2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 10X308 School Name: BRONX DANCE ACADEMY SCHOOL Principal: SANDRA SANCHEZ 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: Bronx Dance Academy 321000010308 6th Grade, 7th Grade and 8th Grade 3617 Bainbridge Avenue School Number (DBN): 10X308 School Address: Bronx, NY 10467 718 515-0410 Phone Number: 718 515-0345 Fax: School Contact Person: Email Address: Ms. Sandra Sanchez Ssanche3@schools.nyc.gov Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: 10 Superintendent’s Office Address: Ms. Sandra Sanchez Mr. Stewart Cadenhead Candice Dunbar Sandra Sanchez Saniyah Padilla Jlynn Jhonson n/a District Information MaribelTorres-Hulla Superintendent: 1 Fordham Plaza, Bronx, NY 10458 mhullal@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-741-5852 Phone Number: 718-741-7098 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 3  Bronx Field Support Center, Team 4 FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Field Support Center (FSC) Jose Ruiz Executive Director: 1 Fordham Plaza, Bronx, NY 10458 jruiz2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: (718) 741- 8895 Phone Number: (718) 828-7776 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Sandra Sanchez Stuart Cadenhead Candice Dunbar ElizabethDiazgranados Ashley Otero Rayneri Medrano 825(Highest Third) Ashley Caivinagua825 (Highest Third) ValeriaLeon Guerra725 (Highest Third) Crystal Rodriguez Lizette Gasca John Gordon Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Parent Parent Parent 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Alexandar Delgado Danielle O'Connor Dominque Martin ShonteArmstrong Diana Alicea 628 (ICT) Hennessy Camacho628 (ENL / ICT) Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Parent Member/ Teacher Teacher Member/ Member/MMCCAfter School Program Representative Member/Student Member/Student Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? MISSION STATEMENT Section 4: CEP Overview Our mission at the Bronx Dance Academy School, is to provide a comprehensive and nurturing learning environment where students excel. Our focus is on raising student achievement by infusing the Arts into the school's entire curriculum. Dancing and the Visual Arts are an important part of the fabric of our school. Staff and parents work 2018-19 CEP 9  collaboratively, to improve the quality of standards-based instruction, while respecting the diversity of our school community. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. The Bronx Dance Academy School (MS 308) is located at the last stop of the 4 train in the Bronx. The present enrollment is 269 children; 67% are Hispanic, 30% are Black, 2% are Asian and 1% White. We are dedicated to promoting academic achievement by creating a teaching and learning environment that recognizes the unique social, emotional and intellectual needs of young adolescents. We remain committed to providing an excellent education to all students in a caring, nurturing environment. We are proud of the devotion and support each child can expect from our entire staff. We are currently working with different organizations in an effort to further drive instruction and give support to our teachers. We are collaborating with the Martha Graham Dance School to develop dance units that mirror our Social Studies curriculum, as well as, dance and choreography rubrics. The Bronx Dance Academy School believes in the importance of nurturing the "whole student". We are a school of creative thinker in the area of dynamic movement. Our goal is to provide rigorous instruction to the whole student by emphasizing the alignments between the Arts and all content areas. This alignment is central to the school continued efforts with developing strong community and family ties. We continue to raise our parent engagement, by celebrating all of our students creative spirits. This is achieved by carefully orchestrating high impact performance with our community stake holders Teachers and administrators are committed to giving every individual student a differentiated, academically rigorous education that considers the individual learning styles of each student, preparing them for success in college and career. The administration’s attention to teacher effectiveness promotes deeper and longer lasting learning of our students, and provides a richer educational experience in a culture that instills in them the values of lifelong learning. BDA has a strong, positive school culture with high expectations and support for achievement and responsible social behavior, involving many stakeholders-students, teachers, school administrators, and parents. It is our belief that this culture promotes more collegiality, and improves educational outcomes. Our goal of increasing student achievement is steeped in aligning all curricula to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) and integrating the instructional shifts with pedagogy. The administration works with the entire school community to enhance understanding of how these shifts impact student learning. The administration takes part in meaningful professional development provided by District 10 and the Bronx Field Support Team. The provided information is then turn keyed to all staff members during teacher professional development time. Also, parents are invited to attend workshops that outline the instructional shifts of the CCLS. Additionally, during the forty minute parent engagement block, parents meet face to face with teachers and are provided with strategies for assisting their children to perform at their own personal best. The results of these sessions are evident in the coherence of instruction across grades and subject areas as the school community works to promote college and career readiness for all students. In all classrooms, one can observe the application of high order skills aligned to Webb’s Depth of Knowledge as all students, including students with disabilities (SWD) and English Language Learners (ELLs), are engaged in rigorous activities and discussions. One can also observe the principles of a Universal Design for Learning in action as teachers deliver instructional tasks that are differentiated to allow multiple entry points for students to be engaged and express their ideas. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. 2018-19 CEP 10  At the Bronx Dance Academy School, we have a high population of students who feel the performing arts is an important aspect of their life. These students need to see the practical link to traditional academics and the academia of dance and art. To ensure this link exist, we monitor how our teachers are planning to infuse the performance arts in their classrooms. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Over the past year, The Bronx Dance Academy School has made progress in the area of Rigorous Instruction as outlined in the Framework for Great Schools. For the school year of 2017-18, the school will continue to deepening our understanding around rigorous instruction. More specifically, we want to ensure all students are being provided multiple entry points, to help them obtain mastery of any content. To do this we plan on developing a strong connection with Rigorous Instruction between the areas of Collaborative Teachers and Strong Family-Community Ties. 2018-19 CEP 11  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 10X308 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 269 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 7 7 3 12 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 21 18 9 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 93.0% % Attendance Rate 88.1% % Reduced Lunch 4.8% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.0% 75.5% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 0.7% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 10.95 0% 25% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 43.0% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES N/A NO YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES N/A NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A YES N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 34 34 9 93.1% 4.8% 23.8% 22.3% 1.5% 0.0% 2 30% 11.5 22.5% 36% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No YES N/A N/A N/A YES YES N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 12  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths The Bronx Dance Academy School continues to strengthen its instructional core by engaging students with in thematic curriculum instruction. As a school, we take great pride in making every effort to collaboratively work in inquiry teams to improve the quality of our instructional core. Our teams design and create units that encapsulate opportunities for horizontal and vertical alignments across grade and content. We continue to strive to ensure that all of our students have access to instruction through multiple entry points. In addition, we have created a community where students feel that they can be risk takers to gain mastery of content so that they can be better prepared for college and career readiness. Priority Needs Our school needs to deepen our understanding of rigorous instruction and learning across all content areas. We believe that as a result, our students will gain the necessary skills to be well-rounded, career and college ready individuals. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. (UPDATED 6/28/18 SRM) Throughout the 2018-2019 school year teachers will utilize researched based strategies – explicit modeling, annotation techniques, questioning and discussion techniques (Socratic seminars, debates, etc.), reciprocal teaching, etc. to deliver effective pedagogy resulting in at least 50% of teachers receiving effective ratings in Danielson components 1a and 3e and 50% of students attaining a level 3 on ELA performance tasks, ELA end of unit assessments, and short response assignments in all content areas (Art, Dance, Math, etc.) and teacher observations. 2018-19 CEP 13  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers will continue to model effective annotation techniques as demonstrated during the Spring 2018 Monday 80 minute PDs and hold students accountable for annotating as they read. Teachers will plan and implement effective discussion techniques (Socratic Seminars, Debates, etc.) as demonstrated during the Spring 2018 Monday 80 minute PDs. Teachers 2018-2019 Administration Instructional Coaches Teachers 2018-2019 Administration Instructional Coaches Teachers will continue to refine their unit plans and use them as a tool to plan daily. Teacher 2018-2019 Administration Instructional Coaches Lesson plans will include differentiated tasks and multiple points of entry to provide access to rigor for all students. Teacher 2018-2019 Administration Instructional Coaches Ongoing classroom visits, Danielson observations, etc. will be conducted in each classroom to note and encourage rigor as well as to observe students working and learning using highly intellectual and engaging activities. Monthly professional development that promote rigorous instruction and learning will be executed. Teacher 2018-2019 Administration Instructional Coaches Teacher 2018-2019 Administration Instructional Coaches 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We engage all of our students families to support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction, by hosting 4 celebrations that highlight the achievements of our students with our thematic units. To achieve this, we will need clear communication to parents from our Parent Coordinator. As well, as input from our School's Leadership Team around the best practices to engage our current family body. 2018-19 CEP 14  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP X Title I TA X Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A X C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2019, we need to host at least 6 Professional Development sessions around rigorous instruction. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) We will develop a rubric that measures the quality of each Capstone Project for Rigorous Instruction elements and collaboration Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 15  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Strengths Based on the 2016-2017 School Environment Survey, 89% of students in grades 6th through 8th agreed or strongly agreed that their school provides guidance for the High School application process. (Q9b) This is in comparison to the City 89%. Priority Needs Based on the School Environment Survey, 69% of our students responded positively to questions about the Supportive Environment section. Overall, the school’s performance was lower than that of District 10 (73%) and New York City (75%). In light of these figures, we would like to further develop our structures and routines in order to continue to build a more supportive environment. According to the Three Year OORS Incident and Suspension Report, in 2016-2017 the Bronx Dance Academy had 124 reported level 1-5 incidences. In 2017-2018 we had 111. We would like to continue to reduce the number of level 1-5 reported incidences. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. (UPDATED 6/28/18 SRM) By June 2019, the Bronx Dance Academy will reduce its number of Online Occurrence Reports (OORS) incidences in the classroom to at least 20-25% by continuing to create a school wide culture of respect and fostering a more sustainable, supportive, healthy and happy school environment as measured by OORS, PBIS data sheets and Brain Power feedback. 2018-19 CEP 16  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? The school’s administration was introduced to the PBIS framework in March of 2018. Administration March 2018 Administration In June of 2018, A PBIS committee was formed to address students’ social emotional learning and to develop a culture of respect and clear expectations across all grade levels. The committee engaged in an all-day training on the PBIS framework and then met to design a behavior matrix which consists of agreed upon behavioral expectations. PBIS Committee May 2018 PBIS Committee The PBIS committee will introduce all staff members to the PBIS All staff September 6, 2018 Administration PBIS Committee framework during the first September 2018 PD session. The PBIS committee will visit each class to introduce students to the PBIS framework. Staff & Students The PBIS committee will meet on a consistent basis to plan PBIS activities, examine student data, develop and sustain the PBIS framework across the school. PBIS Committee Administration All staff members will participate in monthly PBIS professional development. All staff members Teachers engaged in a Brain Power development session with Dave Beal in June 2018. The Brain Power framework helps students to – Focus better on their work. – Gain confidence in themselves. – Build harmonious relationships. – Understand and manage their emotions. – Improve their academic performance. Teachers will receive ongoing training and Brainpower mentors will be identified to turnkey training to their peers across the school. Teachers Teachers will implement the Brain Power framework in each classroom. Students Week of September 7, 2018 1st, 2nd and 3rd Tuesdays of the month The 4th Tuesday of each month during the non-parent engagement time. September 2018 through June 2019 PBIS Committee PBIS Committee Administration PBIS Committee Teachers Brain Power Mentors Administration June 2018 through June 2019 Teachers Brain Power Mentors Administration 2018-19 CEP 17 All staff members will use the school-wide ladder of referral process when addressing student behavior. Teachers All staff members September 2018 – June 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. We plan to engage the families of our school and support their understanding of Supportive Environment, by instituting a communication plan. The communication plan will outline the multiple method that parents will communicated through to make them aware of our celebrations. As well as, outline the frequency of each communication cycle. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By end of February 2019, the school will have hosted at least 2 ceremonies, highlighting at least 10 students per grade that excelled in their social emotional growth. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Ceremony programs, parent attendance sign in sheets, data from i-ready assessment data used to measure student growth. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 18  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths The teachers at the Bronx Dance Academy collaborate to develop unit plans and address students’ academic needs. We use our Professional Learning Cycle as inquiry to create opportunities for teachers work with instructional coaches around best practices to deepen their knowledge around reading and literacy. Priority Needs As recorded on our 2016-17 school survey, 100% of teachers agreed that at their school teachers talk with each other about instruction. Even still only 67% of our teachers agreed that the teachers design instructional programs (e.g. lessons, units) together effectively. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By the end of June 2019, teacher teams will work collaboratively to facilitate at least 6 PDs on best instructional practices that are aligned to the school’s instructional focus, to raise student achievement through interdisciplinary connections. 2018-19 CEP 19  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teacher Leaders will collaborate with instructional coaches to create a calendar of PD sessions on best instructional practices. Teacher Leaders Teacher Leaders will work collaboratively with school wide instructional coaches to establish clear expectations on the facilitation of effective professional development. Teacher leaders will work with each team to create clear meeting norms and expectations. Teacher Leaders Teacher Leaders Teachers Teacher leaders will guide teams in analyzing student work and other forms of data resulting in improved instruction and student learning. Teacher Leaders Teachers Teachers will engage in weekly grade-level meetings to plan a cross- curricular culminating Capstone Project for 4 thematic units. Teachers will be tasked with designing a project that allows all students to partake in an activity or task which addresses the Teacher Leaders Teachers unit theme. Staff members will participate in professional learning sessions and meetings to look at various data sources (ex: MOSL, iReady, Achieve 3000, Pre and Post Unit Assessments, student work, ettc.) to decide which instructional approaches they will use to plan their Capstone Projects and supporting lesson plans. Teacher Leaders Teachers Teachers will develop thematic units of study utilizing CCLS, DOK, and the Danielson rubric to promote active student engagement and cross- curricular learning. Teacher Leaders Teachers September 2018 through June 2019 September 2018 through June 2019 September 2018 through June 2019 September 2018 through June 2019 September 2018 through June 2019 September 2018 through June 2019 September 2018 through June 2019 Teacher Leaders Coaches Administration Teacher Leaders Coaches Administration Teacher Leaders Coaches Administration Teacher Leaders Coaches Administration Teacher Leaders Coaches Administration Teacher Leaders Coaches Administration Teacher Leaders Coaches Administration 3b – Parent and Family Engagement 2018-19 CEP 20  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We will send home a newsletter that outlines the focus of the schools current PLC and invite parents from the school leadership team to attend learning walks. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A SIG X PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2019, we will have completed at least 2 learning walks around any identified best learning practices. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. We will measure the progress of our teachers implementation of the targeted best practices, through the use of "Learning Walk Rubric". The information will be compiled and distributed to the staff. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 21  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strength The Bronx Dance Academy School was identified as in institution that maintains a culture of mutual trust and positive attitudes. This culture supports the academic and personal growth of students and adults. As well, it was noted that the school continues to observe teachers using the Danielson Framework for Teaching along with the analysis of learning outcomes to elevate school-wide instructional practices. This approach helps the school to implement strategies that promote professional growth and reflection. Priority Needs Based on 2016-17 School Quality Snapshot, 53% of teachers say that the curriculum and instruction are well coordinated across different grade levels compared to 82% across the city. Teaching practices sometimes result in teacher-centered instruction and a lack of high levels of participation and student ownership. To ensure that our classroom demonstrate a high level of cohesiveness, we need to focus on differentiating instruction to address the needs of all learners. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By the end of June 2019, the principal will lead the school instructional supports resulting in an overall average of “Effective in the area of ‘Designing Coherent Instruction. Progress will be monitored using the Teacher Advance system. 2018-19 CEP 22  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Each teacher will receive support in designing coherent instruction, based on data (Danielson observations, lesson plans, etc.) Teachers 2018-2019 Administration Coaches Teachers of ICT classrooms will be provided opportunities to Teachers 2018-2019 Administration engage in co-planning and will receive actionable feedback to further their growth as well as student learning. Coaches A cycle of teacher intra-visitation to observe the implementation and execution of coherent instruction will take place each cycle. Teachers Students 2018-2019 Administration Coaches 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We will engage our families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership, by doing the following: inviting families on learning walks that target Designing Coherent Instruction. Providing families with a workshop on Designing Coherent Instruction Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other 2018-19 CEP 23  Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By the end of January 2019, 75% of our teachers will be rated effective or highly effective in the area of Designing Coherent Instruction as outline in Advance Teacher Rating System. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. We will use the Advance Teacher Rating to compile data in the area of Designing Coherent Instruction. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 24  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. School's Strength The Bronx Dance Academy continues to foster an inviting environment for our families. We do this by hosting dance and art events as well as social emotional workshops on mental health and well-being. We have developed strong partnerships with community agencies such as MMCC and St. Jude help to bring in much needed resources for the community at large. Priority Needs To better service the needs of our community, we need to develop and implement parent engagement activities that will encourage attendance at each event thereby increasing and sustaining the number of parent and guardian participants. Through consistent, well-structured outreach and feedback from families we will develop an even richer connection to their specific needs in order to ultimately raise student achievement. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Throughout the 2018-2019 school year, the parent coordinator, teachers and other specific staff members will collaborate to host a variety of monthly parent engagement activities that will support students’ academic achievement, and social and emotional growth in order to promote college and readiness as evident by attendance sheets at events, agendas, flyers and surveys. 2018-19 CEP 25  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? September 7, 2018 – September 26, 2018 September 7, 2018 – September 26, 2018 Parent Coordinator School Administrators, Parent Coordinator, Parent Engagement point person for each grade and/or department. Create a year-long parent calendar for 2018-2019 school year. Parents & Guardians Schedule a list of parent engagement topics, which have been customized for ourn school's student population around academic and social emotional growth. Parents & Guardians Some of the topics include: 1. Technology (Skedula, Google Classrooms) 2. College & Career (High School Articulation) 3. Test Strategies 4. Social Emotional Learning (bullying, safety, social media, PBIS, BrainPower) 5. Art 6. Fitness (dance, yoga, etc., healthy foods) 7. Tips for Parent of Teens Collaborate with community based organizations to acquire support in hosting and/or providing resources for selected parent engagement activities. Parents & Guardians January 27, 2019 Conduct outreach to parents via flyers, school messenger, manual phone calls, emails, text messages. Parents Monthly School Administrators, Parent Coordinator, Parent Engagement point person for each grade and/or department. Parent Coordinator, Parent Engagement point person for eachgrade and/or department. 2018-19 CEP 26  3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. The Bronx Dance Academy has partnered with the following Community Based Organizations: Mosholu Montefiore Community Center (MMCC) Martha Grahman Dance School Alvin Alley Dance Theater Water for Sudan Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP X Title I TA C4E 21st Century Grant SIG X X Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By the end of January 2019, the Bronx Dance Academy will have hosted a minimum of 6 parent workshops lead by the parent coordinator, and at least two workshops lead by the guidance counselor. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. For every Workshop a specific flyer will be produced and sign sheet will be collected. As well, attended will complete reflection sheets, which are designed to help us better service the community. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 27  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) 2016-17ELA State Assessment Data Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Skills Lab (In-School AIS) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Small group instruction during class instruction and after school Combination of during the day and after school time. iReady Reading Assessment Data Parent Outreach One-to-one instruction Performance Task (Unit Assessment) Data After school programs Communicate with families via Pupil Path Student goal setting MMCC “power hour” Saturday Program One-on-one conferencing Holiday Program Mid-Winter Recess Program Mathematics 2016-17 Math State Assessment Data Skills Lab (In-School AIS) Small group instruction during class instruction and after school Combination of during the day and after school time. iReady Math Assessment Data Parent Outreach One-to-one instruction After school programs Communicate with families via Pupil Path 2018-19 CEP 28  Performance Task (Unit Assessment) Data Student goal setting MMCC “power hour” Saturday Program Science State scores One-on-one conferencing After school programs Science Unit Pre- and post-assessments MMCC“power hour” Holiday Program Mid-Winter Recess Program Small group instruction during class instruction and after school Combination of during the day and after school time. FOSS kits lab reports (rubric based) One-on-one conferencing One-to-one instruction Urban Advantage Professional Development Parent outreach During the school dayAISopportunities (skills lab) Communicate with families via Pupil Path Student goal setting “power hour” Saturday One-on-one conferencing Parent outreach After school programs Social Studies State scores SS Unit Pre- and post-assessments MMCC“power hour” Program Holiday Program Mid-Winter Recess Program Small group instruction during class instruction and after school Combination of during the day and after school time. Running records One-on-one conferencing One-to-one instruction Parent outreach During the school dayAISopportunities (skills lab) Communicate with families via Skedula Student goal setting “power hour” for homework 2018-19 CEP 29  At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Review SESIS goals Review modified criteria One-on-one conferencing Parent outreach IEP teacher modifies goals if necessary Guidance involvement Parent outreach One-to-one During the day 2018-19 CEP 30  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) The Bronx Dance Academy has in 4 students in temporary housing. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. We will provide the following services to the STH population- uniforms, outreach services, at-risk counseling, and supplies. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). The Bronx Dance Academy has in 4 students in temporary housing. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 31 We will provide the following services to the STH population- uniforms, outreach services, at-risk counseling, and supplies. 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. n/a 2018-19 CEP 32  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. o We have a partnership with Lehman College that provides us with student teachers for Science and Math. Our learning community gets to know these student teachers and often we offer them a position upon a vacancy. We assign student teachers to our most highly effective teachers, who serve as their mentors. o We provide high quality professional development to our science teachers through our collaborative partnership with Urban Advantage. o We match highly effective teachers with our newly hired teachers for support and guidance through the challenges of their first year teaching. o The administrative team seeks for high quality professional development opportunities offered by the DOE, Museums (New York Historical Society, etc.) and matches it with teacher needs. o The administrative team is encouraging teachers to request for attending professional development and, upon funds availability, pays for it. o All of us at BDA strive to create a positive and pleasant environment for everyone to feel valued and appreciated. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). o Teachers: Urban Advantage, NY Historical Society, 80 min. Mondays PD, Collaborative Teams for all grades and all content areas, UFT sponsored PD. o Principal/Assistant Principal: Urban Advantage, membership subscriptions to professional publications (ASCD), CSA sponsored PD (Annual Assistant Principals Association Luncheon), DOE sponsored PD (Chancellor’s Principals Meeting), District 10 meetings for Principals/Assistant Principals, MOTP/MOSL consultants. o Paraprofessionals: Lesson plans need to have the role of the paraprofessional explicitly described on a daily basis. 2018-19 CEP 33  o Secretaries: Training on being part of a positive environment, always courteous to the parents and helpful to the students. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. In the Fall of 2014 a Measures of Student Learning (MOSL) committee was formed, with members from all departments and grade levels. The MOSL committee recommended the assessments that would be used at the school for SY 2016-2017. Each department decided to select math and ELA state scores for evaluation. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. 2018-19 CEP 34 Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) 5A,5E 5A,5C,5E 5A,5C,5E x x x Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 193,093.00 0 11,200.00 0 1,810,443.00 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH). 2018-19 CEP 35   Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 36  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Bronx Dance Academy, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Bronx Dance Academy will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 2018-19 CEP 37  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 2018-19 CEP 38  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) Bronx Dance Academy , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; 2018-19 CEP 39  ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; 2018-19 CEP 40  Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; Parent/Guardian Responsibilities: II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; 2018-19 CEP 41  ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; III. Student Responsibilities Student Responsibilities: ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn 2018-19 CEP 42  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 10 School Name Bronx Dance Academy Borough Bronx School Number 308 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Sandra Sanchez Coach Troy Akiyama ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Katalin Harsaczki Teacher/Subject Area Stuart Cadenhead/ Social Studi Teacher/Subject Area Impirika Quinzon/ Special Educ Related-Service Provider Scott Schiff IEP teacher Superintendent Maribel Hulla Assistant Principal Shaoba McCoy Coach National Action Network School Counselor Michael Corona Parent Elizabeth Perez Parent Coordinator Michael James Field Support Center Staff Member Mark Weissman Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics 2018-19 CEP 43  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 278 Total number of ELLs 17 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 6.12% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 2 4 3 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? When a newly arrived ELL is admitted to our school, the student will be interviewed and the parent fills out the Home Language Identification Survey. Based on the survey, the student may have to take the NYSITELL. If the student is Spanish-speaking, s/he will also take the Spanish LAB. However, the vast majority of our ELLS were identified as ELLs before coming to our school. As the data suggest, the support they need is in reading and writing in English. Therefore, most assessment is in the target language. To assess the early literacy skills of ELLs, our school has been using the Teacher College Reading and Writing Project Reading Level Assessments. Based on this assessment we are not just able to show the reading level of a student, but we are able to show how students progress from one level to another. The school has also purchased the program Achieve3000, that administers an automatic level set test at the beginning of the program and adjusts the instruction to the student’s independent reading level. In addition, this program allows newcomer ELLs to work and be assessed in Spanish. 2018-19 CEP 44  Running records are then compiled in the ESL teacher’s conference binder for reference. Reading level assessments are repeated at least 3 times in a school year to indicate growth in reading accuracy, fluency and comprehension. The majority of our ELL students tend to read below grade-level. Therefore, one of our goals is to heavily focus and provide instructional support on reading strategies and skills to improve not just reading fluency and accuracy, but also comprehension. One way to provide this support is through guided reading groups in all content areas. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? ELL assessment data comes from various sources; NYSESLAT data broken down to proficiency level and modality, Running Records to test fluency, accuracy and comprehension, Unit Assessment data, Teacher-lead conference binders, Achieve 3000 data organized by standards. Additionally, we hold different meeting ( grade/content, 80 minute PLC, etc.) where teachers are allowed to meet with each other on a daily basis to discuss best practices and the quality of instruction that supports students with their academic success. Some examples of these best practices that are evident in the classroom are (scaffolding, building on academic language, grouping with a purpose around proficiency level, using graphic organizers, and making sure that we have available tools to monitor and track understanding across all content areas). Our school is also consistently taking a pulse of the curriculum that we use across all content to create opportunities to make revisions and modifications that ensure that there are entry points within the units, lessons, and activities that support language acquisition for all ELLS. The curricula that we follow is aligned with the CCLS standards that provide opportunities to learn academically and access College and Career Ready skills. (e.g. Scope and Sequence for Science and Social Studies, Urban Advantage for Science, Expeditionary Learning, KEMS Mathematics), to support the students' needs around language development, reading fluency, academic language, and comprehension around all content. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? Our evaluation of success is based on whether ELLs were able to show growth primarily in reading, writing and math and how many ELLs move up one or more proficiency levels or end up testing out of ENL based on the results on the NYSESLAT. Measures of student growth can be running records, Lexile levels, IReady, Achieve 3000, unit assessments, student work, conference notes that teachers will be able to share and analyze to come up with new instructional plans and learning goals. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? We have incorporated daily meeting into our schedules to create opportunities for teachers to be engaged in meaningful thinking and discussion around strategizing and inquiry on how to incorporate best practices to ensure that we are improving the quality of teaching and learning for all our ELLs. These are demonstrated through (e.g. facilitation of meetings by content, grade, and 80 minute PLC that support best practices and strategies for ELLs). In these meetings teachers use student work and assessments to track and monitor progress students are making after unit and lesson revisions as a tool to check and monitor wither student obtain mastery of the goal and to discuss what are other supports needed. Teachers also discuss inquiry of best practice as a study around a common question or hypothesis that can be of focus to study what best practices support and improve the progress students make throughout the year. The data that we use to inform us of the progress they're making are and not limited too (e.g. NYSESLAT, running records, IReady, IXL, Achieve 3000, Mathletics, Lighsail, etc.) . Once the data has been gathered from these summative data that teachers engage in meaningful thinking to make modifications to lessons and units. In addition they conduct visits and share feedback to set S.M.A.R.T goals across all content. The ENL specialist also facilitates strategies shared with her by the ELLs District Liaison around best practice to improve the quality of learning and teaching for all ELLs. Learning Walks are then conducted to ensure that all ELLs are sitting in classrooms where there are multiple entry points that allows them accessibility to demonstrate academic progress. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] The ENL teacher will be using the ELL Policy Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) as a support tool to create units and lessons that allow access to activities that are level-set and proficiency-based. Students will also be grouped by level of proficiency and will also be leveled by areas of weakness so that the teacher is making modifications, adaptations, and using appropriate resources and materials that support individual and whole group instruction. 2018-19 CEP 45  6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. In the past, the large majority of our students across grades performed at a higher level in listening and speaking than reading and writing on the NYSESLAT. We find that ELLs are generally reading at a lower level than their English-dominant peers and they take much longer to attain the same level of achievement in reading and writing. With the proper scaffolds and supports we intend to help them access the curriculum just like their non-ELL peers do. However, in recent years we have concluded that many ELLs were lagging behind in their Speaking skills much more than we had anticipated. This necessitates that we not only focus intently on building reading and writing proficiency in our ELLs, but also give them more opportunities to speak, ask questions, present and have discussions about what they are learning. We do this through PBL where opportunity is given to them to communicate and express their work verbally and in writing. In addition, we have created and designed lessons that have structures and routines around speaking, listening, and communicating which all create entry points for students to master skills, make connections, relate to real life experiences, and to engage with each other through meaningful discussion and thinking around content. (e.g. Reciprocal Teaching, Socratic Seminar, Accountable discussion stems, Thin vs Thick questions, etc.) Students are grouped purposely for different activities depending on the learning outcome and students are also given a choice to demonstrate the accessibility of entry points so that they can engage in more meaningful and rigorous discussions that lead to inquiry based learning. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? The structures that we have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to these programs include grade/content meetings, the uploading of documents on Google docs, maintaining conference binders, teacher inter-visitation, Principal feedback, thematic revision of units, observation feedback from administration, learning walks, PPO visits. All of these best practices that we have in place allow us to make the appropriate modifications to support all students individually and in groups. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Freestanding English as a new language (ENL) classes delivered by a certified ENL teacher will provide instruction in English with home language support to develop English language skills so that students can succeed in core content courses. Integrated ENL will be co-taught by a certified ENL and a certified content area teacher to build English language skills through content area instruction using ENL strategies. All ELLs and former ELLs up to 2 years after exiting ELL status will receive a minimum number of units of integrated ENL. ENL will be delivered in the following 2 ways: • Push-in model: an ENL teacher will work with ELLs in collaboration with general education classroom teachers to provide language acquisition and vocabulary support. There will be a common preparation time between the 2 teachers and/or prior collaborative lesson planning. • Pull-out model: ELLs who spend the majority of their day in all-English content instruction will be brought together from various classes for English-acquisition-focused instruction. ENL teachers will plan carefully with general education teachers to ensure curricular alignment and continuity of instruction. School leaders will allocate time for general education and ENL teachers to plan curricular alignment and instructional improvement for transitioning ELLs into a push-in model. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A 2018-19 CEP 46  c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Based on Part 154-1 (K-8) English as a New Language (ENL) Unites of Study and Staffing Requirements there have been some changes in the number required minutes for students on each proficiency level. Students on the Entering and Emerging levels will be required to receive 360 minutes (1 units/week); students on the Transitioning and Expanding levels will receive 180 minutes (1 unit/week). Finally, students who have reached the Commanding level will receive 90 minutes (0.5 unit/week) of services for two years. For students on the Entering and Emerging levels will receive both pull-out and push-in instruction into ELA, while Transitioning and Expanding level students will receive integrated push-in instruction into ELA. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Integrated ENL instruction will take place in ELA classes on all three grades using ENL strategies. The ENL teacher will work with ELLs in collaboration with general education classroom teachers to provide language acquisition and vocabulary support. There will be a common preparation time between the 2 teachers and/or prior collaborative lesson planning. The teachers will create an environment where ELLs can feel secure and prepared to take risks and where ELLs’ languages and cultures are valued. As students build on the understandings of their own language, they would be encouraged to use their first language as well. Instruction will focus on the ELLs’ oral language development in order to support writing. The teachers will support ELLs’ language skills development through scaffolding the learners’ language by modeling, visualization, text analysis, and metacognition. The new language, which includes vocabulary, grammar and pronunciation, will be taught explicitly in the context of a theme or topic, while pair and group work will maximize language interaction supported by accountable talk stems, sentence starters, or talk moves, which is monitored and assessed by the teacher. All or most of the above strategies will be used to support not just ELLs in the classroom, but all the students in a whole class setting or in small group instruction in order to ensure that all ELLs can access the ELA curriculum and perform successfully on the Common Core Learning Standards. Since students on the Entering and Emerging levels will receive both pull-out and push-in instruction into ELA, the pull-out instruction delivered by the ENL teacher, will be tailored to provide extra support in addressing students’ needs in succeeding in ELA and other content areas. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? When a newly arrived ELL is admitted to our school, the student will take the NYSITELL. If the student is Spanish-speaking and does not pass the NYSITELL, s/he will also take the Spanish LAB. Also, Achieve 3000 allows for students to work and be assessed in Spanish. However, the vast majority of our ELLS were identified as ELLs before coming to our school. As the data suggest, the support they need is in reading and writing in English. Therefore, most assessment is in the target language. If and when our population and its needs change, we will consider additional methods of assessing in the native language. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a. Our goals are to introduce or reintroduce SIFE students into the school setting and provide them with the tools that they need to successfully learn English, make academic gains, and learn to navigate American culture. We differentiate instruction within the classroom by providing them with materials that are both age appropriate and meet them at their linguistic and instructional level. We help them get engaged in learning by pairing them up with buddies who speak their native language. Finally, we offer students the opportunity to spend their lunch periods in Lunch Bunch with a guidance counselor and other 2018-19 CEP 47  students so that they could develop social and linguistic skills in a small and nurturing environment. Currently we have no SIFE students in our students population. b. These students are engaged in the same curriculum as the rest of the student body, but they receive additional linguistic support and more small-group instruction in an ENL setting. The classroom teachers focus heavily on reading, writing, listening, and speaking through the use of technology because we have found that it evokes a high student interest and ensure ongoing student participation in collaborative activities and discussions to give opportunity for the practice of all 4 modalities. They engage in interactive work online, including Achieve 3000, and build linguistic skills in that manner. These students are also targeted for ENL After School, and Saturday Academy. In our school we tend not have newcomers, but there are exceptions. Using pictures and other visuals, gestures and movements helps their comprehension. A lot of repetition of English and the benefit of a learning buddy who speaks his language also helps. Other strategies involve using graphic organizers, asking yes/no and either/or questions, accepting one or two word responses and providing plenty of opportunities for him to participate in activities. c. We know that these students are traditionally stronger in listening and speaking, but they struggle to gain proficiency in reading, writing, and engaging in content area knowledge. Therefore, the content area teacher in conjunction with the ENL teacher create content and language objectives for each lesson. These objectives address their specific areas of need and motivate students to work beyond their former expectations. Teachers and students assess and realign objectives in one-on-one conferences based on assessment data. This individual attention and progress monitoring is key to preventing students from becoming long-term ELLs. The content and ENL teacher adapt and use various co-teaching models to teach the content and the language knowledge the students need to be able to succeed. The school also created a more effective learning environment for ELLs by implementing ELL teaching strategies school-wide in all content areas and mainstream classrooms and making content area teachers more aware of what it means to be an ELL. d. Long-term ELLs are students who have not benefitted enough from the traditional classroom experience including differentiated instruction and standard ENL strategies. Therefore, their needs necessitate a more aggressive form of academic intervention. This involves additional tutoring in both English and their native language, if possible. Additionally, these long-term Ells may be struggling due to other learning problems that may need to be assessed and addressed in order to show improvement. Appropriate staff needs to consult with the Committee on Special Education if the student is a student with a disability or is suspected of having a disability that may impact the ability to speak, read, write or listen in English. The principal must provide additional support services to the student, which must be aligned to any intervention plans (e.g., Academic Intervention Services) the school is already providing to all students. e. ELLs who scored on a Commanding level on the NYSESLAT will continue to receive services for an additional two years. Also, they will continue to receive testing accommodations for up to two years. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Integrated ENL instruction will take place in ELA classes on all three grades using ENL strategies. The ENL teacher will work with ELLs in collaboration with general education classroom teachers to provide language acquisition and vocabulary support. There will be a common preparation time between the 2 teachers and/or prior collaborative lesson planning. The teachers will create an environment where ELLs can feel secure and prepared to take risks and where ELLs’ languages and cultures are valued. As students build on the understandings of their own language, they would be encouraged to use their first language as well. Instruction will focus on the ELLs’ oral language development in order to support writing. The teachers will support ELLs’ language skills development through scaffolding the learners’ language by modeling, visualization, text analysis, and metacognition. The new language, which includes vocabulary, grammar and pronunciation, will be taught explicitly in the context of a theme or topic, while pair and group work will maximize language interaction supported by accountable talk stems, sentence starters, or talk moves, which is monitored and assessed by the teacher. All or most of the above strategies will be used to support not just ELLs in the classroom, but all the students in a whole class setting or in small group instruction in order to ensure that all ELLs can access the ELA curriculum and perform successfully on the Common Core Learning Standards. Since students on the Entering and Emerging levels will receive both pull-out and push-in instruction into ELA, the pull-out instruction delivered by the ENL teacher, will be tailored to provide extra support in addressing students’ needs in succeeding in ELA and other content areas. We have also built into our schedule where the ENL and content teacher will meet to discuss and look at the progress of the ELLs and make revisions around their units and lessons to ensure that we are setting S.M.A.R.T goals that allow us to track the academic progress for ELLs and SPED students. 2018-19 CEP 48  7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? All ELL-SWD students are in their least restrictive environment. Most ENL classes and groupings include both general education and special education populations. Flexible scheduling is used to maximize time spent with non-disabled peers when possible and appropriate. In our school, class assignment decisions are based partly on students achievement and special population classification. We have found that if ELLs are grouped in the same class, the ENL teacher is better able to provide the ENL services by pushing in using the integrated ENL model. Additional stand-alone ENL services are delivered using the pull-out model during our Skills Lab periods, so that students wouldn't miss out on content area instruction. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Over the past few years, data has shown that intervention is most needed in ELA for all students, including ELLs. In our recently adopted Expeditionary Learning model of teaching and learning, students are inspired to think critically and realize their potential to be prepared for college and career. Additionally, we have purchased Achieve 3000 and LightSail reading and writing programs to supplement the ELA curriculum. In Achieve3000, we use the 5-Step Literacy Routine that is specialized for ELL needs, equipped with special scaffolds, with Lexile- and language-based differentiation, integrating reading, writing, listening and speaking. The program focuses on vocabulary development and teaches language through content and themes strategically to improve literacy and content proficiency. Lightsail is an Ipad based program with an extensive library to choose grade and content appropriate literature for each student reading level and interest. The program monitors reading level, speed and comprehension and informs the teachers about trends. We also hold an after school program and Saturday Academy focusing largely on literacy and math. Math intervention programs also include IXL, a computer-based program. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Our school wants to improve our parent outreach efforts, so that we can involve the parents of ELLs in educating their children. We'll be holding a Parent Workshop specifically targeting ELLs where parents will be taught about the main principles of language development, ELL learning strategies, ELLs' needs and how they can help address those needs: guided reading at home in both the primary and secondary languages, translation services done by students, where they can find resources to support their children's education. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? We are not discontinuing any programs or services for ELLs. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs have the same access to school programs, if not more. They are included in all after school programs in collaboration with MMCC, band and chorus practice, basketball practice,, student government, school events, field trips and Saturday Academy 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. ELLs use the same instructional materials as other students, but they may use them in different ways or with different frequency. For example, ELLs tend to use math manipulative and hands-on materials more often to help demonstrate understanding. They also require additional resources, particularly in literacy. Picture dictionaries, thesauruses, and books/materials in the native language or both languages are common resources. Additionally, ELLs benefit greatly from using technology such as brainpop.com, flocabulary.com, unitedstreaming.com, teachervision.com, educationplace.com, and starfall.com. These websites create a visual and auditory learning experience for students and help them to gain English proficiency, content area knowledge, and literacy skills. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? In ENL, native language support is more subtle than in dual language or bilingual programs and includes books in the native language. ELLs may choose from a library of a variety of books on various levels including those from Spanish authors, those 2018-19 CEP 49  that are both in English and Spanish and those that are only in Spanish for Independent Reading. Assigning a learning-buddy or cross-subject tutor is also helpful because they are allowed to communicate in their native language providing support and gaining self-esteem. The ESL teacher besides providing some native language support embedded in the daily instruction, can also use strategies that will allow ELLs to interact and participate despite having limited proficiency. These include learning simple instructions in the student's native language, using questioning that allows students to answer yes or no, this or that, using basic syntax, using lots of visuals, routines and having a co teacher or paraprofessional provide one on one support to students with limited English proficiency. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. We know that learning a second or third language is extremely challenging and will affect a child’s self-esteem in a profoundly positive or negative manner. We take great precautions to ensure that our instructional decisions and use of materials build a child’s confidence and help them to discover their greatest abilities as a learner. Therefore, we provide support and resources that will be appropriate for each child considering their level of English proficiency, their academic standing, and their age. One example is differentiation based on reading level on the Achieve3000 reading and writing program by assigning the same article on personalized reading levels and then exposing the same grade-level article to all students, so they can be challenged to their fullest potential and get familiar with the Common Core Learning Standards and its expectations. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? ELLs use the same instructional materials as other students, but they may use them in different ways or with different frequency. For example, ELLs tend to use math manipulatives and hands-on materials more often to help demonstrate understanding. They also require additional resources, particularly in literacy. Picture dictionaries, thesauruses, and books/materials in the native language or both languages are common resources. Additionally, ELLs benefit greatly from using technology such as brainpop.com, flocabulary.com, unitedstreaming.com, teachervision.com, educationplace.com, and starfall.com. These websites create a visual and auditory learning experience for students and help them to gain English proficiency, content area knowledge, and literacy skills. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). At the start of the school year, we usually don't have newly enrolled ELLs. If and when we do welcome these students to Bronx Dance Academy in September, they and their families will be invited to a Parent Orientation and will be set up with a buddy student in each class once school starts. The initial transition into our school community is important, and we want to be sure that we are meeting social and emotional needs of ELLs in addition to their academic and linguistic needs. All ELLs with Entering levels of proficiency are supported to gradually transition into using English while using the necessary primary language support. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? We currently do not have language electives. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A 2018-19 CEP 50  Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Professional development can take the form of For all bilingual and English as a new language teachers, a minimum of fifty percent (50%) of the required professional development hours will be dedicated to language acquisition in alignment with core content area instruction, including a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for English language learners. The ENL teacher will be ensured to receive professional development during the monthly faculty conferences, during grade and content meetings, learning walks or walk through, meetings with administrators and outsourced professional development events of teachers' choice that is aligned with content instruction for ELLs. The Professional Development offered in the school this year to teachers of ELLs included topics such as Academic Discussion in the Classroom, Essential Questions, Text Complexity and the Common Core, Flexible Grouping and Differentiation, Achieve3000 and LightSail Training, and Teaching Academic Vocabulary just to mention a few. The ENL teacher also have the opportunity to present ELL-specific topics to the school to turnkey important information about teaching practices pertaining to ELLs. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. The ENL teacher looks for Professional Development events that if attended would accommodate the needs of ELLs and their teachers’ in addressing the learning needs of the school’s ELL population. Later this information is turn keyed to other content teachers, so that there can be consistent practices implemented school-wide in all content areas across grades. Teachers need to have the same understanding about the expected levels of rigor and standards in the classroom, and what the students need to be prepared for in terms of Common Core Learning Standards. Our school will provide professional development to all teachers and administrators that will specifically address the needs of English language learners. A minimum of fifteen percent (15%) of the required professional development hours for all teachers will be dedicated to language acquisition, including a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for English language learners. For all bilingual and English as a new language teachers, a minimum of fifty percent (50%) of the required professional development hours will be dedicated to language acquisition in alignment with core content area instruction, including a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for English language learners. Meeting agendas will be uploaded to Google.docs to be accessed by any teacher or school staff. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? The Bronx Dance Academy will individually meet with the parents or guardians of English language learners at least once a year. In addition there are parent-teacher conferences, initial parent orientations, quarterly progress meetings or other scheduled meetings provided for parents or guardians, to discuss the goals of the program. In the meetings we provide opportunity to discuss their child’s language development progress, their child’s English language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas. This meeting will include school staff necessary to sufficiently inform the parents or guardians about the child’s language development in all content areas. The meeting will be conducted with a qualified interpreter/translator in the language or mode of communication the parent or guardian best understands. School will record attendance, establish protocols and assign qualified and trained staff to manage these meetings. In addition we have purchased the program Pupil Path/Skedula that allows the parents to read any comments on their child's progress in 2018-19 CEP 51  the language of their choice. The Language Access Coordinator will receive training in order to turn key vital and new information about the language and interpretation services provided by the DOE and school to all parents. In addition we have the school messenger that translates the information to parents based on the Home Language Survey. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Parents will be invited to join a classroom presentation and/or debate by sending out letters in multiple languages describing the lesson and activity. Students will develop self confidence and trust in their abilities to present/debate information to an audience which includes their parents. Parents will trust teachers and their skill to teach their children. Feedback to parents through ENGRADE will be regular and current. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 2018-19 CEP 52 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Sandra Sanchez, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 53  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Bronx Dance Academy School DBN: 10x308 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Sandra Sanchez Title Principal Shaoba McCoy Assistant Principal Michael James Parent Coordinator Katalin Harsaczki ENL/Bilingual Teacher Elizabeth Perez Parent Stuart Cadenhead Teacher/Subject Area Impirika Quinzon Teacher/Subject Area Troy Akiyamma Coach Coach Michael Corona School Counselor Maribel Hulla Mark Weissman Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 10/20/15 10/20/15 10/20/15 10/20/15 10/20/15 10/20/15 10/20/15 10/20/15 10/20/15 10/20/15 10/20/15 10/20/15 2018-19 CEP 54  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 10X308 School Name: Bronx Dance Academy MS 308 Superintendent: MaribelHulla The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Michael James Parent Coordinator Yes No * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. To assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication we use ATS and view the Adult Preferred Language Report (RAPL). We using the RAPL report to identify parents needs to make sure their needs are meet in their preferred language.. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral BANGALI BANGALI 100% BANGALI 100% 2018-19 CEP 55  SPANISH SPANISH 50% SPANISH 50% 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. n/a Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Parent Handbook September 1st Emergency Contact Cards September 1st. Summer School Notices June 9th. Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. We plan to translate our Parent Handbook using in house staff. We plan to translate our Emergency Contact Cards through the use of software. As well, we will use the DOE intranet. We plan to translate our Summer School Notices through the use of software. As well, we will use the DOE intranet. As well, we will use Language Line and on-site staff to inform individual parents School Calendar The first Wednesday of the every Month We plan to translate our School Absentee Letters Weekly Calendar through the use of software. As well, we will use the DOE intranet. As well, we will use Language Line and on-site staff to inform individual parents We plan to translate our Absentee Letters through the use of software. As well, we will use the DOE intranet. As well, we will use Language Line and on-site staff to inform individual parents 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. 2018-19 CEP 56  Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Open School November March Student Orientation September Parent Engagement Nights Bi Month PTA Meetings Once a Month Parent Tuesdays Every Tuesday of the Month Curriculum Night September November December January February Twice a Month Student Auditions Parent Workshop interpretation service(s)? Through the use of on-site interpretation and community base organizations (On-site simultaneous interpretation) As well, we will use headsets. Through the use of on-site interpretation and community base organizations (On-site simultaneous interpretation) As well, we will use headsets.s Through the use of on-site interpretation and community base organizations (On-site simultaneous interpretation) Through the use of on-site interpretation and community base organizations (On-site simultaneous interpretation) Parent volunteers Through the use of on-site interpretation and community base organizations (Consecutive interpretation) Language Line Through the use of on-site interpretation and community base organizations (On-site simultaneous interpretation) As well, we will use headsets. Through the use of on-site interpretation and community base organizations Parent volunteers Through the use of on-site interpretation and community base organization. As well, we will use headsets. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. 2018-19 CEP 57  In the event of school emergency, we will use software base solutions, such as Skedula, which allows us to send texts and emails in the preferred parent language, In addition, we will use School Messenger, and Language Line. As well, there will be a letter head with the 1-800 number to Language Line. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. For the upcoming school year, we will request training from our school district, As well, we reach out to our Field Support Network to help us deliver a staff professional development Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) We will translated all signage by developing letter sized version, in every language needed. As well, there will be a translated version adjacent to very shared written communication to parents. All parent events will be available to for translation services, through a certified DOE vendor. As well, we will use on-site services to translate. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? The mechanisms our school will use to gather feedback from parents on the quality and availability of the above services include running debriefing surveys after parent workshops and ensure a 100% return of the Parent Survey. 2018-19 CEP 58 
