2018-19 RENEWAL SCHOOL COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (RSCEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 09X313 School Name: I.S. 313 SCHOOL OF LEADERSHIP DEVELOPMENT Principal: EARL BRATHWAITE 2018-19 RSCEP-R 1  Renewal School Comprehensive Educational Plan (RSCEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: Executive Summary and Organizing Principles Section 3: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 4: Renewal School Narrative Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) Section 7: Community School Description Section 8: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 9: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 10: Title I Program Information Section 11: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 RSCEP-R 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information School of Leadership Development 09X313 320900010313 SE, SC, and ELLS in grade 6, 7, 8 1600 Webster Avenue (718) 583-1736 School Number (DBN): (718) 299-5559 Phone Number: Mr. Earl. R. Brathwaite Fax: EBrathw2@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Community School CBO: Principal: Community School Director: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: BronxWorks Email Address: Mr. Earl R. Brathwaite Ms. Debra Nunez Mr. MxolisiMalunga Ms. Janira Mussenden Mr. Clifford Dupoux SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): Ms. Pamela Rivers N/A District Information Geographical District: 09 Superintendent’s Office Address: Ms. Leticia Rodriguez-Rosario Superintendent: 1245 Washington Ave, Bronx, NY 10456 lrosairo2@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: (718) 579-7143 Phone Number: (718) 410-7017 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 RSCEP-R 3  Bronx FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Mr. Jose Ruiz Executive Director: 1 Fordham Plaza, Bronx, NY 10458 JRuiz2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-828-7776 Phone Number: N/A Fax: 2018-19 RSCEP-R 4  Section 2: Executive Summary and Organizing Principles The Objective The intent of this Renewal School Comprehensive Educational Plan (RSCEP) is to continue to frame a three-year process for each Renewal school and design a comprehensive plan that outlines a strategic path to a paradigm shift in each school at every level. The motivation driving this work is our commitment to providing every child with a school that meets their academic and social-emotional needs. Closely accompanying this imperative is our belief that every school can be renewed and foster a community based culture of learning. The job of the district is to use our position to provide the systemic vision, strategies, and resources to facilitate school renewal through a collaborative effort including all stakeholders. The core values held as essential for the success of the School Renewal Program:  A “learning stance” must be held by all community members (district leaders, school leaders, school staff, community-based partners, students and families). The work should be approached with humility and integrity. We must all be willing learners.  A “theory of action” must guide the work to ensure clarity and coherence.  Authentic teams that collaborate in the spirit of trust, within and across the various levels of the school community, are prerequisites for successful school renewal  Schools will be places of robust engagement, anchored in positive youth development, ensuring that the school environment is welcoming and empowering for students, families and community members.  Strong professional development/learning is a fundamental part of our work.  The school renewal implementation must be simultaneously dynamic and responsive as well as sustained over the three year period of renewal. The organizing Theory of Action that guides the School Renewal Program strategy: By using the Six Elements of the Framework for Great schools as our improvement structure, we seek to align instructional coaching and leadership development with structural supports in order to build staff capacity. Using schools instructional foci, school leaders and staff will implement changes in curriculum, instruction, school culture and structures so that there are sustainable improvements in student outcomes and school culture. The arc of the School Renewal Program strategy: In order to attain high levels of achievement for all students in Renewal schools we must build capacity to increase student achievement through the adoption of new attitudes and behaviors, research based strategies that improve teacher practice, coupled with the use of clear data driven supports for building students’ skills in the content areas and increasing student engagement. We are particularly prioritizing reading and writing across the curricula. The use of student learning data will drive instruction through strong teacher teams; onsite, job embedded professional learning and problem solving, and accountability at all levels of the system: central, district and school - for results. Renewal schools are provided with intensive training, leadership and pedagogical coaching, and structural supports, monitoring of implementation and ongoing feedback and revisions as needed. Further, each Renewal school will become a Community School and strategically partner with community based organizations (CBO) to integrate social services and expanded learning time into the fabric of the school to help them better serve the needs of students. These schools will stand as centers of opportunities where families can get the supports they need to make sure students come to school ready and able to learn. Structure of the Renewal School Comprehensive Educational Plan (RSCEP) The Renewal School Comprehensive Educational Plan (RSCEP) will serve as the organizing and overarching document for each Renewal school and will be directly aligned and developed around the elements of the Framework for Great Schools, New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, and Strong Schools, Strong Communities, including the following:  Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks: Demonstrable improvement benchmarks located in the 2018-19 RSCEP, in the Data and Accountability Snapshot page. Receivership benchmarks have been closely aligned with 2018-19 RSCEP-R 5  the Renewal benchmarks so that schools will have one coherent set of improvement benchmarks to meet. All Receivership Benchmarks are a subset of Renewal Benchmarks. While the targets for these overlapping benchmarks are not always identical, the Receivership Benchmark targets are always equal to or lower that the Renewal Benchmarks targets. That means that any school that meets its Renewal Benchmarks targets have by definition also met its Receivership Benchmarks targets. For additional information on Receivership demonstrable improvement benchmarks go here.  Establishing an overarching summative vision aligned with elements of the Framework for Great Schools and documenting key areas of celebration and renewal through analysis of assessments and by envisioning what the desired outcome for each school will be at the end of the School Renewal process.  Setting interim assessment benchmarks that create the path for improvement by focusing on desired outcomes and goals. In this way, the plan will be mapped to the overarching summative vision. In addition to the five discrete goals formed around the elements of the Framework for Great Schools, each school will create an action plan.  Transformation into a community school in order to increase student and family access to physical and mental health services and other social-emotional supports made available in or near the school.  Expanded learning opportunities for all students, including additional instruction provided during afterschool  and/or summer programming provided in collaboration with community partners. Intensive professional development for all staff to ensure effective implementation of curriculum and instruction aligned to the Common Core State Standards (CCSS) and to support staff in effectively responding to the differentiated academic and social-emotional needs of all students.  Additional, focused strategies to increase parent and family engagement. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Information on the Framework for Great Schools and the DTSDE Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department has established programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students supports to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and RSCEP Development 2018-19 RSCEP-R 6  The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint for continuous improvement that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to increase student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five (5) goals and action plans that align with the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. Accountability Tools and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is informed by the New York State Education Department’s (NYSED) Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) Tenets, the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Rubric, School Quality Guide and other quantitative and qualitative data tools. NYSED’s Six DTSDE Tenets To strengthen the existing system, the NYSED has developed a tool that captures the best practices from each of the current tools called the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness. This new tool encompasses multiple instruments such as interviews, classroom observations and surveys. The protocol will begin with a clear and cogent statement of the optimal conditions of an effective school and the instruments comprising the protocol will measure 2018-19 RSCEP-R 7  how close or far away a particular school is to the optimal conditions identified. Once reviewed, the school and district will create a strategic plan to address the areas in need of improvement. All current Priority and Focus Schools and Focus Districts must use the tool; districts that are required to submit District Comprehensive Improvement Plans and Comprehensive Educational Plans also will use the tool. The DTSDE protocol includes a rubric, which identifies clear and coherent expectations of the optimal conditions of an effective school and school district across the following six tenets: 1. Tenet 1: District Leadership and Capacity 2. Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions 3. Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support 4. Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions 5. Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health, and 6. Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 2017-18 Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) I. II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Structures for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the RSCEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the RSCEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. Next Steps for RSCEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists in every Renewal school and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the American Institute of Research (AIR) needs assessment, the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 8   Step 3: In Part 1A of the Section 5: Needs Assessment indicate the Statement of Practice (SOP) from the DTSDE Tenets that will be addressed in the action plan. Schools that received an Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) School Review should use the recommendations from the review to select their SOPs. Schools that did not undergo an IIT review should select SOPs informed by the major findings/recommendations from your most recent Quality Review (QR) or Central-led Review (CLR), and other qualitative and quantitative data.  Step 4: Create a summative vision for the elements of the Framework for Great Schools.  Step 5: Revisit your school’s current goals, and strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you have identified, and will let your school community know when you have reached your goal.  Step 6: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 7: Update your school’s AIS section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 8: Complete the Expanded Learning Time (ELT) and the Community School sections.  Step 9: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether strategies and activities outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust practices along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 9  Section 3: Community Engagement Team and School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Directions: All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Renewal School Comprehensive Educational Plan (RSCEP). SLT members’ signatures indicates that they have been consulted with and given the opportunity to provide feedback on the plan and the plan’s alignment with the school-based budget to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Expanded Learning Time, Community School initiative, Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. On the chart below: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the second column. 2. 3. In the first column, indicate using an “X” if the person is an SLT member. In the third column, record the position and constituent group represented such as staff, parent, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), or other contributor. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 4. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the RSCEP, not approval. 5. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Signature (Blue Ink) Check if SLT X x x x X X Name Position and Constituent Group Earl R. Brathwaite MxolisiMalunga JaniraMussenden Patricia McCarter Pamela Rivers Deborah Nunez Represented *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Community School Director (staff) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) 2018-19 RSCEP-R 10  Check if SLT X X X x x x x x x Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Clifford Dupoux Teacher - SLT Chairperson MargoritaPerez ZerdeneLewis Pamela Rivers Alicia Dacosta MarisolYone Noa Boagatch CliffordDupoux TaninaAccardo Member/ Parent Parent Parent Parent Parent Teacher Teacher Teacher Member/ Member/ 2018-19 RSCEP-R 11  Section 4: Renewal School Narrative In a brief narrative, describe the current state of the Renewal school addressing the following: 1. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including your school’s mission statement and a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. 2. What are the school’s beliefs about student learning? 3. 4. Describe your school’s approach to family engagement and progress made with establishing families as Identify any special student populations that the school has and what their specific needs are. partners in furthering student achievement 5. Describe how your school is leveraging community school partnerships to support progress in elements of the Framework for Great Schools and indicate where this has been a challenge. 6. Summarize the Expanded Learning Time (ELT) opportunities that have been offered to your students this year. The School of Leadership Development (Intermediate School 313 District 9 Bronx, N.Y.) is located at 1600 Webster Ave in the Bronx. The school housed on the fourth floor of the building, known as the Diana Sands Educational Complex, built in 1973 and is now shared with Middle School 339 and x469. The building has stood tall in this community for the last 43 years and there is a clear relationship between the school, the parents, and the surrounding community at large. Mission and Vision We believe students will take ownership of their learning when they are intellectually engaged in rigorously designed instruction. One of the school's strengths is the administrative team's ability to communicate high expectations to all constituents resulting in a path to college and career readiness. In addition, the school concentrates on challenging English language learners by implementing a pull out and push in model and fluidly moving them into more rigorous class settings. Finally, our school needs to focus on tenet 4.3. The teachers provide coherent, appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students to achieve targeted goals. Although there are some classes where differentiation and multiple entry points exist, it is not consistent throughout the building. The emphasis has been placed on the academic, social and emotional needs of the students and will be targeted through the following programs: The teachers voted to continue with the following Expanded Learning time Model where they did modify the plan to meeting their professional needs around their practice which in turn will impact students outcomes throughout the school year. Under this option, the 155 minutes for Professional Development, Parent Engagement and Other Professional Work, scheduled according to the modified model below for non-ELT teachers (80 minutes Monday, 75 minutes Tuesday) but on a different schedule for the ELT teachers. The school chose option 1 based on the models provided by the department of education. No SBO was needed for this model to be implemented. Our program will be available from the first day of the school year for both teachers and students. Our program allows teachers to work with students on identifying skills and strategies in small groups to ensure that we meet the instructional needs of all. Teacher (non-ELT) Day Student School Day/ELT ELT Teacher Work Day Work Day 8:15am - 2:58PM 8:15am – 3:44PM Mon. 9:02:am - 3:44PM (Renewal Hour is built-in during the day) 8:15AM-2:58PM (PD 2:59PM - 3:58PMPM) 2018-19 RSCEP-R 12  2:58PM - 3:58PM Professional Development (8:01AM - 9:01AM 8:01AM - 9:01AM (Professional Development) 8:15am – 3:44PM Tues. 8:15am – 3:44PM Wed. 8:15am – 3:44PM Thurs. 8:15am – 3:44PM 8:15am – 3:44PM 8:15am – 3:44PM Fri. 8:15am – 3:44PM 8:15PM – 3:44PM 8:15PM -2:58PM 8:15PM -2:58PM 8:15PM - 2:58PM 8:15PM – 2:58PM 2018-19 RSCEP-R 13  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 09X313 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 315 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual YES Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 43 43 5 3 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 23 21 1 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 92.0% % Attendance Rate 91.1% % Reduced Lunch 32.4% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.0% 68.9% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 1.0% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 4.2 0% 4% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 14.2% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No No Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District Yes N/A 17 17 90.3% 0.3% 24.1% 29.5% 0.6% 0.0% 4 39% 7 11.2% 9% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No Yes Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School No Focus Subgroups Black, Hispanic, ED Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A NO N/A NO NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A NO N/A N/A NO High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A NO NO NO N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 RSCEP-R 14  2018-19 RSCEP-R 15  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 3 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 3.2 The school leader ensures and supports the quality implementation of a systematic plan of rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of students. Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction (DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and address student achievement needs. The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. 3.3 3.4 3.5 SOP(s) Addressed X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? The strengths and needs referenced were discussed during the 2018-2019 Quality Review, Principal Performance observations, Leadership Coach visits and progress monitoring with DSR of School Renewal. Currently the percentage of students scoring at level 1 are 143 (ELA) and 186 (MATH) and at level 3 and 4 are 38 (ELA) and 33 (MATH). Units plans are aligned to the CCLS in all subject areas. Mastery Connect is the current system being used for tracking individual student data and performance on required assessments and it is being used in every classroom and is transparent to all students. The data tracking is aligned with the units of study. The use of formative data during lessons (check for understanding), during activities (feedback aligned to rubrics that can improve student performance and target individual learning needs) and during units (informing teachers towards trends, areas of strength and areas of weakness to determine logical sequencing of lessons) is a focus of professional development this school year. Lesson planning is inconsistent at this time. Teachers need to create clear and specific instructional purposes (learning targets, teaching points), followed by opportunities for group work, independent practice, and guided practice in their 2018-19 RSCEP-R 16  lesson plans. Teachers also need pre plan questions using DOK and identify specific students that they are working with during each lesson. Part 2 – Summative Vision for Rigorous Instruction What is your school’s instructional focus? What is your vision for promoting the instructional focus consistently across classrooms? The priority statement for the 2018-2019 school year is to develop teachers through the use of assessments. We will support teachers with the implementation of assessments to best support teaching and learning. This will include the use of formative/diagnostic tools, grade-level tiered tasks and the use of assessments as a means to check for understanding. Through monitored cycles of inter-visitations and the use of resources and tiered supports, we will bring equity to teaching and learning in order to cultivate critical thinkers and analyzers. What is your vision for the implementation of CCLS-aligned curricula that meets the needs of your diverse learners, personally, academically, and culturally? IS313X will use research based CCLS aligned curricula in all subject areas: ELA will use Powerful Writers units of study and Expeditionary learning reading units; Math will use Engage New York Modules; Science will use Pearson Elevate Science units; Social Studies will use the New Social Studies Core curriculum provided by NYC (Passport). Teacher teams including Special needs teachers and ENL teachers will use student achievement data, IEPs, student work, and data from formative assessments to make modifications to the lessons and unit plans to meet the needs of IS313X diverse learning community. Teachers and teacher teams will provide students with a diverse range of materials that has a real world context for them (diverse authors and or stories with diverse characters that they can relate to). What is your vision for diverse program offerings that allow students to develop skills, habits, and behaviors to be career and college ready? How are instructional shifts embedded in this vision? Within content areas, teachers will consistently reinforce college and career ready skills, including close reading, note taking, organization and time management. The instructional shifts being focused on are the use of academic vocabulary across subject areas, an increase of non fiction text across subject areas, and the use of text based answers. IS313X is partnering with College Access for ALL which also allows us to partner with colleges and universities to do campus visits and hear from college advisers and students. What do you envision the delivery of instruction to look like so that all students are set up for success? Instruction will be delivered using a workshop model. Lessons will have a mini-lesson (I DO) followed by opportunities for students and teacher to work together (WE DO), students will then try out the strategy or the skill on their own with the teacher as facilitator (YOU DO1), then students will be allowed to work in groups to practice independently (YOU DO2). Teachers monitor and check for understanding throughout the lesson. Teachers also work with a small group and/or confer with students daily. How do you envision teachers using multiple entry points to ensure the success of every child? Teachers create multiple entry points by using translated texts, multiple/supplemental texts, multiple response styles, varied groupings, and various media including video and audio to create more access. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 17  What is your vision for the use of a comprehensive assessment strategy (diagnostic, formative, benchmark, and summative) to drive curricular, instructional, and organizational decisions that impact student outcomes? Benchmark assessments in ELA and Math will be administered in October, January, and February to measure growth and predict possible state exam performance. Unit exams will be administered at the end of every unit to measure mastery of requisite standards. Formative assessment will be ongoing in the form of quick writes, questioning, conferring, exit tickets, and summaries. All these assessments will impact how units are revised as well as inform the formation of intervention groups and what they will focus on. Please indicate below the specific assessments that you are implementing and their purpose for each grade. Assessment Name Assessment Type Grades Implemented Purpose (diagnostic, formative, benchmark, summative) Ready (paper test) ELA benchmark 6-8 Ready (paper test) math benchmark 6-8 formative, summative 6-8 On demand writing assessments baseline and endline (3) assessments Engage NY Units assessments summative 6-8 to measure growth in ELA from the baseline assessment given in September to a midyear assessment given in January to predict performance on the NYS ELA and exam to measure growth in Math from the baseline assessment given in September to a midyear assessment given in January to predict performance on the NYS Math exam the baseline can inform areas to focused on instructionally, particularly in elaboration and craft for each unit -the endline measures student growth after the unit has been taught and help to inform intervention groups and focus skills measures student achievement after a unit has been completed -provides data to inform the formation of intervention groups Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – 2018-19 RSCEP-R 18  Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Renewal Benchmarks and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks. By June 2019, 85% of 38 teachers will incorporate daily rigorous tasks/activities within differentiated instruction resulting in a 10% decrease of level 1 students and an increase of 10% in proficiency on the ELA and Math state examination. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Rigorous Instruction Annual Goal: Which Renewal benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Rigorous Instruction Annual Goal? List of Renewal Benchmarks expected to improve ELA Benchmark proficiency rating MATH Benchmark proficiency rating Attendance Benchmark 2018-2019 2018-19 RSCEP-R 19  Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. Implement a priority statement that espouses students taking ownership of their learning using assessment data to track progress. Unit and lesson plans will be created with multiple opportunities for students to take responsibility for their own learning Writing Workshop: In grade 6-8, teachers will use the embedded tasks in the Educating Powerful Writers units. Similarly, teachers will incorporate rigorous tasks into the Expeditionary learning units for reading. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) All teachers, Math state exam All students September 2018 to June, 2019 School Administration, staff, consultants DSRs ELA state exam All teachers, ELA state exam All students September 2018- June 2019 School Administration, staff, consultants DSRs How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) review of student work products review of teacher lesson and unit plans review of student performance on standards RI. 1&2, RL. 1&2 when looking at assessments on demand assessments in writing (baseline & endline) review of students Reader's notebook with conferring notes review of students Writer's 2018-19 RSCEP-R 20  notebook with conferring notes monitor teacher performance on formal and informal observations. review student reading levels when they are entered in ... monitor student reading logs to ensure they are reading independently for the required time review teacher lesson plans to ensure implementation of guided reading groups with goals based on reading levels All teachers, Math state exam All Students Teachers will collaborate on finding and creating rigorous tasks to incorporate into the Engage NY math curriculum. These tasks will be used to help teachers and students follow the structure of the 5 Practices for Orchestrating Productive Mathematics Discussions. September 2018 to June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, all teachers, CSD, DSRs review exit tickets from classes review unit exam results to measure student mastery of specific standards 2018-19 RSCEP-R 21 All teachers, All students All teachers, All students ELA state exam, Math state exam September 2018 to June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, all teachers, DSRs ELA state exam, Math state exam September 2018 to June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, all teachers, DSRs, BFSC coaches All teachers, All students ELA state exam, Math state exam September 2018 to June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, all teachers, DSRs, BFSC coaches All teachers, students in pushable/slippable groups, including SWDs and ELLs ELA state exam, math state exam December 2018-June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, all teachers, DSRs, BFSC coaches We will implement a tiered intervention program (RTI) for math and ELA. Teachers will engage in weekly content-based team meetings in order to examine student work and assessment data, make adjustments to unit and lesson plans and progress monitor students across grades. Teachers will receive coaching and professional development support from the BFSC in ELA, math, social studies, science and ENL. Saturday and Holiday Academy - During February and April breaks, students, teachers and supervisors will be present for three days (for each break). In addition, after-school - small group support, tutoring, homework help and academic enrichment and extra-curricular activities. Students work with teachers in small groups and 1-1 using iReady, as well as other reading comprehension and math supports. 4b – Parent and Family Engagement 2018-19 RSCEP-R 22  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Families will be informed of our school's emphasis on Rigorous Instruction and the New York Standards through the use of monthly calendars, workshops and during report card conferences. Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, lead CBO’s community school budget, etc. A common planning period is built into the schedule daily for all teachers Professional development is provided through a literacy consultant Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) X Title III Title I TA PTA Funded X P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By February 2019, there will be a 5% increase of students scoring at a Level 3 and 4 on the Ready math Test from the baseline given in October 2018 as a result of teachers consistently developing and implementing lessons aligned to the Common core Standards. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Ready (paper assessment) for ELA and Math Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 23  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 5 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 5.2 The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. 5.3 The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students. 5.4 All school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health supports tied to the school’s vision. 5.5 The school leader and student support staff work together with teachers to establish structures to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental health needs. x Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: SOP(s) Addressed 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? 5. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? Tenet 5.5 will be our focus for the 2018-2019 school year. Our focus for the 2018-2019 school year, all IS313X staff will work collaboratively to develop all teachers’ ability to use data to effectively respond to the social and emotional needs of our students, so students can become socially and academically responsible. We will continue to work cooperatively in-house with our Student Intervention Team (SIT), Respect for All (RFA) Team and the newly instituted Student Intervention and Guidance (SIG) Team. These teams of administrators, teachers, guidance counselors, IEP Teachers and Dean of Students, will plan, implement and monitor all initiatives that impact student’s social and emotional wellness. The tone of the school is generally calm and respectful. The Principal and staff have created collaborative teams to address the needs of students and support teachers in the classrooms. The SIT, RFA and SIG will directly address behavioral issues throughout the school and across grade levels. Members of these teams are the school psychologist, guidance counselor, social worker, Dean of Students and IEP Teacher and these members will gather data, meet regularly and deliberate on student individualized education plans IEP’s. The teams will conduct parent workshops, professional development sessions for teachers and provide small group presentations with teachers regarding effective classroom management strategies from the Danielson Framework. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 24  Additionally, the teams will work closely with ASTOR children mental health services to provide additionally support with in-school and outside counseling for families (dual counseling – parent and child) and individual counseling (student). ASTOR our mental health CBO will work to promote mental health wellness for students who are referred to the program. We will also engage in a Respect for All (RFA) Team, which coordinates monthly assemblies to promote positive interactions amongst student to demonstrate how to effectively resolve conflict and build self–confidence and self-awareness. Part 2 – Summative Vision for Supportive Environment What is your vision for a supportive school environment? How will you in partnership with each CBO and families enact your vision? IS313X engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders, in English and Spanish (languages most spoken), in order to identify needs and augment learning. Our school community collaborates with family and community based agencies to provide training across all areas (academic, social and emotional developmental health) to promote student success. In collaboration with our new CBO, the school community will support the families with behavioral support that will help both the families and the students in order to increase our school attendance and student achievement. Counseling: Our school will engage in the learning framework of Positive Behavior Interventions and Supports (PBIS) a proactive approach to establishing the behavioral supports and social culture needed for all students in a school to achieve social, emotional and academic success. Attention is focused on creating and sustaining primary (school-wide), secondary (classroom), and tertiary (individual) systems of support that improve lifestyle results (personal, health, social, family, work, recreation) for all youth by making targeted misbehavior less effective, efficient, and relevant, and desired behavior more functional. Behavior: Our school will engage in school-wide discipline as we place an emphasis on school-wide systems of support that include proactive strategies for defining, teaching, and supporting appropriate student behaviors to create positive school environments. Instead of using a piecemeal approach of individual behavioral management plans, our guidance counselor will engage our students in a continuum of positive behavior support within our school, as we implement these behavior management plans, in all areas to include the classroom and non-classroom settings (such as hallways, cafeteria and bathrooms). We have in place a Student Counsel, elected by students to represent, attend, and take part in a guided decision-making process and promotion student achievement throughout the curriculum. Additionally to ensure further exposure to college and career readiness, we plan to institute internship opportunities for our 8 th grade students who meet all academic criterias. Guidance:  Establish a coordinated system of students’ records, monitor confidentially and update ATS log system with student data.  Guidance Counselors will follow-up with school staff, administration and parents regarding programming of students. SIT, RFA and SIG Team meetings (guidance counselor, social worker, school psychologist and Dean).   Parent Conferences  Monitoring student interpersonal strength: the ability to control emotions and behaviors in social situations. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 25 Intra-personal strength:outlook on his or her competence and accomplishments.   Affective strength:ability to express feelings towards others and to accept affection from others  Restorative Practices and Restorative Circles Who are your CBO partners? How will each CBO sustain and support the social-emotional and academic growth of your students? CBO Partner CBO Focus Bronxworks BronxWorks helps individuals and families improve their economic and social well-being. Phipps Neighborhood Provide an after-school program to support students with tutoring, homework help and their social and emotional needs How will you in partnership with your CBO will create a supportive environment and engagement for your students’ families? In order for the school's strategy and practices to align with the concepts in Tenet 5 the school will expand the plan to engage all stakeholders in ensuring the school's vision supports both the social and emotional needs of students to ensure timely services and supports for the whole school community. We will expand this plan with the newly formalized partnership of our school community with the community based organization when selected. The lead CBO will work with us to establish a plan that will engage all stakeholders to support the social and emotional needs of our students. Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Supportive Environment. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Renewal Benchmarks and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks. By June 2019, we will increase the percentage of students who agree/strongly agree with the statement, "Most students at this school treat each other with respect" from 28% to 50%, as measured by the 2019 NYC Learning Environment School Survey. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Supportive Environment Annual Goal: Which Renewal and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Supportive Environment Annual Goal? blank Attendance Benchmark 2018-2019 Student Behavior Punctuality Benchmark 2018-19 RSCEP-R 26  Part 4 – Action Plan Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) All staff and students Developmental assets, Student behavior, attendance and punctuality September 2018 to June 2019 CSD Respect-for-All Team, Principal, Assistant Principal, Teachers, Para Professionals and Guidance Counselors Social Worker. How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) Attendance Records In order to address the social emotional needs of our students, we have partnered with ENACT services to work with our students and staff both during the day and after school. During the day, ENACT staff members will work with teachers in the classrooms to help students remain on task and provide a secondary instructional resource of strategies to use during behavioral issues in the classroom. Rather than suspend students for low-level infractions, guidance counselors, social workers and dean will work within the school community to enrich the environment and provide additional support. Tasks include creating bulletin board displays in and out of the classroom, working with teachers and students directly in the classroom to prepare students for school events. This will give the students vested interest in improving behavior, while giving staff Student behavior All Staff and students September 2018 to June 2019 Guidance Counselors and social workers Lower OORS Report on school incident Dean 2018-19 RSCEP-R 27  members the opportunity to determine preventive strategies to avoid future infractions. The school will continue to provide social emotional supports through following: All Staff and students Students behavior September 2018 to June 2019 Counselors Principal decreased incident reports Social worker  ASTOR  Guidance Counselor Social Worker   Respect for All School counselor and social workers will work closely, with all students to set academic expectations and monitor progress towards reaching those goals, teach strategies towards positive behavior modification. Student Students behavior September 2018 to June 2019 Social worker, Dean and guidance counselor decreased incidents reports 4b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Our school will engage parents / families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment through monthly newsletters and workshops delivered by our Guidance Counselor and Parent Coordinator. Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. School Personnel Partnerships with Community Based organizations Guidance Counselor Social Worker Dean Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA P/F Set-aside 21st Century C4E 2018-19 RSCEP-R 28  Title I 1003(a) X Title III PTA Funded X SIG Grant School Achievement Other Funding Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. In February 2019, students will take a survey to measure the school's progress in meeting the goal of "Most students at this school treat each other with respect" from 28% to 50%" Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Students will use Survey Monkey to answer a short survey on the topics of student-to-student respect. Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 29  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 4 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 4.2 School and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. 4.3 Teachers provide coherent, and appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards x (CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. 4.4 Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences and tailored to the strengths and needs of all students. 4.5 Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, and progress monitoring). Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: SOP(s) Addressed 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? IS313X has a structure built into the schedule to promote teacher collaboration: a common planning period daily for all teachers, used for lesson/unit planning, lesson/unit plan revising, and looking at student work. This has promoted the formation of strong teacher teams and a culture of collaboration in all things instructional. The next step is for teacher teams to become more proficient in making data driven decisions and to become more involved in decisions involving school culture. Our teachers are diligent in creating lesson plans, creating assessments that are aligned to the CCLS and they are engage in a collaborative cycle of modifying and revising the unit/lesson plans. In planning their lessons teachers make considerations regarding subgroups (ENLs and SWDs), however, the practice of providing access for all learners is inconsistent. The ENL program is aligned with ELA in terms of some resources, but more support and development is needed to provide students with the tailored instruction they require (considering 32% of the school's population are ENLs). The ICT program lacks a consistent paradigm of how instruction should be delivered and this is critical considering 25% of the schools' students have an IEP. Improving planning and pedagogical techniques that allow for all students and student subgroups to be fully immersed in learning is paramount. There is a need for an improvement in the use of formative data to inform student goals, individual student feedback, and conferencing. Part 2 – Summative Vision for Collaborative Teachers 2018-19 RSCEP-R 30  What is your vision for collaborative teaching? This school year 2018-2019 IS313 will promote teacher collaboration in a variety of ways. The schedule is structured in a way that all teachers are available during 6th and 7th period for a common planning time. This common planning time serves two main purposes; first, teachers look at student work samples departmentally and across grade level using the Looking at Student Work Protocol. They identify gaps and trends and use their findings to revise units/lessons for classes/individuals. The teachers focus on making adjustments in three areas: planning, pedagogy, and assessment. This leads to the second focus of the common planning time: writing and revising unit and lesson plans departmentally. In an effort to create a consistency across departments, teachers plan lesson as a department, ensuring that lesson plans are detailed and focused on student learning. Teacher teams assess each lesson’s instructional purpose, making sure it is a clear and targeted objective. They assess the activity, making sure it is student centered, problem based, and pushing students’ thinking. They also look for built in checks for understanding, particularly exit tickets or summaries. Teacher teams also ensure that requisite units/lessons exhibit the school wide priority statement (The priority statement for the 2018-2019 school year is to develop teachers through the use of assessments. We will support teachers with the implementation of assessments to best support teaching and learning. This will include the use of formative/diagnostic tools, rigorous grade-level tiered tasks and evidence of assessments as checks for understanding. Through monitored cycles of inter-visitations and the use of resources and tiered supports, we will bring equity to teaching and learning in order to cultivate critical thinkers and analyzers). How do you envision collaboration amongst your School Instructional Cabinet to improve teacher practices and student learning? The instructional cabinet will use the protocols to identify a learner centered problem and a problem of practice to improve their own work with teachers and make them better equipped to help teacher teams implement the protocols. How do you envision collaboration within teacher teams to improve teacher practices and student learning? The instructional teacher leaders will use protocols to look at data and to look at student work to make adjustments to curriculum and pedagogy. Instructional teacher leaders will engage in Inter-visitation which is a critical part of the collaboration among teachers within teacher teams. The inter-visitation will focus on the use of formative assessment during instruction. How do you envision collaboration across teacher teams to improve teacher practices and student learning? The instructional teacher leaders will meet regularly to share progress towards their problems of practice as well as to discuss the implementation of school wide routines and structures and the priority statement. They will also look at student work across subject areas to create a well rounded view of student performance. What data will teachers and the School Instructional Cabinet regularly review to ensure that they are reflecting upon their teaching practices and meeting individual student learning needs? What is the intent for reviewing each piece of data? (ex. Teachers will regularly review student IEPs when developing lessons in order to ensure that tasks are appropriately scaffolded.) Data Reviewed Intent Formative Assessments to measure student growth from baseline to end-line and determine groupings and focus skills for intervention On Demand writing assessment bi weekly assessment to measure student growth following targeted feedback from teachers 2018-19 RSCEP-R 31  to ensure that teachers are giving targeted feedback regularly to students that will lead to their improved performance unit test results to measure students' progress toward achieving mastery of math standards being measured to determine groupings and focus standards for interventions Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Renewal Benchmarks and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks. By June 2019 teachers will engage in structured collaborations in teacher team inquiry around problems of practice, which will result in shifts in teachers’ instructional practices, resulting in a 10% increase in the number of students attaining or exceeding proficiency levels (levels 3 and 4) on the New York State ELA exam and a 10% increase in the number of students attaining or exceeding proficiency levels (levels 3 and 4) on the New York State math exam. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Collaborative Teachers Annual Goal: Which Renewal and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Collaborative Teaching Annual Goal? List of Renewal Benchmarks expected to improve ELA Benchmarks MATH Benchmarks Attendance Benchmarks 2018-19 RSCEP-R 32  Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. Teacher teams will use Data Wise protocols to determine student centered problems and problems of practice by looking at student work across content and across grade to surface gaps. Content teams engage in collaborative unit and lesson plan writing, focusing on a clear instructional purpose, student centered learning opportunities, access for all learners, and checks for understanding. The teams will also collaborate to revise unit and lesson plans based on data. Teacher teams will look at data to progress monitor and make adjustments in RTI tiered student groupings. Teacher teams will create and maintain classroom routines that are consistent school wide, including entry and exit routines, flow of the day, notebook Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) All teachers Framework Collaborative Teachers September 2018-June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, Consultants, DSRs, instructional lead teachers All teachers Framework Collaborative teachers ELA state exam September 2018-June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, Consultants, DSRs, instructional lead teachers All Teachers Collaborative teachers September 2018-June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, Consultants, DSRs, instructional lead teachers All Teachers Collaborative teachers September 2018-June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, Consultants, DSRs, instructional lead teachers How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) Teacher teams will submit their action plans they will be implementing to address their problem of practice lesson plans will be collected and studied to ensure they have all the required pieces revisions to unit plans will be submitted uniform classroom routines will be visible across classes and subject areas 2018-19 RSCEP-R 33  protocol, grading policy, and availability of resources to help students learn. 4b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. blank Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. A common planning period is scheduled almost daily for every teacher to participate in teacher teams IS313X will use protocols for looking at data, including but not limited too, Looking at Student Work Protocol Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded X P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By February, 2019 30% of pedagogical staff will demonstrate movement towards Effective in the overall HEDI rating for Engaging Students in Learning (3c) and Assessment (3D) Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. On demand writing assessments from Powerful Writers Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 34  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 2 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 2.2 The school leader ensures that the school community shares the Specific, Measurable, Ambitious, Results-oriented, and Timely (SMART) goals/mission and long-term vision inclusive of core values that address the priorities outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (RSCEP). Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital resources. 2.3 X 2.4 The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district's Annual Professional Performance Review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. 2.5 Leaders effectively use evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve critical individual and school-wide practices as defined in the RSCEP (student achievement, curriculum and teacher practices; leadership development; community/family engagement; and student social and emotional developmental health). Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: SOP(s) Addressed 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? The school leader has engaged in the process of sharing the state of the school with the School Leadership Team. The SLT has discussed the previous year's School Quality Review and the school state data in order to develop our 2017-2018 school wide goals. The school leader analyzes multiple points of data such as attendance, state assessment, classroom observation to improve individual and school-wide practices. The school leader has also engaged in data analyzes during professional development with the school faculty. Part 2 – Summative Vision for Effective School Leadership What is your vision for effective school leadership at your school? The school leader will shape the vision of the school, outlining key elements for success. The Principal will consistently communicate high expectations for his entire staff and set measurable goals for optimization. The Principal will create a climate that is hospitable to educating students. Teachers, staff, parents and students will work collaboratively to ensure success. The Principal will cultivate leaders and encourage the development of leadership across the school. The Principal leader will improve achievement by focusing on the quality of instruction, and effectively manage student data and building operations. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 35 The CBO partners will continue to collaborate with school staff to ensure students academic and social emotional needs are met through mentoring, counseling, success mentors along with the mental and health services progived to the entire school community by ASTOR. On which aspects of your own leadership do you plan to focus for the upcoming school year? Giving feedback in a timely fashion and linking the feedback to professional development, departmental initiatives and discussions with consultants. What is your vision for ensuring that everyone in your schools has a normed and shared understanding of the school’s vision, mission, and instructional focus? Consistently reiterate the school vision, mission, and priority statement when meeting with various stakeholders and ensure that the vision, mission and priority statement will drive our decision making and they will be visible in the classroom and in the student work What is your vision for developing differentiated leadership throughout your school? How will you utilize teacher leaders to build broad capacity within your school? Our instructional teacher leaders will be a part of the instructional cabinet, and will lead teacher teams meetings using protocols from Data Wise. Instructional teacher leaders will disseminate the initiatives designed by administrators and consultants and lead the implementation in teacher team meeting and during professional development. How will the leader foster collaborative school governance processes, and ensure full family participation together with other stakeholders? The school leader will consistently conduct SLT and PA meetings to engage parents with the stakeholders in the school community. The school leader will partner with our CBOs (Bronxworks and Phipps Neighborhood) to create more opportunities for adult learning, for parents to find out what their students are working on, and to celebrate their students' achievements. How often will the school leader conduct observations? How quickly will school leader share actionable feedback with teachers? How will school leader ensure accuracy and provide support to teachers based on observation feedback? Frequency Feedback Turnaround Accuracy The Danielson Framework for Teaching has served as the foundation for developing effective teaching practices at IS 313 for the past three years. Staff has been significantly steeped in Verbal feedback will be given to the teacher within 48 hours after the observation has been conducted, follow by written documentation within 72 hours. Feedback will be to linked professional development, departmental initiatives, staff handbook and discussions with consultants. Feedback will have an expectation of when it should be implemented 2018-19 RSCEP-R 36  learning and following the tenets set forth in the framework. To that end our school community has developed a shared understanding of effective instruction through strategic professional development focused on specific components of each domain. Based on the Advance selection option chosen during IPC conferences, administrators conduct informal and/or formal observations for each teacher using the framework and specific identified ‘look fors’ as a guide resulting in actionable verbal and written feedback with next steps. Continual reflections and revision of curriculum and practices has positively impacted student learning and there is ongoing identification of next steps to meet the diverse needs of our students. Our focus for the 2017-2018 school year is to refine and strengthen the systems and protocols in place to ensure that we maximize student achievement and teacher performance. What kind of evidence based systems would a school leader put in place to ensure that the school and individuals continues to improve? What kind of supports? Who would he/she collaborate with? Evidence-Based System Support(s) Collaborator(s) Advance rating system to monitor individual as well as school wide progress in Danielson components DSRs BFSC instructional leads 2018-19 RSCEP-R 37  Assessment data is entered into Mastery Connect to monitor students progress Teachers, instructional lead teachers, students How will you organize student and teacher programs to ensure students’ needs are met? Fiscal capital? The school will have a 9 period day, 10 periods of ELA and Math a week, common planning time, and staggered teacher schedules along with 4th period built in intervention. Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Renewal Benchmarks and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks. By June 2019, school administrators will support teachers in improving lesson planning - as a basis for rigorous instruction - through individual and group professional development, resulting in a 50% increase in the number of teachers receiving an "Effective" rating in Danielson component 1e in Advance. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Effective School Leadership Annual Goal: Which Renewal and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Effective School Leadership Annual Goal? List of Renewal Benchmarks expected to improve ELA Benchmark proficiency rating Math Benchmark proficiency rating Teacher Retention 2018-19 RSCEP-R 38  Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. School leaders will provide teachers with support and professional development around the required components for planning, including the use of models and 1-1 coaching. Lesson plans will be reviewed with feedback in alignment with the UFT contract provisions. School leaders will create a schedule of observations and a schedule of when feedback will be delivered. Follow up visits will also be scheduled to determine how feedback is being implemented. School leaders will continue to hone their feedback practice ensuring that all feedback is specific and actionable. Feedback will be tied to PD, department initiatives identified in staff handbook Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) Teachers September 2018-June 2019 Administrators ELA and MATH Benchmark September 2018-June 2019 Principal, DSRs, Superintendents, PLF, Coaches, Consultants We will continue to meet our monthly observation conducting benchmarks Administrators ELA and MATH benchmark September 2018-June 2019 Principal, DSRs, Superintendents, PLF, Coaches, Consultants Administrators will review each others feedback regularly Learning walks will be conducted 3 times a year jointly with IS339 2018-19 RSCEP-R 39 our co-located school in the building Administrators ELA and MATH benchmark September 2018- June 2019 Principal, DSRs, Superintendents, PLF, Coaches, Consultants Feedback will reflect what has been discussed in PD Principal, AP ELA and MATH benchmark September 2018- June 2019 Superintendent, DSRs, BFSC instructional coaches, leadership coaches Teacher performance, particularly in domains all 8 components will be tracked Principal performance and feedback from various visits from including MPPR, QR, visits from OSR, DSRs, Leadership coaches etc. will be reviewed/implemented and work conducted with consultants. Improved teacher practice ultimately leads to improved student achievement. School leaders will work with teachers to create a professional development plan including identifying goals for specific teachers or groups of teacher. The plan will focus on areas identified through classroom visits, observations and data regarding student achievement. School principal participates in multiple professional development venues and professional learning communities including professional development for the Power of Writing. 4b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. blank Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 40  The principal and 3 Assistant Principals will create a schedule of observation and feedback. A common planning time is built into the schedule for teacher teams to work together PD Plan will be created and revised with various consultants based on observations and departmental initiatives, and student achievement data.. Feedback to teachers will be tied to the department initiatives, PD and the discussions with various consultants. Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded X P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By February 2019, a minimum of three Data Wise Improvement Process teams will be in place, resulting in a school-wide decrease (25%) in the number of teachers receiving 'developing'' HEDI rating as measured by Domain 1, component 1e Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Advance rating system Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 41  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 6 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 6.2 The school leader ensures that regular communication with students and families fosters their x SOP(s) Addressed high expectations for student academic achievement. 6.3 The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders so that student strength and needs are identified and used to augment learning. 6.4 The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to support student success. 6.5 The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school community members centered on student learning and success and encourages and empowers families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their children. Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? Our school has done a good job of communicating with parents according to the Quality Review 2018 which identified quality indicator 3.4 (High Expectations) as proficient. The reviewer stated that the school leader consistently communicates high expectations to the entire staff. These expectations are directly connected to pathways for college and career readiness. The school does a good job of communicating with parents in regards to report cards, parent teacher conferences, promotion in doubt, after school programs and performances. Our school will continue to improve its outreach techniques from just making phone calls on a needs basis using the phone messenger, fliers, online grading system as we expand in house personal phone bank that will be provided by both the school and our CBO (Bronxworks). Our school will continue to promote an open door policy allowing parents to have consistent access to administration and teachers. Our parents have stated that they feel welcomed, and the school provides them with clear expectations for student performance and progress. Parents stated they received the school-wide grading policy which informs them how students are assessed. Parents receive progress reports in addition to report cards and texts and emails from teachers sharing student progress. Parents shared that they have attended workshops such as the grade 6 parent orientation in the summer, and in September an open house allowed them to meet teachers and hear teachers’ expectations in each subject. Our continuous goal is to create opportunities where we make IS313 a central hub for learning and support for the community as we anticipate through out collaboration with our CBO partnership. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 42  Our school will continue to celebrate the accomplishments of students (perfect attendance, science fairs, art fair, poetry slam, literacy celebration, etc.). These celebrations must become a conduit for bringing parents into the building on a regular basis. Part 2 – Summative Vision for Strong Family and Community Ties What is your vision for having strong family and community ties at your school? IS313X will continue to strive to maintain a welcoming environment for all stakeholders. Our school safety agents will continue to greet visitors politely and positively and direct them to the right personnel as they have done for years at our school. Our school leadership and support team will employ an open door policy as we accommodate parents as they come into the school regularly to discuss their children's progress. Part of our parent empowerment time will be dedicated to holding mini parent teacher conferences. When concerns arise in regards to students' academic or social and emotional progress, parental outreach will be made to bring parents into the intervention/support process. The parent coordinator's office will serve as a hub to welcome these parents in order to meet their needs. We will continue to create other outreach opportunities including phone banking by the CBO team led by Ms. Nunez, the community school director. Our parents will also receive four report cards for the school year, a progress report every five weeks within the marking period, as well as information regarding promotion. We will also hold four parent teacher conferences during the school year. Our collaboration with our CBO will continue to engage our parents for positive activities, not just to address concerns. This will be done by celebrating student's accomplishments (perfect attendance, honor roll, family night, movie night, bingo night, etc.). Within the Community School model, how will families be welcomed into the school and made a part of the school community? What support will administrators, teachers, school staff and school safety officers be given to help create a welcoming environment? Will there be a dedicated space for families in the school? Our IS313X stakeholders will be greeted by the school safety agents in a polite and courteous manner. They will proceed to the main office where the office staff will connect them with the appropriate personnel. If necessary, there are bilingual staff that can assist with the translation. IS313X is an academic community where the central priority is to provide and open channels of communication with our families through newsletters, community-wide events, parent-teacher conferences, celebrations, and regular communications between school and home, both in-person, via telephone and monthly calendars along with fliers. Communication is carried out by the administrators, teachers, and members of the school leadership team. How will the school identify and develop families to take leadership roles in school decision making/school governance structures? The administration team, with the support from the CBO and student government, who will be viewed as student leaders, will promote the vision of IS313 from the student perspective. The student government will be a part of the SLT once a month and they will engage our parents in creating a strong Parent Association and SLT. The PA and SLT will be encouraged to become active partners of the school community, organizing evens, activities, and fundraising. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 43  How will the school engage the community and families? How will they ensure that teachers are able to learn from families about the children being taught? Our school community and families will be invited to various events aimed at celebrating the student's social and emotional development, and academic achievement showcasing student talents. The four parent teacher conferences will help parents gain a better understanding of the school's goals, curriculum and factors that impact their child's progress. Through our partnership with Bronxworks (CBO), we will plan family workshops to empower parents through content and skill development. What types of supports does the school provide to families to encourage them to take an active role in what their child is learning? Type of Support Rationale Parent Teacher Conferences (Student Led) Interim Progress Reports - Monthly Newsletters Common Core Workshops Welcome families to be active partners in student learning. Give students and parents a more active role and voice in the school. Keep parents up to date on assignments, due dates, progress, attendance and assessments. Teachers will help parents learn how to support their children at home. How do families partner with the school and CBO to support student success? Will there be dedicated space for families? Family partnerships with school: SLT, PA, Weekly Parent Empowerment Family partnerships with CBO: Assist with and attend family workshops, studentscelebrations, trips and family night Is there dedicated space for these partnerships? Yes. The community school office and the Parent Coordinator office What is your vision for the role the school will take in providing access adult education classes within the community? In collaboration with the CBO the school offers the community GED and ENL classes. What data and student progress feedback loops will be present at the school to ensure that families knowledgeable of their children’s scholastic success? The school will provide parents with interim progress reports every five weeks within the marking periods along with monthly calendars. Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Renewal Benchmarks and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 44  By June 2019, 85% of overall stakeholders: parents, teachers and students, will participate in 3 Equity Workshops focused on Teaching and Learning which will result in an increased participation rate of 10% in the completion of the NYC Learning Environment Surveys. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Strong Family and Community Ties Annual Goal: Which Renewal and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Strong Family and Community Ties Annual Goal? List of Renewal Benchmarks expected to improve ELA Benchmark MATH Benchmark Attendance Benchmark 2018-19 RSCEP-R 45  Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) School government has been created to provide students voice. Current 6, 7 and 8th grade students. Student's Attendance September 2018 to June 2019 Parent Coordinator Administration Teachers Guidance Community School Director Our student government was created by the student body through an election process. Workshops dealing with Equity issues will be created with the participation of the student government members. Provide parent workshops to understand graduation requirements, careers, college and work readiness, and higher learning incentives. Parent CBO Parent Involvement workshops September 2018 to June 2019 Parent Coordinator Administration Teachers Guidance CSD How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) Enrollment and attendance at community events and adult classes Increase in student collaboration in programming and events The guidance counselor and parent coordinator will be supported by the school's administration and Dean to formulate parent workshops. These workshops will be evaluated by parent sign in sheets at the conclusion of the workshops. The surveys 2018-19 RSCEP-R 46  Parental Involvement activities will include workshops led by parents, where parents are welcomed to share experiences and specific skills (careers, crafts, life, and cultural diversity) to include participation in Family Day, Learning Celebration, Walks, and community beautification are a few of the strategies to promote student achievement. Teachers will participate in workshops designed to examine issues of equity for student learning across content areas, across grades and school wide. will be deliberated on by the SIG Team and Principal. All necessary adjustments will be considered and successes will be noted and continued. There will be a higher percentage of invited families attending events workshops and implementing parent- recommended classes Students and families Student Attendance September 2018 to June 2019 Parent Coordinator Administration Teachers Guidance CSD All teachers Rigorous Instruction January 2019 to June 2019 Teachers, APs, Principal More supports and scaffolds for students will be provided in order that all students can access the core curricula Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Priority and focus money Parent Workshops Workshops Facilitators Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA P/F Set-aside 21st Century C4E 2018-19 RSCEP-R 47  Title I 1003(a) X Title III PTA Funded SIG Grant School Achievement Other Funding Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By February 2019, a minimum of 10% of families will actively participate in a workshop being offered. All teachers and students will have participated in a minimum of one equity workshop. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The Community School Director will input data into New Visions Student Sorter to track parent attendance, results from agendas, etc. Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 48  Section 6: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) Program Description Directions: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) activities are directly aligned to the elements of the Framework for Great Schools, Rigorous Instruction, Supportive Environments, and Strong Family and Community Ties. ELT provides enriching educational experiences that happen outside of the traditional school day and blend skill acquisition, relationship-building and fun to foster academic and social-emotional growth. Summer learning, afterschool programming, and extended-day ELT models, when well-implemented, play a critical role in supporting students in all grades and ensuring that they graduate from high school, college and career ready. SED requires that Priority schools offer a minimum of 200 additional student contact hours as Expanded Learning Time in addition to the current mandated length of 900 hours of instruction per year (25 hours per week) in grades K-6 and 990 hours of instruction per year (27.5 hours per week) in grades 7-12. Effective ELT models will blend school staff with community partners, and will provide a balanced curriculum that can include ELA, math, STEM, arts, physical activity, and leadership development. Complete the sections on this page to demonstrate how the school will meet these requirements. Part 1 – ELT Program Goal(s) Describe the summative goal(s) of the ELT program for the 2018-19 school year. Goals for ELT should align to the Renewal Benchmarks. How will the school will ensure that all students’ individual needs are served during the Renewal ELT and how the school’s vision for ELT will impact both academic achievement and social emotional growth? Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. Renewal School Comprehensive Education Plan Section 6 (First Draft) The purpose of this document is to provide initial thoughts as to how Bronxworks and IS313X will carry out the Extended Learning Time (ELT) portion of the community school at the 1600 Webster Avenue campus. It is important to note, as the primary Community Based Organization (CBO) provider for IS313X and IS339X, Bronxworks will work with the principals at both schools to integrate and leverage the community school resources as much as possible. That said, each school has its own unique set of needs, which may require nuances in the model in order to meet the needs of both schools. Part 1 – ELT Summative Program Goal(s) Extended learning time will provide every student in the school academic support, remediation and/or enrichment facilitated in an engaging manner, which capitalizes on the student’s personal goals and interests. The 2018 – 2019 ELT goals will be as follows:  ELT is scheduled for all students in grades 6-8 (including all SWDs and MLLs), providing targeted instruction in both ELA and MATH, yielding an increase in measurable growth of students of students in ELA and MATH.  75% of students who participate in academic support, homework help, and or tutoring during the course of the school year will show improvement in their core subject areas as measured by increased quarterly grades in ELA, math, science and social studies. Schoolwide attendance will be sustained at 91% or increased over the course of the school year as a result of the improvement of student academic outcomes.  Part 2 – ELT Program Type Is the ELT program voluntary or compulsory? Voluntary X Compulsory Renewal ELT – Describe what accountability structures the school will employ to ensure participation of all students, including special populations, will participate fully in Renewal ELT. Additional ELT - If there is a voluntary ELT program in addition to the compulsory Renewal ELT, indicate how you will actively encourage the participation of all students, with the goal of serving at least 50% of students. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 49  Part 2 – ELT Program Type ELT is a one hour program where students are engaged in an online computer based IREADY instruction in both ELA and MATH Monday through Friday throughout the instructional day. Part 3 – ELT Program Description Target Population: The ELT program for a Renewal School will be offered to all students in the school. Describe how the school will meet the following SED requirements for an ELT program: How will the school integrate academics, enrichment, and skill development through hands-on experiences that make learning relevant and engaging? How will CBO staff and the school’s teachers be integrated to provide a seamless learning day?  Offer a range of activities that capture student interest and strengthen student engagement in learning so as to promote higher attendance, reduces risk for retention or drop out, and increases the likelihood of graduation.  Actively address the unique learning needs and interests of all types of students, especially those who may benefit from approaches and experiences not offered in the traditional classroom setting.  What new content areas and opportunities will be offered to students? How will the school ensure all IEP and language mandates are met during ELT?  Contain components designed to improve student academic, social, and emotional outcomes, including opportunities for enrichment programs such as in music and art.  Ensure instruction in any core academic subject offered in the program will be delivered under the supervision of a teacher who is NYS certified in that particular content area.  How will community educators receive professional development? Are there plans to provide joint PD to school faculty and community partner staff?  What content will be led by pedagogical staff and what content will be led by CBO partners?  How will the school best utilize CBO partners to impact student achievement?  How will effective outreach be conducted to families?  How will programming be made easily accessible to students and families in order to encourage participation? Part 3 – ELT Program Description Programming for ELT will be provided in conjunction between the school’s teaching staff and Bronxworks staff. The time will include collaboration with teachers and Bronxworks engaging students in small group work using IReady s the platform for ELT time. The Community School Director will participate in the schoolteacher’s weekly grade team meetings and planning sessions in order to align the after school content with the school’s curriculum and individual student needs. We will also provide opportunities for students to work with Bronxworks and school staff in preparation for state tests and college entrance exams. Since most students are performing well below proficiency level on state exams in ELA, math and science, we will provide support and literacy-based activities that allow students to apply skills they have learned. Part 4 – ELT Program Implementation and Oversight Part 4a. Who will implement the ELT program? Who will oversee the program? 1. Indicate the key personnel that will be responsible for implementing and overseeing the ELT program, including school-based staff and any high-quality community partners that will be involved. If applicable, describe the scope of involvement of all community partners and how the joint ELT program is structured. 2. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 50  3. How will the school assess the impact of ELT on individual student achievement and social emotional development? Part 4a – ELT Program Implementation Oversight The ELT program is supervised by the Principal and Assistant Principals with the support of the Community School Director. The ELT program’s impact will be evaluated both qualitatively and quantitative through the IREADY diagnostic data collections and the school wide assessments both in ELA and Math along with Ready benchmark assessments in their content areas. Part 4b. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. Part 4b. Timeline for Implementation and Completion. Compulsory ELT: September 2018 – June , 2019 Part 5 – ELT Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the ELT program. Part 5 – ELT Budget and Resource Alignment Bronxworks and the school agree to collaborate with one another to appropriately staff and budget the above described ELT program. Ideally, the school’s teachers will be the primary instructors for the academic instruction in ELT with Bronxworks and providing supplemental support (push in and pull out during the ELT hour). Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support the ELT Program. Note: If the program is funded by 21st Century Community Center Learning Funds, it must be offered in conjunction with a high quality, high capacity community partner. 21st Century Title I 1003(a) X X Tax Levy X Title III Title I SWP PTA Funded Title I TA SIG Grant P/F Set-aside School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 6 – ELT Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound and aligned to the school’s Renewal Benchmarks By June 2019, all students will participate in the ELT program. resulting in an improved or sustained attendance rate of 91% for the 2018-2019 school year. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. IReady Diagnostic Assessments Ready Benchmark Assessments Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 51  Section 7: Community School Description Directions: The Community School program is directly aligned to the Framework for Great Schools element – Strong Family and Community Ties. Part 1 – The Community School Program Goal(s) Indicate the summative goal(s) of the Community School program for the 2018-19 school year. Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Renewal Benchmarks and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks. By June 2019, our whole school attendance rate will meet or exceed our stated benchmark of 90%, as measured by the daily attendance records and the New Vision Data Sorter. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Community School Program Annual Goal: Which Renewal and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Community School Program Annual Goal? List of Renewal Benchmarks expected to improve List of Renewal Benchmarks expected to improve Attendance Benchmarks Math and ELA Benchmarks Part 2 – Community School Program Description Part 2a. Identify the CBO partnerships that you will develop, their target student population(s), and scope of the services provided. As well as supporting schools’ supportive environment and attendance work, CBO’s should be helping to support your school’s instructional focus. CBO Partnership Target Population Scope of Service Bronxworks All students/severely chronically absent and chronically absent students Phipps Neighborhood All students Bronxworks All students Help develop school wide tiered attendance strategies that include school-wide strategies targeted interventions for students with attendance challenges. Work with students during the After School Program providing tutoring and homework help. Work as a success mentor for subgroups of students. blank blank blank Part 2b. Describe how the school will meet the NYCDOE requirements for a Community School in the School Renewal program. 1. Renewal Schools are expected to partner with a community-based partner organization (CBO) and together with members of the School Leadership Team, hire a Community School Director. The Director will lead implementation of the asset and needs assessment process, and other critically important coordinating activities. Indicate how you will leverage this aspect of the work. Renewal Schools are expected to personalize the needs of all students, through strategic programming and services, as determined by the asset and needs assessment, and must also offer Expanded Learning Time (ELT) and mental health programming. In completing this section, ensure that you think about how: (1) the right services are provided to the right students and families at the right time; and (2) how you will seamlessly 2. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 52  3. 4. coordinate services with instructional programming happening throughout and outside of the school day. Indicate how you will implement this work, and describe other programming you anticipate to be in place to strengthen this initiative. Renewal Schools are expected to emerge as Partnership Schools, which are places where parents and families feel welcome, actively participate in the conversation and decision-making around the renewal of their schools, and have many opportunities to advocate for their children. Monthly meetings and Community School Forums engaging families and community stakeholders will be a critical part of this family engagement strategy. Describe how you will implement this aspect of the work. Renewal School Principals are expected to meet on a weekly basis with their Community School Director, select Assistant Principals, key staff, and other CBOs, to analyze trends in data and case manage individual students. Data tools – including the New Visions Data Sorter - and training will be available for schools to use. Indicate how you will implement this aspect of the work. 2b. IS 313X has collaborated with Bronxworks to meet the requirements for a Community School in the School Renewal program. The principal, members of the SLT, and Bronxworks staff will work collaboratively to hire a Community School Director through a joint interview/screening process. The Community Director will coordinate the needs assessment process by reviewing relevant school data, interviewing school leadership, and conducting student, teacher, and parent surveys. The community leadership team will analyze the data and develop a strategy for goal achievement. The strategy will include extended learning and mental health services, as well as other elements illuminated from the needs assessment. The community leadership team will provide guidance and oversight for the work that at the Community School. This team will be integrally involved in strategy decisions and program delivery. Parents, students, community members, instructional staff, the principal, and the community school director will comprise the leadership team. The team will meet monthly to discuss strategy and programming. The community school director will participate in weekly student support and attendance meetings with school personnel to review attendance and student concerns. Using the student sorter to extrapolate attendance, testing, and behavioral data, and these meetings will serve to focus on trends and develop intervention strategies to address troubling trends as they arise. The director and school principal will also meet regularly to review progress of the work and implementation. Part 3 – Community School Program Implementation and Oversight Part 3a. Key Staff and Partners 1. Name and describe the scope of involvement of all community partners working in the school (include partners supporting ELT, counseling, enrichment, etc.) 2. Name the members of your Community School Team and how meetings will be organized and structured to engage all stakeholders and be focused on results. 3. Explain data strategies including the use of the data sorter, and steps that the school will take to ensure that the appropriate interventions are provided to the right students 3a. Implementation of the Community School will be the responsibility of the Community School Director. The director will work in tandem with the school principal to oversee the work as prescribed by the community school strategy. The Community Schools Managing Director at Bronxworks will supervise the support staff during ELT and after-school program.. Weekly supervision sessions will provide guidance support to the work. Additional personnel, both school and community partners will be determined by the strategy informed by the needs assessment. Bronxworks will work alongside the school personnel to design the ELT program to provided academic support. Standardized test scores and report card data will measure impact on student achievement. Part 3b. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the Community School program. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 53  3b. Resources needed include a community school director and office space for community program personnel. Additionally, personnel to deliver ELT, academic enrichment, mental health, and parent engagement activities are needed. Professional development for program and school staff that reinforces the new community school model needed, as well. An extension of the school day to include the additional hour for ELT would be ideal to ensure maximum participation. Instructional needs will be determined upon completion of the needs assessment. Part 3c. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. 3c. DUE DATE TASK Complete Mental Health Assessment 10/2018 First Community Leadership Meeting 9/2018 9/2018 Complete Needs Assessment Complete Program Work scope 9/2018 10/2018 Hire Relevant Personnel 10/2018 Professional Development Begin Programming 9/2018 Part 3d. Mental Health Work Plan Separate from this RSCEP, schools will complete a Mental Health Work Plan that will become an addendum to this document. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 54  Section 8: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Students scoring high level 1 on the 2018NYS ELA Exam will be identified as pushable Students identified by teachers as low performing based on 2018NYS ELA exam as well as in class assessments will be identified students who are reading below grade level as identified by PRAreadingassessment Students scoring high level 1 on 2018 NYS Math Exam will be identified as pushable Students identified as low performing based on 2018NYS Math Exam as well as in class Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Saturday and Holiday Academy - During February and April breaks, students, teachers and supervisors will be present for three days (for each break). Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Differentiation and scaffolding during lessons, When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) During core lessons During built in intervention periods Small groups instruction After-School - Tutoring During IReadyperiods small group support, tutoring, homework help andacademic enrichment and extra-curricular activities. Students work with teachers in small groups and 1-1 using iReady, as well as other reading comprehension supports. ReadyProgram– Saturday and Holiday Academy - During February and April breaks, students, teachers and supervisors will be present for three days (for each break). During February and April break academies Differentiation and scaffolding during lessons, During core lessons During built in intervention periods Small groups instruction 2018-19 RSCEP-R 55  Science assessments will be identified - Students who perform poorly on initial Math baseline, and IReady skills assessment administered in Sept. 2018 Students identified by teachers as low performing based on 2018 NYS Science Exam Social Studies Students identified by teachers as low performing based on 2017 Social Studies baseline assessment, End of Unit assessmentas well as in class assessments At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Students identified by teachers based on observed behaviors or conversations with student(s)-Students identified by parents as needing at risk service because of issues at home that After-School - Tutoring small group support, tutoring, homework help andacademic enrichment and extra-curricular activities. Students work with teachers in small groups and 1-1 using iReady, as well as other math supports. repeated reading of content covered in the science classroom During IReadyperiods During February and April break academies differentiation and scaffolding during lessons Saturday Academy supplementary reading to help students improve their prior knowledgeregarding the content being taught repeated reading of content covered in the science classroom supplementary reading to help students improve their prior knowledgeregarding the content being taught CBOsocial worker Whole group, small group, and one-to-one tutoring differentiation and scaffolding during lessons Whole group, small group, and one-to-one tutoring Whole group, small group, Guidance Counselors and one-to-one During core lessons During built in interventions periods During the school day Outside counseling 2018-19 RSCEP-R 56  may potentially impact the student 2018-19 RSCEP-R 57  Section 9: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) The school has 75 students in Temporary Housing. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. -Assistance with purchasing uniforms -Assistance with purchasing school supplies -Referrals for health/ mental health services through ASTOR, Mental Health Clinic -Vision screening and glasses Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). n/a 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 58  After school program Social and Emotional Support Parental outreach program provided by the CBO 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. n/a 2018-19 RSCEP-R 59  Section 10: Title I Program Information Directions:  All schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. When hiring new teachers candidates are interviewed, lesson plans reviewed and demo lessons evaluated before hiring. Teachers selected and paired with a classroom teacher on the grade. The teacher spends the day with the teacher and feedback is gathered from the visiting classroom teacher as to their strengths and needs before consideration is made in regards to their assignment as well as their license area. We also work closely with the district office, the Office of Renewal, and Central Hr department to ensure the hiring of highly qualified candidates. Through frequent observation from administrators and inter-visitations with colleagues, teaches are monitored and supported when areas of concern are identified. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the strategies and activities for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, staff, and paraprofessionals that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). PD is conducted by administrators, consultants, district personnel, and teacher teams based on needs identified through observations as well as on instructional shifts and strategies related to CCSS. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. n/a 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). n/a 2018-19 RSCEP-R 60  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/information, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. A Measures of Student Learning/Professional Development (MOSL) committee was created by the administration to participate in the selection, implementation, and analysis of multiple assessment measures. Teachers participants are represented in all major content areas. This group of teachers also created the assessment schedule for our school with in put from the coaches and administrators. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds enables, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (RSCEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) X N/A N/A N/A X Column B Section Reference(s) 5A-E N/A N/A N/A 5A-e Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Title I Part A (Basic) Title I School Improvement 1003(a) Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funds Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal 284,673 0 0 0 13,774 2018-19 RSCEP-R 61  Title III, Immigrant Federal Tax Levy (FSF) Local 0 3,102,628 N/A X N/A 5A-e 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I School Improvement 1003(a): To support implementation of school improvement activities identified through the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) reviews or a school review with district oversight and included in the DCIP/RSCEP.  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: To support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs.  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the 2018-19 RSCEP-R 62  participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan.  Title I Priority and Focus School Parent Engagement Set-aside: Additional set-aside is to enable greater and  more meaningful parent participation in the education of their children. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process, including Title I 1003(g) SIG funds: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 63  Section 11: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. I.S. 313 in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students IS313x School of Leadership Development will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● Providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology. ● Providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children. ● Fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments. ● Sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 64  ● Providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community. Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● Actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact. ● Engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● Ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact. ● Support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills. ● Maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office. ● Conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home. ● Provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report. ● Host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 2018-19 RSCEP-R 65  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA). ● Schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions. ● Translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● Conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help. The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● Holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference. ● Hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year. ● Encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● Supporting or hosting Family Day events. ● Establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● Encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers. ● Providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● Developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress. ● Providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) I.S. 313, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for 2018-19 RSCEP-R 66  improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● Using academic learning time efficiently. ● Respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences. ● Implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards. ● Offering high quality instruction in all content areas. ● Providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA). Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● Conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related. ● Convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved. ● Arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting. ● Respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education. ● Providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand. ● Involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact. ● Providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 67  ● Ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year. Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● Ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents. ● Notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member. ● Arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities. ● Planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences. I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● Creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians. ● Assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend). ● Sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community. ● Supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents. ● Ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy. ● Advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs. Support Parents in: II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities 2018-19 RSCEP-R 68  ● Monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent. ● Ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age. ● Check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary. ● Read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● Set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games. ● Promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time. ● Encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child. ● Volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits. ● Participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education. ● Communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district. ● Respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested. ● Become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact. ● Participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible. ● Take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams. ● Share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; III. Student Responsibilities Student Responsibilities: ● Attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● Complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● Follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● Show respect for myself, other people and property; ● Try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; 2018-19 RSCEP-R 69  ● Always try my best to learn. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 70  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): K 6 1 7 2 8 3 9 4 10 5 11 12 100 2018-19 RSCEP-R 71  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: The purpose of the Saturday and Holiday Academy is to support our English Language Learners in language acquisition, vocabulary development, reading comprehension, writing and mathematics. The academy services approximately 100 students in grades 6-8. For the ELA component our students are place in two groups. One groups services 30-40 students news to the country or have lesson than one year in the NYC school system. These students use Imagine Learning, Duolingo, a computer based intervention with support in L1. With these programs students will learn English through instructional strategies that focus on key vocabulary words, phonics and word families, they also listen to oral language and have the opportunity to record them as they become more proficient in English. The other two groups are for students who are group by proficiency level as well as grade. Students in these groups use I-Ready lessons to address the gaps in math and ELA. they also participate in independent reading. These groups of students also receive mathematical instruction based on grade level. With the grade they focus on high leverage low performing items identified from the 2016-2017 NYS Math exam item analysis. All students receive an hour and a half of ELA and MATH instruction. The program is from 9:00AM to 1:00PM every Saturday and will run through Math. The Saturday Academy begins in late October and runs through the last Saturday before the math exam in May for approximately 17 sessions. The teachers involved in the program are certified math and ela teachers. One teacher is a certified ENL teacher and the other teacher is a certified bi-lingual math teacher. Eight teachers teach during this program. six will program services in both ELA and Math to the monolingual students while the other two certified teacher will instruct the ELLs students. There will be one assistant principal to supervise the program. The holiday academy will consist of our expanding students three time during the vacation in February and April (Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday). There are approximately 50 students across the grades that will receive additional instruction. this will be at a cost. We will use the Title III funding to purchase the services of our teachers in to provide our students rigorous instruction throughout the program. We will continue to use the Title III funding to support our Saturday and Holiday Academy in order to provide English Literacy instruction as well as English as a New Language language with focus on second language instruction. The Academies, Saturday and Holidays, are designed to help English Language Learners in their language acquisition process. In addition, a first language (Spanish) support instructional component designed to help Students whose first language is Spanish (Spanish speakers are approximately 90% of the English Language Learners population) to strengthen their first language reading and writing skills in Spanish for those students sitting in our Spanish Transitional Bilingual Program who have interrupted formal education (SIFE). Moreover, Title III after school target second language acquisition through literacy in the second language 2018-19 RSCEP-R 72  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information (English). Students in our Title III Saturday and Holiday Academy will receive the benefit of small-group instruction from late October, 2018 through June 2018 (to support the ELLS who are taking the eighth grade science examination) approximately 25 sessions 4 I/2 hours each Saturday’s session for a weekly total of 4 1/2 hours. To address the range in linguistic and academic abilities among second language learners, students will be placed in an ability-based group (as determined by the NYSESLAT and ELA scores). Four (2) Bilingual/ENL teachers and one (2) reading/ELA teacher as well as a mathematics teacher will team teach in our Title III Saturday Academy and holiday programs for second language learners. Although, the reading and mathematics teachers do not have ENL/Bilingual licenses, they have been exposed to different ENL teaching methodologies. They will team teach with ENL/Bilingual certified teachers. The two regular teachers will also co-plan with ENL/Bilingual certified teachers for instruction and professional development. Two school aides will serve as out of classroom support, during the Saturday and Holiday Academy program, covering the Main Office, school hallways, photo copies, cafeteria duty, and phone calls to parents in order to keep 100% attendance. The two school aides are paid from another funding source. To ensure quality of the instruction and the safety of all students, the Principal and/or one of the Assistant Principals will supervise both instructional programs, Saturday and Holiday Academy. The supervisor will be responsible for all documents such as: attendance, performance data, purchase, and distribution of needed materials to all pedagogical staff participating in the Title III Saturday’s Academy and weekly after school. The supervisor, Assistant Principal will file and keep all document in a Title III binder which will be divided in sessions for all communication with parents, teacher assignments, professional Development, students attendance, and all other documents relate to the implementation and supervision of the program. In addition, the supervisor will make sure that the Title III Plan is followed and implemented according to the mandated Title III guidelines. The supervisor will also conduct informal observations, professional developments, collect, and distribute students' data to inform instruction. Target Population Entering/Emerging Group: This group (50 students) is composed of students who are Entering and/or with very limited English abilities in all four NYSITELL and NYSESLAT testing modalities – reading, writing, listening and speaking. The focus for this group will be to accelerate the development of both social and academic language by strengthening individual student foundation in the four NYSESLAT testing modalities. Such skills included phonemic awareness, vocabulary enrichment, phonics, early reading skills, and sentences recognition as well as sentences formation. In Addition, there will be an increase in oral/auditory comprehension and fluency practice teacher to students. Students in the beginner group will be using the NYSESLAT readiness materials for beginners to strengthen their language-development within the four NYSESLAT modalities of language acquisition. These students will also be using Imagine Learning, Duolingo a computer base programs designed for English Language Learners which has a city and state test readiness resource to prepare for the ELA exam. Transitioning Group: Students (20 -40) in these two groups scored in the range of Intermediate level English proficiency on the NYSESLAT test and a level 2 or low 3 on the ELA and Math exams. Generally these students have a grasp on social language but are still struggling with academic language in both reading and writing. This group will use the New York ELA (Expeditionary Learning Curriculum) and Math (Engage New York curriculum guide), and NYSESLAT materials. Particular attention will be given to more complex elements of comprehension and fluency in Reading and Writing. Sample units included sentence structure, the paragraph, conveying understanding through writing, re-telling, identifying main idea, character analysis, 2018-19 RSCEP-R 73  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information and the use of details. To achieve independence as growing readers and writers, students in this group will continue to receive foundational support in English vocabulary and structure. Longman’s ELLs materials such as: American Idioms and Phrasal Verb dictionaries in combination with Rosetta Stone a computer based program designed for second language learners. Expanding Group: The focus of the Advanced Group (40) will be to overcome academic weaknesses and reach proficiency on the NYSESLAT. At this level, we will focus our Saturday and Holiday Academy Title III programs on advanced topics for achieving academic language in Reading and Writing on the second language (English). Sample Reading /writing units included: determining genre, identifying authors purpose, test-taking strategies (scanning, skimming, and rereading), and making text-to-self, text-to-text, and text-to-world connections. Sample writing units include: short answer responses, organizing ideas (pre-writing), essay composition, and self-editing. Special attention will be given to writing style including the use of tense (i.e. past, preset, progressive etc….), identifying, and correctly using irregular verbs. This group will follow the Expeditionary Learning and Engage New York Mathematics program for 6th, 7th, and 8th grades to prepare for upcoming subject tests and state exams in ELA, MATH. Additional supplementary materials from Ready, and IReady lesson, will be used to reinforce and support literacy. The Advanced Group will focus on the reading and writing components of the NYSESLAT (the area of the test where advanced level students traditionally have the most difficulties). In addition, instruction will be planned for all students in different levels of language acquisitions using supporting materials from Newsela, Math, Science, world history, and United States History to reinforce content knowledge, literacy skills, and academic language. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: During the 2018-2019 school’s year, IS313 will host a series of sustained professional development workshops for teachers participating in the Title III Saturday and Holiday academies. These workshops will be available to all teachers during grade conference and staff development days. In addition, Title III professional development will be implemented for the teachers in the Title III program to support the rigorous, high quality Saturday and weekday programs for our English Language Learners. Title III Study Group will involve all Title III teachers and an assistant principal. Professional Development meetings will be held during the months of October 2018 through June 2019, after school and early mornings 8:00AM - 9:00AM and 3:00PM – 4:00 PM. Professional meeting will have an emphasis on studying and exploring effective ENL strategies as well as identifying best practices for ELLs in order to enhance instructional practice in the Title III program by building teachers' capacity on second language acquisition at the middle school level. Teachers and administrators will study and revise text such as: 63 Tactics for Teaching Diverse Learners. Four sessions will be facilitated by the BFSC support team. These sessions will focus on strategies to provide teachers a better understanding of the Immigrant Students adaptation 2018-19 RSCEP-R 74  Part C: Professional Development process to the United State. Emphasis will be given to the study and analysis of ENL/Bilingual students' data. We will also review and study the Common Core State Standards and its Implications for Understanding Language Initiative for Bilingual Education. In addition, we will study the following texts and documents: English Language Learners in Your Classroom, Strategies That Work by Ellen Kottler, Jeffrey A. Kottler and Chris Street; Common Core Learning Standards Implications for English Language Learners from the New Common Core Learning Standards; What Reading Teachers Should Know about ENL Learners written by Mary J. Drucker; Disciplinary Literacy for ELLs Michael J. Kieffer; Supporting ELLs’ Achievement: Oral language Unpacked Nonie K. Lesaux & Julie Russ Harris, Academic Language by Emily Phillips Galloway, and other articles published by the office of English Language Learners in order to get a better understanding of the second language acquisition process in the content Areas. These sessions will be facilitated by teachers. Individual teacher will meet with the Assistant Principal in order to plan and schedule Professional Development sessions. Professional development sessions may also be planned by team of no more than two teachers, participating in the 2014-15 Title III Academies. This will positively impact the quality of instruction by providing teachers strategies designed to teach second language acquisition, which will also positively impact students' progress in their acquisition of a second language, English. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Title III Immigrant After-School/Saturday Programs will offer different Parent Development workshops during the 2018-2019 school year. All title III parents will be invited to participate in the Saturday Academy Program with their children. In addition, parents’ seminars and workshops will be presented in Spanish and English at IS 313. Translation services will be available, if requested, for our growing French speaking population. Parents and community participation are central components of both academic growth and a well-developed Title III Immigrant program. Parent workshops will focus on introducing ELLs' parents to their new community and equipping them with strategies for best supporting their children’s academics. All parental engagement activities communication, Information and invitation flyers will be written in both English and Spanish and if requested flyers will be sent to the Translation and Interpretation Unit for translation into French in order to reach our growing French speaking population. In addition to that, parents will also receive phone calls from our school automatic phone call system, informing them of all title III program activities and special events. Parents’ workshop series will include the following topics: 1) The first workshop will educate parents on the components of the New Common Core State Standards strategies for upcoming state exams. This session will offer numerous take-home strategies parents can use to help to their child succeed on their English language acquisition, 2018-19 RSCEP-R 75  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities English Language Arts, Mathematics, and NYSESLAT state exams. It will be a central focus during this session - offering parents a greater understanding of what is necessary to ensure their children’s success. Teachers and the Assistant Principal will facilitate these workshops. 2) The second workshop will provide a parent-community orientation. The Parent-Coordinator will host this workshop that supports bilingual heritage and celebrates the community. Moreover, parents will be provided with information about community based organization (CBO) located in our community. CBOs that can provide parents information and support to become US citizen, to take GED classes, and other type of community support. 3) The other 6 workshops will be based on academy and community issues such as: understanding and adaptations to a new culture, how to fill in immigration forms, NYSESLAT parents and students preparation, How to Navigate the Internet looking for Educational Resources, the New Common Core State Standards and the application for English Language Learners as well as other related topics. 4) As a culminating activity for the 2016- 2017 Title III Program, we have planned a student-performance which will allow Immigrant Students and Second Language Learners students to showcase their work. Our Saturday Immigrant Celebration has been tentatively scheduled for Saturday, June 13, 2015 from 9:00AM to 2:00PM. All parents and family members in our school community will be invited to attend this event. It will be held in the school’s auditorium and cafeteria. The majority of the mentioned workshops and Title III activities are planned and will be presented in combination with our sister school IS 339X title III staff and administrator. Providers and qualifications: all teachers participating in the Title III Immigrant after school and Saturday Programs. In addition, all other staff and member s of the school community will collaborate with the parents and CIS313’s parents’ coordinator. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 76 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 2018-19 RSCEP-R 77  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 09 School Name School of Leadership Development Borough Bronx School Number 313 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Earl Brathwaite Coach Mr. Viery ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Ms. Carmona/ Mr. Minero Teacher/Subject Area Ms. Sanchez/ HLA Teacher/Subject Area Mr. Smit/SS Related-Service Provider Dr. Charles - IEPMs. Superintendent Ms. Leticia Rosario Assistant Principal Adrina Durant Coach Mr. Dawson School Counselor Ms. Carrion Parent Ms. Trinidad Parent Coordinator Ms. Urena Field Support Center Staff Member type here Other (Name and Title) Mr. Delancer/ Math C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 2 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 2 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 1 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 314 2018-19 RSCEP-R 78 Total number of ELLs 101 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 32.17%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): Spanish If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 4 3 2 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 5 6 1 7 1 8 1 9 10 11 12 0 1 1 1 0 0 0 0 Tot # 3 0 0 0 0 0 3 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Paste response to questions here: All students entering the Bilingual (TBE) or the ENL (Freestanding) programs are administered the NYSITELL and the NYSESLAT for identification and placement. Students whose native language is Spanish are administered the ELE (Examen de Lectura en Espanol) to assess literacy in the Spanish language each academic year. All students are administered Baseline assessments, periodic interim assessments in ELA and Math, the Scholastic Reading Inventory to assess reading levels, and the NYSELA, NYSMATH, and NYS SCIENCE, to include NYSAA in each content area to students with IEP's. In compliance with Part 154 mandates and the Common Core State Standards Initiative all our ELL's (excepting new entrants who are exempt from the NYSELA Exam ) are tested with the same assessment tools as mainstream students. Our ELL students, categorized as entering and emerging, including students who are currently developing and moving on to the transitioning proficiency levels remain at the exempt level until they have been in the program for a year and a day. Students (17) who have been identified and categorized with special needs, receive counseling services, Speech Therapy, and social-emotional group and individual guidance by ASTOR and our CBO (PHIPPS and SONYC) enrichment and 2018-19 RSCEP-R 79  mentoring programs. Students in our Special Education Program and ELL's with Individual Education Plans are tested using the same assessment tools, but in accordance to their IEP testing modifications. ELL’s in our Freestanding Program are serviced in English Language Arts curriculum and Push-in/Pull-Out Program by one certified teacher to meet the needs of reading, writing, speaking, listening, and viewing standards in preparation for the NYESLAT. All ELL’s are required to meet the Common Core Learning Standards and involved in a curriculum of rigorous instruction in all content areas. The patterns revealed by the performance levels (on the NYSISTELL AND NYSESLAT) across the three grades (6, 7, & 8) in the TBE program show Entering (Beginners) has increased by 40% and Emerging has increased approximately 20% in the ENL Program. ELL's in grade 7 and 8 have tested out (15%) in both programs. Inversely, only 5% in grade 6 have tested out. Emergent and Transitioning students are in the lower percentiles (30%) in grade 6 and grade 8. Language and literacy performance levels are not congruent across all grade levels in the Freestanding Program, with students attaining Literacy and Math Levels. Language acquisition in the TBE Program demonstrates a lower performance level in ELA attributed to a majority of 69 % new entrants and the number 14 SIFE students. All students in the Bilingual Program are taught and tested Math in the native language (Spanish), while given the option to test in English. Inspite of the testing conditions in the native language, the challenge of curriculum, the number of SIFE students, the performance levels have decreased minimally. The ENL program has also shown minimal increase (2%) in Math performance. Speaking and listening scores are increasing at the same pace 2 to 1, while reading and writing have increased only1 to 2. The increase in reading and writing in both programs has been set as an annual goal to meeting the annual measurable objectives of both programs for all students. The Annual Measureable Achievement Objectives tool provides the school with an in-depth analysis of attained proficiency in each category (listening, speaking, reading, and writing) for students in the Freestanding ESL Program and in the Transitional Bilingual Program. The data in the tool informs administration budgetary planning, LEP/ENL services needed, attainment of proficiency levels and patterns of Emerging/Transitioning/Expanding gains at each grade and student, and number of students attaining proficiency levels on the NYSESLAT. The State Education Memo has set AMAO criteria for meeting three specific goals: 1. Progress in English (advancement, gains attainment, and scoring at/or above expanding) 2. The percentage of students scoring at commanding levels in Listening/Speaking and Reading/Writing on the NYSESLAT, and 3. Making AYP (Annual Yearly Progress) in ELA and Math. The tool is necessary to inform and drive instruction. Our data (2014-2015) reveals that for two consecutive years, the number of students entering both programs (47) have shown a positive progression from grade 6 to 8 in L/S, expected at the BASICS Level. The number of Emerging (18) has been lower at R/W levels. Indicating the need for an increase in reading/ writing opportunities. The number of Expanding (20) is highest at the second year in Reading but not in Writing. This might explain the decrease in number of students (5) commanding the language and not meeting the AYP in ELA and Math and 47 students at Level 1 in NYS ELA and 68 at Level 1 and 2 in NYS Math, in spite of the changes in category and modality (Entering, Emergent, Transitioning, and Commanding. All data gathered from the NYESELAT, Reading Levels, ELE, ELA and Math Levels, including NYSAA administered from grade K-5, must be analyzed to determine the proper guidance, services, and placement (Bilingual, Special Education classroom, or Least Restrictive Environment). Parents receive a letter of the intended AIS the student shall receive, including the one-to-one professional assigned (if necessary), the Speech Therapy, if called for, and the itinerary of services. The IEP is utilized for differentiation of instruction, behavior modifications, and assessment modalities and accommodations. The teachers providing instruction must become aware of the indicated performance indicators the student must meet and the modifications under which the instruction is imparted. All IEP's are kept under lock and key and read periodically to assure student particular data is up to date and services by SBST and counselors are adhered to. ESL, ELA, and NLA instruction include literature and content-based instruction that is aligned explicitly to New York State learning standards in ESL, ELA, NLA, and content areas. ESL, ELA, and NLA instruction must comply with CR Part 154. Therefore, teachers lesson planning includes proficiency levels, differentiated activities, word study and vocabulary, translation or code-switching for understanding, grouping activities, pacing calendars in content areas, native language instruction intended to increase literacy in both languages, use of resource and reference materials in both languages. We use transitional skills and 2018-19 RSCEP-R 80  sight words for students at the emerging and transitional proficiency levels as well as of program models (My On, Achieve 3,000, and Engage NY). We put emphasis on increasing literacy and math focusing on instructional shifts, leveled and organized classroom libraries to build stamina and provide independent reading and writing, scaffolding of instruction to increase academic rigor, and integration of technology to facilitate teaching and learning. The data acquired as a result of the NYSITELL, the Spanish LAB, the NYSESLAT, Baselines, Interim Assessment in ELA and Math, SRI, Reading records and teacher generated summative and formative assessments as well as letters of progress, attendance, academic intervention services, marking period grades, and content area progress letters serve as a barometer to predict student growth and performance in language development and proficiency. The use of AMAO sustains the validity of all the measureable objectives for each ELL in both the Bilingual and ENL program and provides a valuable tool to evaluate the success of the program and Annual Yearly Progress rates. Results are shared and analyzed during Professional development in order that teacher may note gains and target proficiency needs with the necessary strategies and utilize or request the resources needed. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? Paste response to question here: 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Paste response to question here: 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Paste response to question here: 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Currently, we service a total of 100 students categorized as Limited English Proficient or ELLs. Students in our Spanish Bilingual Transitional Program are grouped according to their grade level 6th, 7th, or 8th grade, one class in each level, classes 631, 731, and 831 accommodate all students in our Spanish Bilingual Transitional Program. Our 2018-19 RSCEP-R 81  Freestanding ENL program accommodate students according to their grade level 6th, 7th, or 8th grades in classes 622, 722, and 823. ELL students that have an IEP sit in special education classes according to their mandated IEP, ENL services are provided according to the recommendations in their IEP. Therefore, our ENL Program across our regular program for 6th, 7th, and 8th grades, services the sub-groups labeled as Entering, Emerging, Transitioning, Expanding, and Commanding. In addition to subgroup within the mentioned language acquisition groups such as: newcomers, students with Interrupted Formal Education (SIFE), Long Term ELLs (LTE), and ELLs with special needs. We use a Transitional Bilingual Approach in which literacy is developed through Home Language Arts (HLA), English as a second language (ENL), and English language arts (ELA) curricula aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards for English Language Arts and Literacy in History and Social Studies. The value of learning to read first in the native language is recognized. Instructional strategies promote the transfer of literacy skills learned in the native language to acquisition of literacy in English. Our English as a New Language (ENL) program focuses on the acquisition of a second language, English, for a heterogeneous population of students with diverse languages and cultural background. Our Freestanding ENL approach is extended by a Push In and/or Pull-Out Program for delivery of instruction. The Transitional Bilingual Education Program consists of three classes: one sixth grade (631), a seventh grade (731), and an eighth grade (831). These classes are categorized at the beginners and intermediate levels of proficiency, having scored at the Entering/Emerging and Transitioning/ Expanding levels in the NYSITELL and/or the NYSESLAT. Students who have scored at the Transitioning/ Expanding levels in the SBTP receive one unit of ELA and one unit of HLA as well as the mandated ENL units. The majority of our ELLs, an estimated 85% are Hispanic, approximately 10% are of Africans background, 4% is from the English Speaking Caribbean, and 1% has other languages background. We have experienced an estimated 30 to 35 new admissions into the 6th, 7th, and 8th grades each academic year, for the last 5 years, categorized as new arrivals and LTE’s from feeder schools. Our Transitional Bilingual Program includes students who have recently arrived to the United States with a diverse Spanish language background to students that have scored Transitioning and Expanding on the NYSESLAT who may have been in the United States from 1 to 7 plus years. Besides, our three Transitional Spanish Bilingual classes, grades 6th, 7th, and 8th, are taught math, science, and social studies in their native language, Spanish, including a 10 to 15 minutes English summary in each daily lesson. The English Summary reinforces vocabulary and academic language acquisition in the second language, English, providing scaffolding not only for the acquisition of the second language but also the acquisition of content, integrating language 1 (Spanish) and language 2 (English) in every lesson. In addition the instructional program provides two units of integrated ENL/ELA and one unit of HLA. ELL’s placed in our Freestanding ENL Program or Special Education classes (ELL’s with an IEP), grades 6th, 7th, and 8th, are instructed in a Pull-out model. These students also receive integrated ELA/ENL in a regular setting where the ENL teacher pushes-in to team teach with the ELA teachers. All ELA teachers participate in second language acquisition, best practices for co-teaching strategies, and integrating language and content instruction for English language learners’ trainings out of the school as well as in school. Furthermore, ELA teachers also participate in common planning sessions with the bilingual/ENL teachers as mandated by CR Part 80. The Bilingual Coordinator provides ELA teachers with all language acquisition data compiled by the ELL’s Data Team about their ELL’s students’ language levels and ENL teaching techniques. In addition, the Bilingual Coordinator, the Mathematics’ Coach, and all ELA teachers meet to discuss vocabulary acquisition strategies for ELLs in our school ENL program. The mentioned tools are provided in order to help ENL, Bilingual, and ELA teachers to plan instructional differentiation strategies for their second language learners. ELL’s students who are in Special Education, grades 6th, 7th, and 8th receive academic interventions services according to their Individualize Student Plan (IEP) with support and teaching strategies using Achieve 300, and/or Rosetta Stone computer based programs. The data compiled by formative assessment, NYSETELL and NYSELAT for current school year (2015-16) shows equivalent students’ performance pattern for the last 5 years. It indicates that of the students tested for on NYSESLAT last spring and NYSETELL our school combined the following results. 2015-NYSELAT last spring and 2015NYSETELL up to October 2015, 40% to 47% - Entering, 18% Emerging, 10%, Transitioning, 20% - Expanding, and 5% of the ELL’s were Commanding. The NYSETELL indicates at the time of testing that 100% of the students scored at the entering level so far for the 2015-16 School Year. Based on the description of our program, the demographics, and the performance data there is a need to improve our 2018-19 RSCEP-R 82  program and services by expanding to instruction in an After School and Saturday programs in addition to our Extended Learning Time (ELT) as part of the Renewal School additional instructional time. We are committed to accelerating listening, speaking, reading, writing, and mathematics, focusing instructional strategies on the New Common Core State Standards and its implications for English language Learners. Our Bilingual/ESL staff has been getting support and training from the NYS Language Regional Bilingual Education Resources Network (RBE-RN) at NYU. RBE-RN has been providing Bilingual/ESL teachers and administrator training and professional development designed to help us achieved our annual measurable achievement objective (AMAO). Our needs assessment is further supported by the fact that approximately twelve (12) students, Newcomers for the 2015-16, are not mandated to be administered the English Language Arts (ELA) Exam in the spring of 2016. All students will take the NYSESLAT. The NYSESLAT provides us data to guide instruction, document the progress of those newly admitted as well as current ELL’s, and determine service eligibility. We are aware of the need to continue to count NYSESLAT results towards Title III annual measurable objectives. In addition, all students will take the NYS Mathematics Exam, students will be allowed to have copies of the Mathematics Exam in English and/or Spanish in order to facilitate comprehension in particular to those students who have scored Expanding or Commanding in the last two years. The New York State Science for the 8th graders will be administered in both English and Spanish as well, depending on students’ choice. ELL’s Subgroups Differentiated Instructional Plan EEL’s students with disabilities whose IEP recommends ENL or bilingual instruction All special education ELL students receive instruction according to their Individualized Education Program (IEP) recommendations. Students in special education classes are highly motivated to attend all after school and Saturday programs. EEL’s students who have been designated at risk and are in a program designed to prevent a referral to a Committee on Special Education: These students receive constant support from the School-Based Support Team that includes the school Principal, the Assistant Principal, the Bilingual/ESL Coordinator, the AIS teacher, the Guidance Counselor, the school Social Workers, The Parent Coordinator, and the classroom teachers. EEL’s students who have been referred to the Committee on Special Education for a multidisciplinary evaluation: These students receive constant support from the School-Based Support Team that includes the school Principal, the Assistant Principal, the Bilingual/ESL Coordinator, the AIS teacher, the Guidance Counselor, the school Social Workers, The Parent Coordinator, and the classroom teachers. EEL’s students who first entered an English language school system after grade two with interrupted, little or no formal schooling in their first language: Literacy is developed through home language arts (HLA), English as a new language (ENL), and English Language Arts (ELA) curricula aligned with the ELA Common Core Learning Standards. The value of learning to read first in the native language is recognized. Instructional strategies promote the transfer of literacy skills learned in the native language to acquisition of literacy in English. Moreover, our school support an extended school day and year through after school ENL instruction as well as Saturday ENL/ELLs academies for bilingual students. In addition, the Saturday Academies offer a Spanish literacy component for bilingual students with limited or interrupted education in their native language (SIFE). Emphasis is made in teaching students basic reading and writing kills in Spanish. EEL’s students held over in grade: These students are considered high priority for instructional intervention programs. Emphasis is made in their language acquisition and literacy process in both languages, paying special attention to their individual student needs. They are presented to the School- Based Support Team which also reviews each student individual learning style and academic needs in order to design and effective instructional approach for each individual student. EEL’s students who have not met the performance standard in listening: English Language Arts and ENL teachers 2018-19 RSCEP-R 83  develop English language skills and provide English language instruction using ENL approaches designed to encourage students to practice their listening skill in the second language. Instruction is conducted in an ENL designed room with small groups of students, Pull out program, as well as large classroom. EEL’s students who have not met the performance standard in speaking: These students are instructed by ENL as well as monolingual classroom teachers with training to teach content areas using ENL methodologies to help them develop their reading, writing, listening, and speaking skills in their second language, English. EEL’s students who have not met the performance standard in reading: An English Language Arts/ENL teacher develops English language skills and provides English language instruction using ESL approaches that provide Ell students with specific reading techniques designed to help ELL’s students to learn reading strategies in the second language, English. Instruction is conducted in an ENL designed room with small groups of students, Pull out program, as well as in large classroom. EEL’s students who have not met the performance standard in writing: An English Language Arts/ENL teacher develops English language skills and provides English language instruction using ENL approaches designed to develop students’ writing skills. Instruction is conducted in an ENL/Literacy designed room with small groups of students, Pull out Program, as well as in large classroom setting. Long term absences: An attendance team formed by an attendance teacher, the school family workers, teachers and administrators keeps attendance logs and daily monitors these students attendance. The team maintains an open line of communication with parents as well as all necessary documentations, intervention narrative and schedule are kept in the family worker’s office. b. TBE program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: c. DL program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Paste response to questions here: 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Paste response here: 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Paste response to question here: 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Paste response to questions here: 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Paste response to question here: 2018-19 RSCEP-R 84  7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Paste response to question here: 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Paste response to question here:C.I.S. 313, The School of Leadership Development expands services to our ELL’s population by offering an After School and Saturday Program using the tools of technology to further enhance language acquisition and development. We foresee the potential of creating a curricular program based on interdisciplinary instruction in the core content areas motivating and encouraging students and staff members to recognize and celebrate the cultural and linguistic contribution of each member in our learning community. In addition, we offer all the ELL’s in our three group levels (6th, 7th, and 8th) four times a week, Monday through Thursday, from 2:20pm to 3:20 pm an extra instructional hour. This Extended Learning Time is used to accelerate second language proficiency, and raise literacy and Mathematics skills. Our advanced ELL’s in the 8th grade take Mathematics Regents class as part of their Extended Learning Time.. The Areas of Instructional Targeted Intervention Focus on a Thematic Approach for: • Academic Intervention for literacy and mathematics using Finish Line for Mathematics, and Literacy. • Milestone Series by Heinle Cengage Learning for Saturday Academy, integrating literacy and Social Studies for English Language learning. Milestone Series by Heinle Cengage Learning for Saturday Academy, integrating literacy and Social Studies for English Language learning. The program provides language development by proficiency levels, reading (phonemic awareness and fluency), writing (penmanship, conventions, technology), and listening and speaking. The series contains embedded assessment, vocabulary instruction, and differentiated instruction, remediation, and intervention strategies. • English as a Second Language vocabulary development approach for beginners that includes spelling, grammar, and prior background knowledge. What students need to know for the NYSESLAT and the ELA Test (Comprehension Strategies for ELL’s) at proficiency level? • Interdisciplinary learning using a thematic approach for content areas; development of reading skills in Math, language development in Science and Social Studies, and integrating technology in all the content areas. Development of Math and Science concepts and skills – Institute for integrating reading with math skills – QTEL • Technology-based instruction for all grade levels implementing Achieve 3000, a web based differentiated K-12 program, uses technology, emails, and current events to develop and maintain literacy skills. • Core Reading and Vocabulary Development (Technology-based Solutions), use of the Smart Boards with LAN lap-top for presentations and graphic enhancements of EXIT Projects in Science and Social Studies, and Using the Internet and Other Electronic Resources. Computer Literacy- Computer Assisted Instruction focused on but not limited to (Windows, Windows Vista, Power Point, EXCEL, INTERNET Research and WEB pages) and ESL for students and parents. • Guidance and advisory support for all three groups in the areas of life and health skills to include the Parent Coordinator and Guidance Counselor. The instructional staff, led by the Assistant Principal of ELL’s, includes the ENL/ELA teacher, HLA/Social Studies, Math and Science, and the Guidance/Advisor Teacher. The program relies on the services of security, health, and food services provider during the extended day and Saturday Program. Communication, outreach, and follow-up require a commitment by all to ensure the delivery of the program is successful. All written correspondence include; translation services and timely deadlines. Informational correspondence include; program structure, duration, hours, staff, targeted instruction, telephone and fax numbers, email address, after school security availability, and services provided. The Parent Coordinator, the Bilingual Coordinator as well as staff members, communicates with parents to encourage enrollment and participation in all during school and after school activities. The ELLs’ Inquiry Team oversees the analysis and data effectiveness as well as the program with an emphasis on the expected 2018-19 RSCEP-R 85  outcomes, analysis of formative and summative assessments (ELA, Math, Science, and Social Studies, NYSESLAT, NYSITELL, Pre and post assessments to drive instruction and evaluate the program. The Inquiry Team determines, identifies and prioritizes the evaluation tools to measure expected outcomes. Teachers maintain data folios, work folders, follow IEP objectives, take attendance, observe student work and participation, assist students with self-assessment techniques (i.e. questionnaires and surveys), and conference with students and parents to assess goals and expectations. Parents are encourage to be involved in the implementation phase as well as participants with their children in the Saturday Program classes (ENL and Computer Literacy) working and learning together. The objective is two-fold; parents learn with their children, while students are motivated and engaged in literacy. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Paste response to question here: 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? Paste response to question here: 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. Paste response to question here: 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Paste response to question here: 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Paste response to question here: 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Paste response to question here: 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Paste response to question here: 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Paste response to question here: 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Paste response to question here: 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? 2018-19 RSCEP-R 86  d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Paste response to question here: Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Paste response to question here: Our Professional Development Program relies heavily not only on teacher quality and experience but on the development and planning practices for instruction. A collaborative effort, with a certified and senior team develops; plans, motivates, researches, and initiates instructional strategies. The support of the leadership includes the formation of an Inquiry Team (Principal, Assistant Principals, Data Analyst, and Parent Coordinator) to oversee and measure the evaluation and success of the program. The professional development for teachers takes place in school during common planning and team building Monday through Thursday from 3:20PM to 4:00PM. The teachers, staff, and program administrator(s) discuss best practices for ELL’s instruction, student placement/attendance, student progress and assessments, intervention strategies, parental participation, resources and materials, time and space format, guidance support, and collaboration with professional development providers. All bilingual and ENL teachers and an Assistant Principal have attended the Quality Teachers for English Learners (QTEL) workshops designed for second language learners. Staff members who have already participated in QTEL continue to participate and turn-key concepts during common planning activities. The topics for discussion include: • Development of ENL/ELA Strategies for Second Language Learners using Achieve 3000/Destination Math. • Engagement in – a literacy based interactive program targeting language development. • Comprehension Strategies to improve English Language Literacy for struggling readers. • Development of Math and Science concepts and skills – Institute for integrating reading with math skills from the Division of English Language Learners and Students Support. • Building background knowledge in the core content areas. • Understanding by Design – a perspective of interdisciplinary instructional practice • Developing performance standards in all content areas – alignment of standards and curriculum • Integration of technology-based strategies in literacy, math, science, social studies and second language development for adults. • Implementing Achieve 3000 an interactive technology based program to increase reading levels. • Use of differentiated instruction in the classroom • Understanding and interpretation of formative and summative assessment (NYSITELL, NYSESLAT, NYS ELA/MATH Test) Results Now. • Development of Leadership skills • Classroom/Behavior Management • Technology tools –SMART Boards, LAN-Laptops, Computer hardware and software • Using the Internet and other Electronic Resources Paste response to question here: 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 87  Paste response to question here: Paste response to question here: Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Paste response to question here: Parents are an integral part of the learning community. Research and practice has proven when parents are involved and participate in the schools learning process, students succeed and develop positive leadership qualities. Parents are not only encouraged to be involved in the academic success of their children but also to collaborate with teachers in the implementation of programs designed to help their children in their language acquisition process. Besides, parents are encouraged to participate in the Saturday Program courses (ESL and Computer Literacy) to learn alongside their children. Many of our parents have shown interest in the success of their children’s learning. Some have difficulties with the English language and would benefit greatly from acquiring the new language in the ENL class as well as computer literacy. For parents who are recent arrivals and have difficulty understanding the English language acquiring basic conversational skills becomes an asset beyond the learning community. The Internet provides an additional resource to access the Department of Education’s web page, school web pages, student assessment data and promotional standings. The use the Internet involves them with their children in research, homework, and word processing. Parents are welcomed to be involved in the English as a New Language class and computer literacy using Achieve 300, Teen Biz and Math integration program. The Parent Coordinator works as a liaison between the bilingual coordinator and the parents Our parents participate in extra-curricular activities with students and teachers creating a positive learning environment and partnership in the school. They acquire a first-hand account of instruction and increase the self-esteem of students who see second language learning as a cultural challenge. Parents interact with teachers in a learning environment and gain an understanding of how their children learn. A true partnership and alliance is formed. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Paste response here: Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 2018-19 RSCEP-R 88 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Earl Brathwaite, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 89  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: School DBN: Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Title Principal Assistant Principal Parent Coordinator ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 2018-19 RSCEP-R 90  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 09X313 School Name: School of Superintendent: Ms. L. Rosario The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (Urena) Nersey Parent Coordinator YES YES * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS) ATS Reports Students Emergency Contact Cards Surveys conducted by the school All students complete the blue emergency card forms which require parents to inform the school about their translation needs. ELL parents or newcomers are also administered the home language survey and have an 2018-19 RSCEP-R 91  interview to ensure that the school is aware of all translation and interpretation needs. The parent coordinator works with the teachers, the DOE, and outside contractors to ensure all parents' translation needs are met. Along with this, we use the ATS report (RAPL) that specifies the preferred language of parent, ATS report UPPG which delineates the language parents prefer both orally and in writing. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral French Fulani English Spanish 4 1 216 189 0.96 0.24 51.67 45.22 4 1 217 188 .0.96 0.24 51.91 44.98 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Spanish English Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Monthly Calendar and Communications from the Principal Revised Discipline Code, Student Behavior Contract Monthly or as needed In-house translation for Spanish September Available in English and Spanish Student Handbook September Monthly Calendar and FlyersSeptember through Monthly or as needed English and Spanish In-house translation for Spanish English and Spanish In-house translation for Spanish 2018-19 RSCEP-R 92  2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Parent Teacher Conferences Parent Engagement November February May interpretation service(s)? In-house translation for Spanish SLT Meetings Once a month In-house translation for Spanish Built into the teachers program In house translation for Spanish Families of ENL Student Night September through December (3 meetings) Attendance Meetings 8th grade High School Articulation As needed October In-house translation for Spanish In-house translation for Spanish In-house translation for Spanish 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. IS313 will contact all parents based on blue emergency card information and will use the school messaging/phone blast service for outreach in English and Spanish. On a case by case need for less prominent language groups, IS313 will use the DOE language line to notify parents in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Our parent coordinator will train staff in September/October during after school PD time on one of the Tuesday's in these first two months. Staff will be trained on the use of translation services and over the phone interpretation services like the DOE Language Line along with any outside providers that are available. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 93  Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Translated Signage Brochures/Flyers/letters shared with parents Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (PA Meetings, SLT Meeting, movie night, bingo night, curriculum night) Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? A survey will be put in place to gather feedback from parents, translated into parent first language, which will assess their satisfaction with the translation services provided, as well as any additional services needed so that we can improve our communication and parental ties. The parent coordinator and Community School Director will analyze data from the survey to compile next steps and present findings to the SLT. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 94 
