2018-19 SCHOOL COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (SCEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 12X314 School Name: FAIRMONT NEIGHBORHOOD SCHOOL Principal: MONIQUE HIBBERT 2018-19 SCEP-FL 1  School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Section 4: SCEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Fairmont Neighborhood School 321200010314 Pre-K - 5 School Number (DBN): 12x314 1550 Vyse Avenue Bronx NY 10460 718-328-3210 718-542-7736 Phone Number: Monique Hibbert Fax: MHibbert4@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Email Address: Monique Hibbert Ms. Dana Kirton TamekaCassaberry Gina Heinzinger Tracy White N/A Gary Perez District Information Geographical District: 12 Superintendent’s Office Address: Jacqueline Rosado Superintendent: 1434 Longfellow Avenue Room 409 Bronx, NY 10459 JRosado3@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-328-328-3210 718-542-7736 Phone Number: Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 3  FSC: 12 Executive Director’s Office Address: Nancy Saffer Executive Director: 1230 Zerega Avenue Bronx, NY 10462/1 Fordham Plaza Bronx, NY 10458 NSaffer@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: Phone Number: Fax: 718-828-7776/718-741-8895 718-828-6280 2018-19 SCEP-FL 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the SCEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Monique Hibbert Dana Kirton Charlotte Jackson Tracy White Gary Perez Gina Heinzinger Melinda McNair-Jones *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/ 2018-19 SCEP-FL 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Reggie Ridley TamekaCasaberry NelmarieQuinones Member/Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 SCEP-FL 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) is a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. The process of developing and implementing the SCEP is aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding SCEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department has established programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students supports to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and SCEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint for continuous improvement that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to increase student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 7  In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five (5) goals and action plans that align with the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. Accountability Tools and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is informed by the New York State Education Department’s (NYSED) Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) Tenets, the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Rubric, School Quality Guide and other quantitative and qualitative data tools. NYSED’s Six DTSDE Tenets To strengthen the existing system, the NYSED has developed a tool that captures the best practices from each of the current tools called the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness. This new tool encompasses multiple instruments such as interviews, classroom observations and surveys. The protocol will begin with a clear and cogent statement of the optimal conditions of an effective school and the instruments comprising the protocol will measure how close or far away a particular school is to the optimal conditions identified. Once reviewed, the school and district will create a strategic plan to address the areas in need of improvement. All current Priority and Focus Schools and Focus Districts must use the tool; districts that are required to submit District Comprehensive Improvement Plans and Comprehensive Educational Plans also will use the tool. The DTSDE protocol includes a rubric, which identifies clear and coherent expectations of the optimal conditions of an effective school and school district across the following six tenets:  Tenet 1: District Leadership and Capacity  Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions  Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support  Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions  Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health, and  Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement 2018-19 SCEP-FL 8  NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 2017-18 Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) I. II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Structures for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the SCEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the SCEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. Next Steps for SCEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 9   Step 3: In Part 1A of the Section 5: Needs Assessment indicate the Statement of Practice (SOP) from the DTSDE Tenets that will be addressed in the action plan. Schools that received an Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) School Review should use the recommendations from the review to select their SOPs. Schools that did not undergo an IIT review should select SOPs informed by the major findings/recommendations from your most recent Quality Review (QR) or Central-led Review (CLR), and other qualitative and quantitative data.  Step 4: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 5: Build consensus around activities, strategies and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 6: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 7: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 10  Section 4: SCEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? At Fairmont Neighborhood School we believe that every child has the right to a high quality education, regardless of their zip code. Our mission is to push our students to their full potential by developing their critical thinking skills, encourage thought-provoking discourse, and empower them to build strong character. We will provide a safe and nurturing environment where students, parents, and staff feel safe to accomplish their very best. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Fairmont Neighborhood School holds 306 students from pre-kindergarten through fifth grade. At P.S. 314, staff members, administrators, parents, students, and the community work at large to collaborate in order to provide rigorous educational experiences that support each child's academic, social, and emotional growth. Additional, we believe that every child comes to school with innate curiosity and a desire to be part of a community. It is our responsibility to help students make sense of our ever-changing world. Vision- Fairmont Neighborhood School will provide students with foundation and tools necessary to help them compete and become successful in a continuously changing society. For the last two consecutive years, our Fairmont staff members have volunteered their time during recess and after school for enrichment programs such as: Girl Scouts and Glee Club. Additionally, we are proud of the variety of partnerships and services we provide that support the whole child and address the complex process of raising physically, socially, emotionally, and academically successful children. Some of the programs are:  Children’s Aid Society - a community based organization that offers programs to students which give exposure to: Cooking, Archery, and STEM. CAS-also worked this year on recording parent participation data and making them aware of the number of hours students are missing instruction according to their child's' absences. Also we are provided Story Pirates for grades 1st and 5th to increase engagement in writing by bringing children’s stories to life through creative writing and skills.  Arts Connections- Musical Theatre  Bricks for Kids is a pre-stem program for pre-kindergarten-5th students to explore through inquiry the world of science. Our partnership with our Community Based Organization (CBO) Children’s Aids Society allow us to provide enrichment based activities as well as after school, holiday programming, summer based programs, and adult learning workshops to our school community. Our parents participate in adult education, vocational programs, home and school connections, health and wellness opportunities, and social and emotional support through on site based Parent Engagement Coordinator. Children’s Aid encourages and reaches out to families in order to increase volunteerism and leadership along with community building. Children’s Aid Society is driven by data collection on family orientated events, community building activities, and the collaboration between Fairmont’s Instructional Staff and Children Aid Faculty members Parent and Families:  At Fairmont, we value our commitment to involving parents in every step of the learning process. Families attend monthly Town Meetings, where we showcase one grade a month to highlight student’s cross-curricula learning. During these performances our students incorporate visual arts, music, dance, and drama from their daily curriculum and design experiences that allow children to explore their own creativity through a variety 2018-19 SCEP-FL 11   of media. Additional, Fairmont holds four annual whole school cultural celebrations such as: Hispanic Heritage Month Celebration, Black History Month Celebration, Performance of the Art Spring Show, and finally our Multi-Cultural celebration. Students, faculty, and families are all invited and encouraged to see firsthand, Fairmont student’s awareness to diversity through creative expression. Families and staff provide open lines of communication by teacher created progress-monitoring forms on the student’s progress monthly. Parents and staff also communicate through I Ready Parent Reports, NYCDOE report cards, three yearly parent-teacher conferences, teachers are also available to families to discuss student growth as well as concerns every Tuesday afternoon. In addition, parents go on field trips, attend family nights, and other workshops or events. Parents are invited to create accounts on mystudentsnyc.com website to view updated student progress and online applications such as: Remind and Class Dojo to highlight student’s academic and social emotional learning. Special Education and English Native Language:  The academic performance of Students with Disabilities (SWD) and English Native Learners (ELL) is a targeted area at Fairmont Neighborhood School. Both sub groups represent disproportionately high percentages of students performing at Level 1 in both reading and mathematics. We understanding that our student’s successes depend on the effective instructional practices of our teachers and the support of parents and families. In order to better support this high need, we have implemented bi-monthly Special Education Meetings for all instructional staff, psychologists, social workers, and service providers. We strive to provide teachers with differentiated workshops and professional development for teachers and paraprofessionals.  At Fairmont, we also support our varying academic levels by having one ICT classroom per grade, a K-2 Self Contained classroom and 3-5 grade Self Contained classroom. We also have an ELL focused class on each grade level with two push in/ pull out ELL providers.  Our Special Education team is also spending time inquiring about SMART goals and their progress towards meeting them. We have a focus this to make sure every students goal is aligned directly student's Present Level of Performance (PLOP). Positive School Climate:  Our school community embraces four big values: Safety, Teamwork, Achievement, and Respect (STAR) . These ideas are continually reinforced in the classroom environment, during transition times, cafeteria, and auditorium. These four concepts help develop confident, empathetic, and responsible children who leave Fairmont college and career ready. These values are incorporated in our school culture and daily interactions with the facilitation of STAR committee. Each month the STAR committee presents teachers and students with a challenge that reinforces our core values and positive school cultures.  We also will be starting to use ClassDojo to track students academic and behavior inside and outside the classroom Academics:  Our school offered TC Reading and Writing units of study. Teachers receive professional developments and teacher planning days to modify the units of study to fit the need of all students. Our teachers also use the Fountas and Pinnell benchmark assessments to determine small guided reading groups with targeted instruction on the children’s instructional reading level. Teachers also use Fountas and Pinnell’s, LLI researched based program to help support reading fluency, stamina, and comprehension. Kindergarten through second grade uses foundations phonics and phonemic awareness program while 3rd through 4th uses Words Their Way to target gaps in their knowledge of phonics.  Our school currently uses Go Math curriculum. To help increase our students mathematical knowledge and problem solving abilities aligned to the Common Core standards, we plan on moving forward with switching to EngageNY using tools given from our Generation Ready Consultant. With Generation Ready, teacher's will 2018-19 SCEP-FL 12  be creating curriculum that is designed to fit the needs of all of our students. We are currently working on vertical planning across K-5 and create detailed scope and sequences with each grade level.  Our school has piloted a STEAM program this year with the intention of turning it into a fully run STEAM program where paraprofessional collaborate bi-weekly with classroom teachers for in class engagement and visual learning strategies. This program increases hands on learning and allows for student driven inquiry to occur through project-based instruction. In Social Studies, our school is using NYC's Social Studies Curriculum, with having teacher reinforce inquiry based learning and having students working towards a cumulative project at the closure of each unit.  These programs will increase students ability dive deep into rich real life problems and improve upon our student’s knowledge of numbers and how they relate to one another. Fairmont also wants to provide teachers with professional developments and math consultants to help teachers adapt to this new curriculum. Our teachers meet twice weekly to collaborate with their grade teams. Along with weekly grade team meetings, one of these times is during a Monday Professional Development Day and/or during a Circular Six period. Special education teachers will also meet bi-weekly: 1 meeting is professional development and 1 meeting is to plan, analysis student work, and writ Data Fairmont currently uses I-Ready (Math and Reading), Fountas and Pinnell reading levels, GO Math and Teacher created assessments, Common Core standards based Reading and Math assessments in grades (2nd-4th), TC reading and writing rubrics, math checklists, and conference notes. The data gathered from these areas is used to drive instruction, Fountas and Pinnell Reading Benchmarks and beginning of the year and end of the year NYC Baseline Math Performance Tasks. Teachers used summative and formative assessments from Fountas and Pinnell Reading Benchmarks and beginning of the year and end of the year NYC Baseline Math Performance Tasks 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. As per the 2017 NYC School Quality Guide, 94% of our students with disabilities obtained a Level 1 on the NYS ELA and NYS Mathematics exams. As per the 2017 NYC School Quality, 80% of our English language Learners obtained a Level 1 on the NYS ELA and 82% on the NYS Math exams. The academic performance of Students with Disabilities (SWD) and English Native Learners is a targeted area at Fairmont Neighborhood School. Both sub groups represent disproportionately high percentages of students performing at Level 1 in both reading and mathematics. We understanding that our student’s successes depend on the effective instructional practices of our teachers and the support of parents and families. In order to better support this high need, we have implemented monthly Special Education Meetings for all instructional staff, psychologists, social workers, and service providers. We strive to provide teachers with differentiated workshops and professional development for teachers and paraprofessionals. At Fairmont, we also support our varying academic levels by having one ICT classroom per grade, a K-2 Self Contained classroom and 3-5 Self Contained classroom. We also have an ELL focused class on each grade level with two push in/ pull out ELL providers. Our school offers an Ell focused after school programs. Fairmont provides for SWD and ELL a musical theatre program through Arts Connection which allows students to tap into their multiple intelligences by receiving instruction in visual, kinesthetic, auditory, motion, performance and musical. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 13  Progress in the following areas: 1. Collaborative teachers- In each grade, we hold weekly grade team meetings and have structures that continue to allow teachers to conduct inquiry, plan lessons, revise and edit unit plans, and reflect on best practices 2. Rigorous instruction- Fairmont continues to our work with TC to guide our instruction and maximize student learning. We have started to work on our Math Curriculum with the help of our Math Coach and Generation Ready consultant.  The Bronx Borough Field Support has been a regular collaborative partner for us by supporting work with our for SWD, specifically with creating and implementing SDI inside our classrooms. Stacy Livingston has been working on our Literary Curriculum and Yolanda Baker is supporting our Math Curriculum. Focus for next year: Rigorous Instruction  Continue to monitor the effectiveness of our unit plans.  Using data to inform instruction.  Make sure novice teachers are in the loop as to what's going on. Building Positive Culture  Highlighting classes/students with 100% attendance  Acknowledging student achievement  Instituting new policies such as: Honors roll/achievement rewards based on F & P and I-Ready Data 2018-19 SCEP-FL 14  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 12X314 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 317 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 14 13 18 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 19 9 18 18 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 97.0% % Attendance Rate 92.1% % Reduced Lunch 13.6% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.0% 60.9% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 2.8% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 0.09 0% 15% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 12.6% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 76% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No No Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups Hispanic, ED Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities N/A NO N/A NO NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient N/A N/A N/A N/A Yes N/A 49 50 18 90.9% 3.8% 28.1% 36.0% 0.0% 0.3% 2 0% 5.5 14.7% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No Yes NO N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 15  Economically Disadvantaged N/A ALL STUDENTS N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 16  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 3 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 3.2 The school leader ensures and supports the quality implementation of a systematic plan of rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of students. Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction (DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and address student achievement needs. The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. 3.3 3.4 3.5 SOP(s) Addressed X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The areas in which Fairmont made the most growth last year:  School leader executed organizational decisions to support scheduling needs to accommodate teacher meeting time to allow teachers to meet regularly.  Developing structures to ensure targeted attendance, social-emotional learning, child development, and guidance supports to students. We showed growth in these areas by: implementation of the walking school bus, restructuring our weekly attendance meeting with attendance team, success mentors (meet with students and check in to make sure students are coming to school everyday). Additionally, we joined the SBRT (South Bronx Rising Together). Student engagement in interdisciplinary curricula during the school day STEM courses and with our after-school STEM program.  This year, we have been identified as a Focus School because two of our accountability groups: English Language Learners and Economically Disadvantaged students who did not meet the 2017-2018 Performance Index. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 17  3.3  Unit and lesson plans need to be consistently designed and adjusted according to student data, and need to be aligned with student achievement needs. School accomplishments  Yearly professional developments on curriculum planning and mapping both during school hours and during pre-session opportunities. Increasing forms of data tracking and progress monitoring tools.  The key areas of focus for this school year  Continuing our work on analyzing student work samples using standardized protocols, with rubrics/checklists,  and providing students with actionable feedback Instructional cabinet members, grade team leaders, and teacher teams do classroom visitations through an instructional and environmental lens which will be based on monthly based on observations, Danielson Rubric, summative and formative assessments, teacher feedback and teacher surveys.  Adjusting instructional decisions at the grade and classroom level, based upon data which will drive all instruction.  Planning and providing differentiated professional development and coaching that is targeted for specific teacher needs based on Advance data.  Providing training for teachers and coaches to be better able to support and differentiate the needs of the teachers in Mathematics. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, as a result of deepening content knowledge of mathematics through continued professional development there will be a 7% increase in the percentage of students reaching proficiency on the NYS Math exam as measured by the NYC School Quality Guide. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 18  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Fairmont Neighborhood School’s revised instructional block schedule will allow uninterrupted time for Literacy and Mathematics instruction, push in-literacy support for teachers, and seamless provider service for ELLs and SWDs.  An ENL Literacy Cohort will be established that will foster a culture of collaboration between ENL service providers and classroom teachers in order to better serve our English Language Learners with regard to literacy. T Instructional Programs Teachers College Writing and Reading Project – Common Core aligned Units of Study in Writing and Reading are provided for grade levels K-5 with on-site cycles of coaching support. Go Math and Engage NY aligned units of study are provided for grade levels K-4.  We are also working with Generation Ready for ongoing training and support with curriculum and lesson planning.  After school test prep, STEM, Robotics, Readers Theatre Principal, AP, Coaches will oversee; Teacher Teams will implement Sept 2018-June 2019 Admin, Teachers, Cabinet, Coaches, Instructional Staff ELL Providers, Teachers, Students Admin, Teachers, Students, Coaches Stem Teachers, 2018-19 SCEP-FL 19  Professional Development 1. Meet with Professional Development providers as well as Literary and Mathematics coaches to ensure rigor and standard based instruction is effectively occurring. 2. Target in-house PD's based on teacher and student need. Teachers, Students Sept 2018-June 2019 All instructional staff, admin. Coaches, staff developers 3. District based PD's (12 times a year) 4. Curriculum Planning Days 5. PD's focused on data, assessment, engagement, unit planning, tracking, and differentiation. 5. Grade Leader Meetings on school structures and common objectives. Professional Development for administration will include:  Teachers College Units of Study planning day  TC workshops and/or coaching   Communication between professional development (PD) In-house PDs and/or Math PD days Principal AP, Teachers, Coaches vendors of Common Core aligned curricula, and administration (Principal and AP) to establish and ensure use of assessment data as a tool and adjust PD plans to include topics such as math, phonics, and analyzing student data  Change for Kids will continue to support the effort of our Parent Coordinator by helping to plan monthly parent workshops and school community events to engage families in the life of the school. The school leader will evaluate by working closely with the Parent Coordinator to plan, attend, and debrief parent events and make mid-course corrections based on analysis of parent and family participation and the success of program events. Teachers, Parents, Students, CFK Principal, AP, Teachers, CST, SETTS, and AIS teacher Principal, AP, Grade Team Leaders, and Coaches will oversee, teacher teams and service providers will implement The Children’s Aid Society Program Director and Community School Director 2018-19 SCEP-FL 20  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. PS 314 will engage families and support the understanding of of Rigorous Instruction and the Common Core through developing tailored and comprehensive parent workshops that are designed by our instructional staff to address common core needs and increase the engagement of a all stakeholders. Each month there will be two workshops offered. One will be specifically designed by teachers in conjunction with school leadership to support common core standards learning. The second will address the social /emotional needs of our families and community. The Parent Coordinator will develop the yearly calendar of events in conjunction with school leadership and will provide this to families in September and again on a monthly basis. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Tax Levy Title I & III  Small-group instructional time built into the daily instructional schedule for K-5 student o Per session for after school teachers o Per session for after school enrichment and test-ready programs/tutoring o Professional Development for teachers with TC o Professional Development for teachers with Generation Ready Math o Supplies to support the TC curriculum  Books and supplemental materials for Go Math!, TCRWP, Science Fusion  Purchasing school-wide license for I-Ready ELA and Mathematics assessment and supplemental instructional program through Curriculum Associates  D12 NTC Mentor program is funded by a grant by the District.  Arts Connection - musical theatre for SWD and ELL. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded X P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Our mid-point benchmark consists of looking at Fountas and Pinnell benchmark assessments as well as I-Ready Reading and Math diagnostic results. With that being said by February 2019, students will have reached 7% increase in reading levels, as measured by Fountas and Pinnell Benchmark Assessments and a minimum of one-half grade level increase on I-Ready diagnostic results. Progress toward meeting the annual goal:  Closer analysis of assessment data on F&P and I-Ready data. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 21    For our tri-annual (beginning of the year, middle of year, & end of year) I-Ready diagnostic assessments, teachers will be analysing and creating Data Action Plains based on student results. For F&P's, teachers will be required to conduct four formal benchmark assessments and three informal assessments throughout the school year.  Teachers will be tracking student growth and monitoring student results on regularly administered growth check in order to ensure student progress. Beginning in September 1, 2018 Members of the Instructional Team, including RTI teacher, will conduct a random sampling and re-assessment of students across the grades, focusing on comprehension in small instructional groups. By November 1, 2018 Teachers will use ELA and Math trackers to support with creating coherence by using common assessments to effectively analyze data. Data collected by the Team will be shared with teachers, at grade level meetings at which teachers will be supported in the selection of reading material (Leveled Literacy Intervention) that will strengthen student comprehension. Additionally, teachers will assess students to monitor comprehension for evidence of improvement in reading comprehension. They will look for   Students committing to grade-level/near grade-level texts and extending their independent reading time Students asking questions and challenging ones thinking or asking to provide reasoning and/or evidence to support their claim.  Book discussions with individual and in small-groups    Create Data Action Plans based on At-Risk students every six weeks Student led questioning Inquiry based discussions which are led by our students The Principal's strategic approach to monitoring the implementation of the D12 NTC Mentoring Program will include weekly meetings with coaches to debrief their mentoring goals. The principal and AP will attend mentoring meetings and use tools from these meetings to guide coaches as well as progress monitor teacher improvement based on observational and coaching data. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Progress monitoring tools: I-Ready: Reading and Mathematics Fountas and Pinnell Baseline Assessments    Math MoSL's: Beginning, Middle, and End of the Year   TC: Reading and Writing Pre and Post Test Assessments  Math Coach Fundamentals and ELA Coach Performance  Common Core Aligned mini-quizzes for 3-4th grade students in ELA and Math Interim pre-testing measures - I-Ready New York Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 22  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 5 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 5.2 The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. 5.3 The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students. 5.4 All school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health supports tied to the school’s vision. 5.5 The school leader and student support staff work together with teachers to establish structures to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental health needs. SOP(s) Addressed N/A x x N/A Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Our Quality Reviewer rated us on the Danielson Rubric as Proficient in: Instructional Core 1.1 (Curriculum) Ensure engaging, rigorous, and coherent curricula in all subjects, accessible for a variety of learners and aligned to Common Core Learning Standards and/or content standards  A review of the English Language Arts curriculum shows a series of units for each grade that focus on students reading a balance of both fiction and non-fiction with an emphasis on close reading and annotation of texts. Students are engaged in texts across all genres, and these genres also connect students to disciplinary units.  Math units demonstrate that student engage in common core aligned mathematics that include math practices. Units also show the use of strategies to solve multi-step word problems. Access to tasks for learners includes, math videos, online supplemental curriculum materials, cooperative grouping, and the use of math terminology and manipulatives. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 23  Systems for Improvement (Proficient Rating) 1.3 Make strategic organizational decisions to support the school’s instructional goals and meet student learning needs, as evidenced by meaningful student work products  Our school is developing structures to ensure social-emotional learning, child development, and guidance supports to students. 4.1 Observe teachers using the Danielson Framework for Teaching along with the analysis of learning outcomes to elevate school-wide instructional practices and implement strategies that promote professional growth and reflection  Observational feedback from the school leader encourages managing student behaviors, professional growth and pushes teachers to focus on increasing rigor in the classroom. They also ask teachers to make assessment criteria clear to students and to use data to differentiate and meet student learning needs. The school leader uses data to support the feedback. In one observation the school leader questioned the alignment between the teaching point and student needs stating that students’ online assessment showed that students in one group were “reading significantly below grade level” before making recommendations on lesson planning to meet student data. Feedback across observations shows clear expectations and establishes a time frame for improvement. 4.2 (Teacher Support and Supervision) Engage in structured professional collaborations on teams using an inquiry approach that promotes shared leadership and focuses on improved student learning  Teachers analyzed student essays for the use of transitions and the use of evidence. While the teachers noticed a more pronounced use of transition in student work, they also remarked that the essays felt very structured and formulaic. Danielson Rubric as Developing in: Instructional Core 1.2 (Pedagogy) Develop teacher pedagogy from a coherent set of beliefs about how students learn best that is informed by the instructional shifts and Danielson Framework for Teaching, aligned to the curricula, engaging, and meets the needs of all learners so that all students produce meaningful work products.  There needs to be more of a consistency of supports or scaffolds for students, and during the turn and talk, students were off task thus demonstrating their inability to engage in the activity. 2.2 (Assessment) Align assessments to curricula, use on-going assessment and grading practices, and analyze information on student learning outcomes to adjust instructional decisions at the team and classroom levels  There are various rubrics used in the school. Some of these rubrics are aligned to the school curriculum. This trend was more pronounced in the running record data with students falling behind various reading levels. According to the NYC School Survey, Collaborative Teachers  88% of teachers say that they use their students' prior knowledge to make their lessons relevant to their everyday life.  93% of teachers say that they design appropriate instruction that is matched to students (ELL, SWD). 2018-19 SCEP-FL 24   92% of teachers say that they apply their knowledge of parents' various cultural backgrounds when collaborating with their regarding their child's educational progress. The school’s data indicates that a need exists for supportive environment as evidenced on the NYC School Survey. 43% of teachers say that students listen carefully when the teacher gives directions  increase use of restorative justice throughout the school building which includes teacher training in the 4r's social emotional curriculum.  Using Domain 2 ( components A & D) to observe teacher management and supportive environment when conducting formal and informal observations. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools –Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will a 10% decrease in the number of students presented to the Child Study Team as a result of implementation of the STAR Behavior Matrix and Mindfulness programs as measured by student referrals to the CST . 2018-19 SCEP-FL 25  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) -mindfulness -growth mindset -counseling team The parent coordinator will provide the following: -In conjunction with PTA, -school messenger system in multiple languages -update school website for unfettered access -series of workshops on various topics-English classes, Spanish classes, and GED classes for parents -Campus wide parent room in conjunction with our CBO -Family Engagement nights -Teacher Led Workshops -Family and Child Workshops -Focus on Pre-k and K family engagement to influence school culture The Children’s Aid Society in partnership with the Fairmont Neighborhood School will hire Success Mentors whose responsibility is to connect with the families of children that are chronically absent Parents, Families K-5 Students and Families Year-long dates as per our shared Google Calendar, on-going Parent Coordinator (PTA) 9/2018-06/2019 9/2018-06/2019 Parent Engagement Coordinator (CBO) The Children’s Aid Society Success Mentors, Data specialist, and 2018-19 SCEP-FL 26 K-5 Students and Families Parent Engagement Coordinator Weekly Child Study Team meetings Social Worker implements, Admin oversees and then provide support, encouragement and incentives for these children to attend school at a higher attendance rate. Success Mentors will also coordinate with these same families that are within walking distance in a “Walking School Bus” where these chronically absent children may be picked up along specific routes to ensure their timely arrival to school. Social worker, along with interns will continue to lead the Child Study Team by coordinating the Team's efforts, and work closely teachers to help them understand appropriate developmental behaviors, while assisting with strategies to help de-escalate disruptive student behaviors which may lead to interruption of instruction. Professional development and Pre Kindergarten room Reggio-inspired classroom restructuring provided by consultant (100% SIG funded). Early Fall revisit by consultant to ensure student engagement and work toward independence. Social Worker Teachers Students K-5 Pre Kindergarten and Kindergarten Teachers Counseling sessions as required by IEP 09/2018 Initial Meeting Following dates TBD by provider Consultant implements and oversees, coaches monitor Pre K -5 Grade level teams implement Admin oversees Pre K -5 Grade level teams implement Admin oversees Family Literacy Nights each grade will provide a workshop to explain grade-level CCLS expectations and reading levels as they correlate to books; provide 2018-2019 curricular overviews for each grade, get families’ contact phone numbers and email addresses, as well as availability, and distribute parent workshop/seminar calendar, end with a question and answer period. Pre-K – 5 09/2018 Teachers, Families Revise the school-wide homework policy, determining the purpose, amount, quality, and time allotted to complete each assignment. Pre-K-5 Students, Families 9/2018 - Revision indicated in School Handbook 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Ps 314 will host meetings lead by our social emotional team which includes our school counselor, social worker, parent coordinator and administration. The team will develop a series of monthly meetings to support the areas of need within our community as identified through parent surveys and or observational data. The workshops will 2018-19 SCEP-FL 27  address areas included by not limited to; attendance, health and hygiene, community based resources and parent training. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. SIG:   Subs hired to provide release time for teachers' attendance at on-site professional development Social worker (100% SiG funded) to support social and emotional health of students, lead Child Study Team to antecedents to unwanted behaviors, help student discover new ways of coping with stress or disappointment, and support the family via talk or referral Tax Levy and Title 1:  Teachers and Literacy personnel to support parental understanding of curriculum, grading systems, academic expectations, and student learning outcomes. Sessions will offer practical advice to families about supporting kids at home.  Guidance counselor will support students, teachers, and families. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded X P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 65% of all teachers will be rated effective or highly effective on the Danielson rating scale in Domain 3 through the use of strategic professional developments, data action plans, classroom observations, and curriculum coaches. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress.  Advance - teacher evaluation According to 2017-2018 NYC School Survey, Rigorous Instruction 71% of teachers say that students have to work hard to do well.  Through teacher training and reflection, teachers are consistently challenged to enforce high-expectations and produce rigorous instruction at all times inside the classroom. 21% of teachers say that students respond to challenging questions in classroom 2018-19 SCEP-FL 28   Reinforce the use of the questioning through enforcing grade team meetings and Monday-Professional Development time to discuss and learning about questioning techniques and strategies to use inside the classroom. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 29  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 4 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 4.2 School and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. SOP(s) Addressed x 4.3 Teachers provide coherent, and appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards N/A (CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. 4.4 Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences and tailored to the strengths and needs of all students. x 4.5 Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, and progress monitoring). Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. N/A 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Data received from 2017-2018 Quality Guide and Quality Review Strength 1.1 Rigorous, engaging, and coherent curricula aligned to COLS We currently hold an effective rating due to our teacher trainings, analysis of student work, collaboration between faculty, consultants, administration, students, and families. Weakness 1.2 Research based, effective instruction that yields high quality student work. We need to focus on the learning of all students, including the large population of English Language Learners and students with Individualized Education Programs, due to students showing a weakness in answering high-order thinking. We plan to focus on this need but planning bi-weekly Special Education and English Language Learner Staff meeting. We 2018-19 SCEP-FL 30  also holding monthly meeting with our District 12 office Special Education Team to create informative Action Plans for all our student sub-groups. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, as a result of collaborative opportunities such as grade team meetings, grade leader meetings, and professional development with a focus on student learning, student achievement on end of unit assessments, student progress will increase by 25%. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 31  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  TCRWP (Teachers College Reading and Writing Project) will provide professional development for K-5 teachers, differentiating PD to increase the number of effective and highly effective teachers in Component 3b and 3d, by meeting the needs of individual teachers and their students. TCRWP staff developer will create a PD plan with the teacher, or teachers, to observe, model lessons, and confer. K-5 Teachers, Administration, & Coaches Evidence of TC Footprint will be reflected during teacher observations, coaching sessions, and student outcome data - specifically F&P assessments and on-demand writing assessments. Coaching sessions will be designed around Advance ratings in each component. Literacy coaches will attend D12-NTC mentoring sessions to support classroom teachers will their pedagogy. Teachers will meet with TC staff developer to analyze pre-unit and post unit student work, and discuss next steps. Teachers will use the Analyzing Student Work Protocol from the NTC Mentor program. K-45 Teachers TCRWP PD off-site sessions will be made available to classroom teachers as well as mentors/coaches/admin. Teachers will required to turn-key during grade team meetings. Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Ongoing TCRWP, coaches, Administration See dates above TCRWP, coaches, admin 2018-19 SCEP-FL 32  Homework, based on TC Units of Study work done in class, will be backpacked home as per Fairmont Neighborhood School Homework Policy. Homework is checked weekly and teachers will use homework data as part of the student's overall performance, which will also be reflected in Report Cards. Generation Ready will provide Math professional development for K-5 teachers, differentiating PD to increase the number of effective and highly effective teachers in Component 3b and 3d, by meeting the needs of individual teachers and their students. coaches /admin Teachers/mentors/ See Google Calendar TCRWP, coaches, admin coaches /admin K-5 Students, Families K-5 Teachers/mentors/ Weekly 10 Sessions for the upcoming School Year K-5 Classroom Teachers Gen Ready Consultant, Coaches, Admin Gen Ready Consultant will create a PD plan with the teacher, or teachers, to observe, model lessons, and confer. Evidence of GR Footprint will be reflected during teacher observations, coaching sessions, and student outcome data. Coaching sessions will be designed around Advance ratings in each component. 10 Sessions for the upcoming School Year Gen Ready Consultant, Coaches, Admin K-5 Teachers/mentors/ coaches /admin 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Teachers communicate with regularly families every Tuesday afternoon during Parent Engagement Times as well as during parent teacher conferences, parent engagement nights, curriculum nights, Town Meetings, and via Class Dojo. Our staff provides several avenues to communities with families. We also have a parent coordinator, parent social worker, and family worker. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 33  SIG Professional development facilitators Per session for substitute coverage Tax Levy, Title 1 SWD grade teams/cohorts, families, administrator(s), data specialist D12 NTC Mentoring program will be funded by a District Grant. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded X P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Throughout the 2018-2019 school year, teachers will administer periodic, pre-and post literacy assessments and perform collaborative analyses in grade team meetings and cyclical professional development sessions, using school-wide standardized rubrics or checklists. By February 2019, teachers will have analyzed the I-Ready and F & P reading benchmark data to determine if students are on track - having made 20% increase in assessed literacy benchmarks - for meeting the annual goal. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Fountas and Pinnell Benchmark Assessment iReady According to School Quality Guide  38% of teachers of all subjects say that they had the resources to include opportunities for reading and writing experiences grounded in evidence from text, both literary and informational. (Q18b)  50% of teachers of all subjects say that they had the resources to include opportunities for students to interact with complex grade-level text. (Q18c) From reviewing the above data we added resources into every classroom to make sure each child has exposure to both fiction and nonfiction. For K-2, we received the Universal Literature Grant which added resources such as: children's books, classroom supplies, and instructional guides for teachers. Students also have access to MYOn (online library) where they can read and/or listen to thousands of books. Another resource isthe use of I-Ready inside every classroom, Each classroom is either provided with a computer cart or technology period in order to increase the amount of time each child was completing online lesson on their own instructional level. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 34  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 2 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 2.2 The school leader ensures that the school community shares the Specific, Measurable, Ambitious, Results-oriented, and Timely (SMART) goals/mission and long-term vision inclusive of core values that address the priorities outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP). Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital resources. 2.3 2.4 The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district's Annual Professional Performance Review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. 2.5 Leaders effectively use evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve SOP(s) Addressed N/A critical individual and school-wide practices as defined in the SCEP (student achievement, curriculum and teacher practices; leadership development; community/family engagement; and student social and emotional developmental health). x Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Need: ● 2018 Accountability indicate that Economically Disadvantaged Students (99% of the student population, and Hispanic students did not meet grade level performance expectations on the NY State ELA and Math examinations. We are also aware that students with disabilities, English Language Learners, and students who live in temporary housing are at risk, as well. Many of our students have limited familiarity with literature and story-telling, most have not participated in trips and excursions, outside of school, that lend themselves to the kinds of connections that will enrich literacy experiences and enhance questioning and discussion, thereby increasing student engagement. ● Our Quality Review report stated that differentiation was an area of need. Strength: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 35  Our Instructional Support Team, which includes our RtI team members, has begun work to address this issue. We are offering several off-site and on-site professional development opportunities for our teachers to target the population of students for whom learning has been a struggle. Currently, 69% of our teachers are rated developing in component 3b, and 67% of our teachers are rated developing in component 3d. This improvement will reduce the number of students at level 1 or 2, on New York State ELA and Mathematics standardized state tests, increasing the number of third and fourth grade students at levels three and four by 20%, and helping to ensure that 10% of grade 5 students achieve levels 2 and 3. . Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART– Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 12X314 will provide actionable feedback to teachers which will result in a 36%% increase (from 38% to 74%) in the percent of teachers who will agree or strongly agree that the principal/school leader at their school participates in instructional planning with teams of teachers as measured by the results of the 2019 NYC School Survey. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 36  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). School leaders meet 1:1 with teachers to determine areas of need in individual practice and to plan initial support (mentor, professional development opportunities, inter-visitation). School leaders provide training opportunities and support to increase teachers' knowledge of Danielson Framework. Teachers engage in self-reflection cycles with administration using Danielson rubrics. Instructional Support Team, special education teachers, and ENL specialists will provide professional support and mentoring in use of multiple entry points to provide all learners with access to content, identifying strategies to better support students, and sharing best practices. Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) All Teachers 09/2018 Admin IPC and TIP meetings 4-6 week observation cycles Daily walk-throughs and bi-weekly conversations Teachers All Teachers Weekly IC Meetings to debrief Weekly communication with Child Study Team Admin, Instructional Support Team Admin, Instructional Support Team, Special Education teachers, ENL Parent training offered to familiarize families with school goals, and support leadership opportunities through volunteer work (Learning Leaders). Systems to improve communication include school messenger system and the school website (for parents who cannot attend meetings). All Families 10/2018 Administrators, Parent Coordinator Initial Learning Leaders Meeting, 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. PS 314 will begin the school year with a principal orientation where all share holders are introduced to parents including pathways to support on various and specific concerns. The orientation will outline for parents the school wide expectations for attendance and instruction. STAR Committee will also be hosting monthly town meetings with parents to support their understanding of school wide expectations for learning, engage with staff, hear about 2018-19 SCEP-FL 37  community updates and highlights and also to provide parents with the opportunities to voice / share their concerns and needs. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Adjust schedule to provide preps for 1:1 meetings with Admin  Weekly staff meetings, led by principal, around instructional best practices and student learning styles   Parent Coordinators (Fairmont , Samara, and CAS) will meet bi-weekly to plan and assess efforts to recruit, Inter-visitations between Fairmont and Samara to share best practice  train, and place parents in volunteer positions in the school. Instructional team, ENL and special education teachers to support differentiation as indicated by student data, including IEPs  Use of weekly family engagement period after school to make "good news" calls and to meet with parents about ways in which we can support them with academic, social, and emotional issues; this initiative will serve to make families a more integral part of school life  Paraprofessional's, office staff, and school-aides will support students and teachers, as well as families.  ENL Afterschool program led by ENL Teachers, supporting 40 students in ELA and Math Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 65% of all K-5 teachers will be open to instructional feedback from administrative staff as measured by team meetings, professional development, and observation feedback reflection forms. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Results provided according to 2017-2018 School Quality Guide Strengths  71% of teachers say that the principal takes a personal interest in the professional development of teachers. (Q5f)  91% of families say that they feel respected by their child's principal. (Q1i)  88% of families say that they trust the principal. (Q1j)  89% of families say that the principal is an effective manager who makes the school run smoothly. (Q1k)  90% of families say that the principal at their school works hard to build trusting relationships with families like them. (Q1l) Weaknesses  36% of teachers say that the principal communicates a clear vision for this school. (Q11b) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 38   36% of teachers say that the principal sets clear expectations for teachers about implementing what they have learned in professional development. (Q11e))  21% of teachers say that the principal participates in instructional planning with teams of teachers. (Q11h)  29% of teachers say that the principal is an effective manager who makes the school run smoothly. (Q5b) Due to these weaknesses our schools has instituted a professional development team which allows teachers to communicates their own needs and areas of growth. Additionally staff are provided anonymous exit slips and comments at the end of each meeting to view what our next steps are. Administration and Teachers are also meeting quarter to discuss our schools vision and what steps we need to complete to ensure a positive supportive learning environment. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 39  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 6 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 6.2 The school leader ensures that regular communication with students and families fosters their high expectations for student academic achievement. 6.3 The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders so that student strength and needs are identified and used to augment learning. 6.4 The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to support student success. 6.5 The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school community members centered on student learning and success and encourages and empowers families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their children. x x x x SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Data results are according to NYC School Quality Guide: Strengths  93% of families say that school staff regularly communicate with them about how families can help their child learn. (Q1a)  90% of families say that teachers work closely with them to meet their child's needs. (Q1d)  93% of families say that their school communicates with them in a language and in a way that they can understand. (Q1h)  93% of teachers say that teachers at this school understand families' problems and concerns. (Q9b)  93%of families say that they have communicated with their child's teacher about their child's performance. (Q4b)  94% of families say that they have seen their child's projects, artwork, homework, tests, or quizzes. (Q4c)  95% of families say that they are likely to attend a general school meeting or school event. (Q6a) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 40   96% of families say that they are likely to go to a regularly scheduled parent-teacher conference with their child's teacher. (Q6b)  The school community will partner with families and community agencies to promote and provide workshops and classes (adult education, home and school, volunteerism and leadership, Health and Wellness, Social and emotional, community building) to support student and family success using the family room. School and CAS will collaborate to implement a system that will obtain data that will track parent/family member’s involvement that is linked to their child by the hours.   Teachers and staff use Tuesday, parent engagement times to communicate with families regarding a child's academic and/or behavioral status inside the classroom setting. Needs:  86% of teachers say that teachers at this school work closely with families to meet students' needs. (Q9c)  86% of teachers say that staff regularly communicate with families about how they can help students learn. (Q9d)  86% of teachers say that families are offered opportunities to visit their child's classroom, such as observing instruction or participating in an activity with their child. (Q9a)  As indicated on our Quality Review Report, "some parents were unclear of the vision and goals of the school and they were not aware of the instructional expectations of the grade for their individual children. A level of detail and clarity is lacking for teachers to articulate to parents and students regarding academic progress towards meeting levels of expectations." As further evidenced by the relatively low number of parent participation in the school Learning Environment Survey, we must improve the ways in which we communicate student progress to families. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 12X314 will provide parent outreach and engaging activities for our parent engagement which will result in a 26%% increase (from 58% to 84%) in the percent of teachers who will agree or strongly agree that, at their school, parents/guardians are invited to visit classrooms to observe the instructional programs as measured by the results of the 2019 NYC School Survey. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 41  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). As stated in The Quality Review report Fairmont’s PC, CAS PEC, CAS Program Director will be present during grade level meetings to be able to provide workshops (Teacher Led Workshops) for parents that will help families understand and help prepare students for current progress and next educational level. By January 2019, families whose children are not making sufficient progress "Promotion in Doubt" letter, requesting a conference at which student support plans will be shared. By March 2019, teachers will contact families of "PID" students to update progress toward meeting benchmarks and revise plan, if necessary. Establish a school/community calendar in hard copy and electronic forms. In addition, we will make full use of the School Messenger (Robocall) System to provide families with important school announcements. The Children’s Aid Society will partner with the Fairmont Neighborhood School to support and improve strong family and community ties by supporting parent orientations at the beginning of the school year, supporting events around parent surveys, supporting and providing training for teachers around Parent surveys. Students, families 10/2018 Parent Coordinator, PA President, Admin, Parent engagement Coordinator (CAS) 09/2018 Classroom Teachers will implement, Admin will oversee Families, students 01/2019 09/2018 - 06/2019 Teachers and families 09/2018 - 06/2019 Fairmont and Samara teachers, CAS Program Director, CAS Parent Engagement Coordinator will collaborate 2018-19 SCEP-FL 42  Parent Coordinators from Fairmont Neighborhood School, Children’s Aid Society and Samara will work collaboratively to assess and address the needs of the campus community. They will continue to offer workshops that cover adult education, home and school, volunteerism and leadership, Health and Wellness, Social and emotional, community building. Families 09/2018-06/2019 Fairmont, Samara, and CAS administrators and parent coordinators will implement and oversee Fairmont and Samara will continue to provide a Parent Engagement Room where parents have access to computers for job searches and research when they need it. This room will be used for family workshops and classes, as well. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. - Children's Aid Society - Change for Kids Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Reading Recovery Teacher, RTI provider(s), , a school based coach in literacy and in math, staff development with TC coaches and Math coaching in grade teams and the allocation of funding for a full-time school based social worker to support families and student attendance goals. Per-session Funding for academic programs:  After School Student Enrichment support  Robotics and STEM 3-5 afterschool program  Readers Theaters- differentiated reading program to support students reading at different levels. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal.  By February 2019, parental involvement will have increased by 20%, as measured by parent workshop's and school performance attendance sheets. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 43   February 2019, parental involvement will have increased by 10%, as measured by school performance attendance sheet. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Parent workshop attendance data produced by CAS PE Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 44  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Below grade level as measured by Fountasand PinnellBenchmark Assessment IReady:Diagnostic Below grade level as measured by Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Leveled Literacy Intervention Kits as our Tier II guided reading program. Push in to work with small groups during our extended literacy block. During the day and after school I-Ready instruction Go Math Intervention, Small intervention groupings During the day, and after school iReadyDiagnostic and Unit Mathematics Exams Engage NY RTI resources I-Ready instruction Repeated readings, opportunity to repeat exploration Repeated readings, opportunity to repeat unit segments Guidance Counselor sees student with guidance mandates as well as those at risk as determined by Small intervention groupings During the day - Extended Day Small group instruction During the day 1:1 counseling, small group counseling, parent outreach During the day Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Below end of unit assessment benchmark Below end of unit assessment benchmark At risk services will be provided by the school Guidance Counselor and our social worker 2018-19 SCEP-FL 45  our Child Study Team. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 46  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 56 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Breakfast program After-school enrichment Support services through Guidance, Social Worker, and Children's Aid Society Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 47 Provide uniforms, school supplies, book bags, and other identified materials 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 48  Section 8: Title I Program Information Directions:  All schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. We will recruit new teachers through the NYC DOE New Teacher website, and through outreach to quality teacher preparation colleges. Retention is secured through our efforts to be sure that teachers are a part of shared decision making, helping teachers to feel vested in developing our school community. We will continue to build retention by engaging teachers in professional development requested to support their practice as well as NTC Mentoring. Using NTC protocols and tools, teachers will engage in a self-reflection process that allows them to feel confident in their goal setting and next steps. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the strategies and activities for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, staff, and paraprofessionals that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). We offer on-site as well as off-site professional development through Teachers College (TCRWP), New Teacher Center, and teacher to teacher professional development sessions. We have TCRWP Staff Developers for grades K-2 and 3-5 that provide targeted professional development for teachers in those grade bands. On site training for our Generation Consultant, to help support our math curriculum and teachers understanding of how students can learn and grow in their area of mathematics. Other PDs will include: -SWD and ELL trainings from District 12 Office -i-Ready -SWD specific PDs turn-keyed from BFSC 2018-19 SCEP-FL 49  Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/information, early intervention services, etc.). We schedule meetings with parents who would like to transition their pre- school children to Kindergarten in our school. Early intervention services are offered (Turning 5). In addition, our pupil personnel secretary reaches out to families who have previously applied. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. -Instructional Support Team met with grade team leaders to reflect on the success of the past year’s formative assessments, and to plan for next year’s assessment models. -Data Team is comprised of teachers who will create assessments and turnkey tools for assessing -PD Committee will use teacher need assessment data from surveys and Advance to create a school-wide PD plan -Google Form Surveys will allow teachers to share in the decision making process regarding school-wide initiatives and traditions, such as STAR Behavior, Spirit Week, and Town Meeting. -TC Data Specialist will work with the data team (comprised of teachers) to analyze data which will turn-keyed school-wide. -i-Ready Data Specialist will work directly with teachers and grade teams to discuss interventions and assessment types. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools 2018-19 SCEP-FL 50  Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds enables, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (SCEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) 312,560.00 X Title I Part A (Basic) Federal 491,000 X Title I School Improvement 1003(a) Federal Column B Section Reference(s) 2 Teacher Positions (Section 6) 2 Paraprofessionals (Section 5D) 1 School Aide (Section 5D) Professional Development Supplies(Section 5A) SAPIS Worker (Section 5B) Per Session/Per Diem (Section 5C) Afterschool(ELT) (Section 5A) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 51  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funds Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Federal Federal Federal Title III, Immigrant Federal 51,509 N/A 12,366 N/A 2,350,956.00 X N/A X N/A X Tax Levy (FSF) Local Curriculum and Staff Development Consultants (Section 5C) Afterschool Program (Section 5A) N/A ENL After-school (Section 5D) N/A Classroom Teachers Cluster Teachers (Section 6) Social Worker (Section 5) Substitutes(Section 5B) Guidance Counselor (Section 5B) Assistant Principal (Section 5C) Parent Coordinator (Section 5D) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 52  School Office Staff (Section 5D) School Aides (Section 5D) Paraprofessionals (Section 5D) 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH). 2018-19 SCEP-FL 53   Title I School Improvement 1003(a): To support implementation of school improvement activities identified through the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) reviews or a school review with district oversight and included in the DCIP/SCEP.  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: To support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs.  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan.  Title I Priority and Focus School Parent Engagement Set-aside: Additional set-aside is to enable greater and  more meaningful parent participation in the education of their children. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process, including Title I 1003(g) SIG funds: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 54  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Fairmont Neighborhood School ,n compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students Fairmont Neighborhood School will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 55  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 56  ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act. ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) Fairmont Neighborhood School is in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will 2018-19 SCEP-FL 57  share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act. Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year. I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 58  ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Every Student Succeeds Act.Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); 2018-19 SCEP-FL 59  ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 60  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): K 6 1 7 2 8 3 9 4 10 5 11 12 2018-19 SCEP-FL 61  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: Our Title III ESL Afterschool Program will be content-based in social studies as an integration of literacy and content which is rich in vocabulary, hands-on activities, and exposure to related outside experiences. We also have large arts program in our school, therefore we will have a strong readers theatre component. This will support learning through all modalities. Based on EDAT data, our students consistently underperform on school-wide and NYSESLAT measures in reading and writing. The EDAT also revealed students in these grades who were “at risk” and we will target them through this program. Subgroups: The subgroups of ELLs that will be serviced will be a mix of current ELLs, former ELLs, newcomer ELLs, and ELLs with disabilities. The two teachers who will service these students are Emeline Velten Provider, Diane Brown-George, ENL Service Provider, and Gabrielle Levin-Venegas, RTI Provider. We are relatively small school with less than 20% of our population being ELLs. There will be approximately 50-60 ELLs in our school, so we chose to focus on 30 ELLs in total, grades K-2 who are struggling with vocabulary and writing and grade 3-4 who are struggling with math based on NYS Math Test data. There is a notable group in our population as well, and that is those ELLs with IEPS. We will have 4-6 ELLs in 2nd grade with IEPs and potentially additional ELLs that will receive Tier II RTI services based on the results of our I-Ready Screener. This is why we feel an RTI Provider will be a great asset to our program. Schedule, Duration, Language of Instruction, Teachers Our Title III Program will start on October 17, 2018 and continue through January 10, 2019 for a total of 11 weeks. This equals 22 sessions at 2 hours each session for 3 teachers total at $60.65 an hour. This will cost $8,006.35, which is 65% of the funds. Sessions will be held on Wednesdays and Thursdays from 2:30-4:30. All instruction will be in English with native language support when appropriate. Materials K-2 • Reader’s Theatre books • Bookflix Subscription • Passport to Social Studies 1st Grade Teacher Guides (2x) • Learning A-Z Subscription (funded by DELLSS) • Basic supplies • Crafts for integrated projects and reader’s theatre productions 2018-19 SCEP-FL 62  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Materials 3-4 -Math manipulatives -Smartboard games -basic supplies Trips K-2 Trips will be based upon the Passport to Social Studies Curriculum and the NYC Scope and Sequence • Bend 1- Self and Others: Individual Development and Cultural Identity: Museum of Natural History, Children’s Museum of Manhattan • Bend 2 - Geography, People and the Environment : Community Walk , Visit a Local Firehouse • Bend 3 - Families, Change and Time: Shadow Box Theatre - African Drum Trips 3-4 -Museum of Mathematics -Local trip to bodega/supermarket to discuss how math is used and needed in the community Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Strategies for Vocabulary Instruction Materials needed: Index cards, Rings, Hole punchers, Clip art program Rationale for this Professional Development: All students, ELLs and non-ELLs, can benefit from excellent, explicit vocabulary instruction. Title III and ELL teachers will provide a 1 hour school-wide professional development on what vocabulary strategies they could be using that aligns with our school curriculum. When reviewing data from informal and formal assessment school-wide, vocabulary richness is area of growth for us and we hope to begin targeting that in this session. We will ensure that our coaches and ELL staff continue modeling and supporting this work throughout the year with all teachers. •Supporting ELLs Through Center Activities Materials needed: File folders, Laminating materials, scissors, Differentiating for varying levels of ELLs (Progressions) Rationale for this Professional Development: Our school's major initiative for next year is bolstering our balanced literacy program. We will do so through explicit use of center activities that are targeted specifically for individual student needs. Title III and ELL teacher will provide a 1 hour school-wide professional development on how to effectively design centers for ELLs that are appropriately for each language proficiency level. We will ensure that our coaches and ELL staff continue modeling and supporting this work throughout the year with all teacher. •Differentiating for ELL-SWDs & Knowing the Difference Materials needed: TBD 2018-19 SCEP-FL 63  Part C: Professional Development Rationale for this Professional Development: There is a small yet strong population of ELLs with IEPs across grade levels in our school. Differentiating instruction for this subgroup is a challenging task. Title III and ELL teachers along with the SETSS teacher will provide this 1 hour professional development to all teachers that have ELL-SWDs in their class. Coaches, ELL staff, and SETSS teachers will continue modeling and supporting this work throughout the year by monitoring IEP goals and aligning tasks appropriately. •Using Language Objectives in Content Areas & Integrated ENL Teaching Materials needed: TBD Rationale for this Professional Development: Teachers often plan for their content objective but neglect to create a language objective that highlights the language students will need to reach the content objective. Title III and ELL staff will build our capacity in writing language objectives as a cohort. We will measure their effectiveness through action-research projects within the team. We will also share practices for co-teaching models between ENL and classroom teachers. The exact dates of these PDs are to be determined because we are in the process of creating our professional development calendar for upcoming school year. We will house all of the information from our session on our school's shared Google Drive. disseminates disseminates disseminates In regard to outside professional development, DELLSS and the BFSC offers Professional Development throughout the year. Our Title III Providers, along with our ELL teachers, will attend these workshops. Our principal forwards the ELL PD information to our ELL Coordinator which in turn diseminates that information to the team. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Introducing Parents to the I-Ready Program This 1 hour session will help parents of ELLs to uncover the connection between the I-Ready data results and their child’s English language development. We will first unpack how to read the I-Ready data and then we will discuss how what is appropriate English proficiency at each level of development. • Family Literacy Craft Workshop Days We will host these 1 hour session bimonthly throughout the afterschool program as a way for parents to come and engage in the literacy craft their children are working on. It will be a very hands-on experience that will include direct explanation of how these activities are support literacy development. • Presentation of Reader’s Theatre Shows 2018-19 SCEP-FL 64 Part D: Parental Engagement Activities At the culmination of our 3 bends, we will put on a Reader’s Theatre show for the parents. Afterwards, the children will be able to do a “meet and greet” with the parents and speak about their performance. The entire duration of the celebration will be 1 hour. These parent engagement activities will be presented by the teachers of PS 314. We will schedule them during the after-school program hours so more parents will be able to attend. Parents will be notified of these activities through letters home in their preferred language and outreach by our Parent Coordinator. We will work in junction with the Parent Coordinator to ensure our events are added to the monthly calendars distributed to parents. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) N/A  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 65  2018-19 SCEP-FL 66  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 12 School Name Fairmont Neighborhood School Borough Bronx School Number 314 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Scott Wolfson Coach Jessica DeGennaro ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Diane Brown-George/ ENL Teacher/Subject Area Emeline Velten Teacher/Subject Area Diane Brown-George Related-Service Provider Bena Ortiz Superintendent Rafaela Espinal-Pacheco Assistant Principal Marie Flynn Coach Dana Kirton School Counselor Marcus Jaime Parent Lourdes Velez Parent Coordinator Anthony Arias Field Support Center Staff Member Karyna Tejada Other (Name and Title) Gabrielle Levin-Venegas C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 2 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 1 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 2 2 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] D. Student Demographics 2018-19 SCEP-FL 67  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 312 Total number of ELLs 49 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 15.71% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 K 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 4 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 6 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? The following are formative assessments / curriculum-embedded assessments using to guide instructional planning for ELLs: Formative: - Fountas and Pinnell Running Records (formal and informal) - IReady -Reading A-Z Language Skill Pack assessments -Getting Ready for the NYSESLAT practice tests, 2018-19 SCEP-FL 68  -teacher-created vocabulary assessments by unit Summative: -Final Fountas and Pinnell Running Record -State assessments such as Math, ELA, and NYSESLAT -Go Math! chapter tests - IReady The data has shown us that our entering and beginning ELLs are struggling to meet grade level benchmarks in reading and writing. We are focusing on reading development in standalone ENL and writing development in integrated ENL. We use the data from these assessment to form instructional groups that are targeted on specific strategies. Teachers collaborated with classroom teachers to help create scaffolds and differentiated instruction for our ELL students. General education teachers and ELL providers met weekly to review student data and create an achievable goal for students moving forward. ELL teachers also looked at both formative and summative assessments to provide students with re-teachings and strategies they could use to gain mastery in that skill set. -ELL teachers created a curriculum to support all ELL students. They used resources from National Geographic, Engage NY, and Reading A-Z to assess and monitor student understanding. They also gave students monthly assessments to track progress and create Data Action Plans for at-risk students. - 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? The structures we have in place to support this effort are: -school-wide online data tracking system in the Google Drive for Fountas and Pinnell Running Records -school-wide assessment calendar with important due dates -ELL department pacing calendar with unit start/end and assessment dates -NYC DOE subscription to Reading A-Z to access assessment materials -incorporation of NYSESLAT test prep into our Title III afterschool program -per session for curriculum mapping and assessment creation 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? The summative assessments and baseline/benchmark assessments that are being used to identify baseline, progress, and areas of need for ELLs are: -ELL Periodic Assessments (Gr. 3,4,5) -TCRWP Primary Spelling Inventory -Fountas and Pinnell Running Records -TCRWP On Demand Writing -NYSITELL - IReady 2018-19 SCEP-FL 69  4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? The structures we have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered are: -ELL Coordinator to ensure proper training, execution, and analysis of NYSITELL, ELL Periodic Assessments, and NYSESLAT in order to create instructional action plans and groupings for students -creation of ELL Cohort that analyzes data from TCRWP On Demand Writing in order to create strategy groups and Tier II interventions in the classroom -RTI for ELLs program based on various data points -using TCRWP Primary Spelling Inventory to progress monitor student growth for ELLs targeted for Tier II who are struggling with decoding based on F&P results -using DRA to progress monitor student growth for ELLs targeted for Tier II who are struggling with comprehension based on F&P results -Supplemental Title III Program has been revised to focus on students at-risk as indicated by the EDAT report and is being designed as a supplemental intervention (focusing on phonics and phonemic awareness) - IReady/ RTI 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Our school uses data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention Framework by: Use IReady Data to form flexible groups and support targeted instruction -using TCRWP Primary Spelling Inventory to progress monitor student growth for ELLs targeted for Tier II who are struggling with decoding based on F&P results -using DRA to progress monitor student growth for ELLs targeted for Tier II who are struggling with comprehension based on F&P results -adjusting our Title III after school program focus to target ELLs in need of intervention by using data from the EDAT and F&P Running Records -Staff accesses and uses the data to drive instruction and differentiate instruction by looking at data during team meetings, collaboration between ELL providers and classroom teachers, data shared school-wide at professional development sessions, and adjusting lessons and instructional groups based on that data during planning sessions 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The following outcome assessments (NYSESLAT, ELA, and Math) noticings are based on the EDAT tool and RLAT report: Programming: 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? The structures we have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to our programs are: -Weekly ELL Team Meetings with ENL service providers to analyze data and make instructional adjustments -Bi-Weekly Cabinet Meetings with administration where data can be presented and analyzed -ELL Coordinator weekly administrative periods so data can be aggregated and analyzed using EDAT and Google Drive -Monthly ELL Cohort Meetings with ENL service providers and general education teachers to discuss data findings -school-wide Professional Developments led by ELL Coordinator and ELL Cohort where data is presented to staff 2018-19 SCEP-FL 70  Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. In our Freestanding ENL Program, we address the following as per CR Part 154.2: Integrated ENL -An ENL service provider pushes into grades K and 1 during ELA for 180 minutes a week -An ENL service provider pushes into grade 3, 4, 5 during ELA for 180 minutes a week -A dually licensed TESOL/Gen Ed teacher provides in-class ENL service for grade 2 during ELA for 180 minutes a week Standalone ENL -One ENL service provider pulls out Entering and Emerging ELLs from grades K and 1 for 180 minutes a week -A second ENL service provider pulls out Entering and Emerging ELLS from grades 3, 4, 5 for 180 minutes a week (with no more than 2 contiguous grades per group) -A dually licensed TESOL/Gen Ed teacher provides small group in-class ENL service for grade 2 for English Language Development for 180 minutes Student Grouping -ELLs of all levels are placed heterogeneously into one Gen Ed class per grade and mixed with native speakers -ELLs with ICT on their IEPs are placed into the appropriate class setting -For Standalone ENL, ELLs are placed into homogeneous groups (Entering and Emerging) and are from two contiguous grades b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? The school ensures the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency level, with explicit instructional minutes delivered in ENL and ELA, by: -using NYSITELL and NYSESLAT data to inform instructional grouping based on proficiency level -scheduling Entering and Emerging ELLs for 360 total minutes - 180 integrated in ELA, 180 standalone in ENL -scheduling Transitioning and Expanding ELLs for 180 total minutes integrated in ELA -Scheduling Commanding ELLs for 90 total minutes integrated in ELA 2018-19 SCEP-FL 71  -Programming provider schedules into STARS Classroom We use data from the EDAT report to support our instructional groupings as well based on areas of need in each modality. For example, we learned that a major area of growth across the grades was writing so we developed our integrated program around writing instruction. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Core content is delivered in our Freestanding ENL Program with specific regard to the following: Language of Instruction - English Instructional Approaches and Methods -Integrated: co-teaching during Writer's Workshop using various co-teaching models, small strategy groups, explicit vocabulary teaching, vocabulary mini-books, modeling, linguistic frames, oral rehearsal, cognates, mixed level language partners, CCLS aligned units -Standalone: explicit language instruction through a thematic lens (social studies or science), focusing on linguistic frames, pre-teaching vocabulary, visual supports, TPR, cognates, oral rehearsal, cooperative learning structures, use of videos/songs/realia, CCLS aligned units -Ensuring language objectives are present in every lesson for both classroom and ENL teachers 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? We ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year by: -administering the Spanish LAB when the student registers if the home language is Spanish -translated state exams -bilingual glossaries As a Freestanding ENL Program we do not evaluate ELLs in their home languages throughout the year. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status We differentiate instruction for each of the ELLs subgroups in the following ways: SIFE -provide social, emotional, and cultural support through culturally sensitive curriculum Support from the guidance counselor, social worker, and parent coordinator -buddy system with students who speak their language and/or are from their country -increased use of modeling, visuals, and collaborative learning activities -receive Tier II RTI instruction in the classroom -support from CBOs (Children's Aid Society) -online websites applications for supplementary support in English Language Development (ELD) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 72  Newcomer -buddy system with students who speak their language and/or are from their country -increased use of modeling, visuals, and collaborative learning activities -online websites applications for supplementary support in ELD -use of scaffolds such as linguistic frames and cognates -use of L1 to support development of L2 -use of Bilingual Common Core Progressions and Performance Level Descriptors to design tasks appropriate to the entering and emerging levels, such as pre-taught words and graphic organizers Developing -use of Bilingual Common Core Progressions and Performance Level Descriptors to design tasks appropriate to the entering and emerging levels, such as pre-taught words and graphic organizers -continued use of modeling, visuals, and collaborative learning activities -continued use of linguistic frames and explicit Tier II and III vocabulary instruction Long Term -use of Bilingual Common Core Progressions and Performance Level Descriptors to design tasks appropriate to the -entering and emerging levels, such as pre-taught words and graphic organizers -continued use of modeling, visuals, and collaborative learning activities -continued use of linguistic frames and explicit Tier II and III vocabulary instruction -intense focus on academic language across subject areas Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status -continued use of linguistic frames and explicit Tier II and III vocabulary instruction -intense focus on academic language across subject areas -receive 90 minutes of ENL service for 2 years 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? The instructional strategies and grade-level materials that teachers of ELLs-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development are: -use of manipulative(s) -use of tactile and kinesthetic activities -activating prior knowledge -extended wait time -pre-teaching and front-loading vocabulary -explicit instruction with visuals -breaking down tasks into smaller chunks -re-teaching and paraphrasing when appropriate -TCRWP for literacy instruction -National Geographic for content based language instruction -Reading AZ for ELD support - IReady Program for all students 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Our school uses curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment by: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 73  -having an ICT class on each grade and placing ELL-SWDs into that class if their IEP mandates an ICT -having special education teachers from each grade provide SETSS in the classroom for ELL-SWDs if their IEP mandates SETSS -using grade level instructional materials and providing scaffolds and differentiation to meet the needs of ELL-SWDs (Bilingual Common Core Progressions, Performance Level Descriptors) -having ELL service providers review IEPs for ELL-SWDs and attend their IEP meetings to stay updated on any amendments made to the IEP 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Our targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA and math are: ELA -LLI (Leveled Literacy Intervention) for comprehension and fluency -FUNdations for phonemic awareness -Florida Center for Reading Research for all 5 pillars of reading -iReady online for ELA -Open Court Reading for phonemic awareness and phonics - Grades K&1 pilot TC Phonics program Math -iReady online for math -Go Math! RTI resources The range of intervention services offered in our school are: -Tier 2 interventions in the classroom by the classroom teacher -Tier 3 interventions provided by out of classroom RTI providers -Title III Supplemental RTI for ELLs afterschool program launching for the 18-19 SY All of these services are offered in English and use specific, streamlined progress monitoring. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Based on data and trends, there are new programs and improvements that will be considering for the upcoming school year. These are: New Program -Title III Supplemental RTI for ELLs Afterschool Program to provide increased reading support for ELLs not making substantial gains on their F&P scores Improvements -incorporating Alphachants from National Geographic into the Standalone ENL service as the first unit for K/1/2 students to support foundational reading skills -incorporating FUNdations into the Standalone ENL service as the first unit for 3/4/5 students to support phonemic awareness and phonics -increased collaborative planning time with classroom teachers for Integrated ENL through the ELL Cohort -increased focus on vocabulary instruction, including pre-teaching, vocabulary books, and tier II and III academic language -increased focus on reading during Standalone ENL service 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? 2018-19 SCEP-FL 74  N/A 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs are afforded equal access to all school programs, including: -Children's Aid Society after-school program and affiliations -Change for Kid's partnership and the programs they bring into the school, including priority scheduling with Story --Pirates, Common Pantry, and Dig In -priority scheduling with Arts Connection and their teaching artist -Title III Afterschool Program -IReady 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. The instructional materials, including technology, that are used to support ELLs (for core content and language) are: -Smartboards / Promethean boards for visual support during lessons - iPads for visual and audio support during small group instruction - headphones for audio support during small group instruction -manipulatives (math manipulatives, magnetic letters, fluency tubes, etc) as a tactile support during lessons -photo cards (National Geographic and teacher created) as a visual support during lessons -folders, notebooks, writing paper, and other basic classroom supplies -sentence strips to support syntax development -index cards for vocabulary books -curriculum materials (workbooks, practice pages, guided reading books, etc) Instructional Core -TCRWP for literacy -FUNdations for phonics -Alphachants and Open Court Reading for phonemic awareness -Teacher created shared reading based off of TCRWP 5 day plan -National Geographic for vocabulary and content support -Learning AZ (Reading, Writing, Science) for supplemental support -MyOn for reading engagement - IReady 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Home language support is assessed and delivered in our ENL program in the following ways: -Spanish LAB for ELLs whose home language is Spanish -use of L1 as needed for entering, emerging, and transitioning students -use of cognates to support language acquisition -bilingual glossaries and dictionaries 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. The school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs' ages and grade level by: -having an ELL coordinator oversee the ENL program and collaborates with ELL department and Instructional Cabinet with 2018-19 SCEP-FL 75  regard to service and resources -using the ELL Policy and Reference Guide to ensure services as meeting mandates as per CR 154 -programming all required services into STARS Classroom -using instructional resources that are research based and leveled appropriately 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Our school shares a building with another school and our administrators have coordinated to ensure that all ELLs' needs are met in the following ways: -shared use of common spaces (yard, cafeteria, auditorium, library) -shared SAPIS worker for socio-emotional support -parent coordinators that co-facilitate events for students and parents -CBOs that work with both schools (i.e. Children's Aid Afterschool) 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). In order to assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school and throughout the school year, our school will host the following activities: -Parent Orientation for all newly enrolled ELLs hosted by ELL providers -Back to School Night hosted by classroom teachers and ELL providers -Community Welcome Event co-hosted by ELL department, guidance team, and parent coordinator for families and students -Exemplary student on each grade level to serve as a mentor/buddy for newly enrolled ELLs -Extra periods weekly of technology-based foundational skill support 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? N/A 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? The professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school, including teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff, with support for engaging ELLs in the Common Core Learning Standards, are as follows: -monthly district level professional development from the BFSC for ELL Liaisons 2018-19 SCEP-FL 76  -ELL PD offerings from the BFSC and DOE for ELL providers on different levels of ELL development, scaffolds to use, differentiation strategies, resources to use for lesson planning, writing language objectives, and more -in-house professional development during ELL cohort meetings -CCLS focused professional development from collaboration with LDC (Literacy Design Collective) -ELL provider collaboration with TCRWP Staff Developers 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Our school meets the professional development requirement as per CR Part 154.2 (15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for ENL teachers) in providing ELL-specific professional development by ensuring the following: -the ELL coordinator is a part of the PD Committee and Instructional Cabinet to make sure the percentage of ELL-specific professional development is met -15% of in-house PDs for all staff members are on ELL-specific topics and are presented by either the ELL cohort or BFSC representatives -ELL providers are sent to out of house PDs to meet their percentage quota -agendas and attendance are maintained for all professional development sessions and housed in the ELL Coordinator's binder -records will be kept with agenda and sign in sheets housed in one binder PD Topics include: -Scaffolds for ELLs -Differentiation for ELLs -Writing Language Objectives -Creating Strategy Groups based on Data -Using Technology for ELLs in Lesson Planning Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? The school provides annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas in the following ways: -providing oral and written translation in the preferred language of the parent/guardian -using a rubric based progressing monitoring sheet to capture feedback regarding students' growth -holding the meetings during the month of May in order to be able to speak to their progress, growth, and approximated performance on the NYSESLAT 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. ELL parent involvement in our school includes: -a bilingual parent coordinator that proactively interacts with all parents of ELLs -partnership with Children's Aid Society to support hosting events 2018-19 SCEP-FL 77  -translators present at all engagement activities -ENL classes for parents -in-classroom workshops for parents to work with students -multi-cultural day (school-wide) for parents to participate in -family heritage celebration for students and parents Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 78 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Scott Wolfson, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 79  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Fairmont Neighborhood School School DBN: 12X314 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Scott Wolfson Title Principal Marie Flynn Assistant Principal Anthony Arias Parent Coordinator Diane Brown George ENL/Bilingual Teacher Lourdes Velez Parent Emeline Velten Teacher/Subject Area Diane Brown-George Teacher/Subject Area Jessica DeGennaro Dana Kirton Coach Coach Marcus Jaime School Counselor Rafaela Espinal Karyna Tejada Dana Kirton Bena Ortiz Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Field Support Center Staff Member Other Coach Other 6/11/18 Gabrielle Levin-Venegas Other 6/11/18 Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 6/11/18 6/11/18 6/11/18 6/11/18 6/11/18 6/11/18 6/11/18 6/11/18 6/11/18 6/11/18 6/11/18 6/11/18 6/11/18 RTI Provider 1/1/01 2018-19 SCEP-FL 80  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 12X314 School Name: FairmontNeighborhood School Superintendent: Rafaela Espinal The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Anthony Arias Parent Coordinator Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. At registration, every parent fills out a Home Language Identification Survey where they can indicate their preference for both written and oral communication. After reviewing the data from Part III of the HLIS, we found that parents prefer either English or Spanish. As per information gathered from ATS and the Student Emergency Contact Cards, we found that similarly, parents prefer communication to be either in English or Spanish. The ENL Team adds the parents’ preferred language to our Google Drive spreadsheet after a student has been registered.The ENL teachers and Pupil accounting secretary keep a copy of the HLIS in the student Cum record and a separate copy is provided to the ENL team. This information is all shared with the teaching team for each student. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 81  Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Spanish English Fulani French 70 298 3 2 18.57 79.05 0.8 0.53 71 297 3 2 18.83 78.78 0.8 .0.53 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. English, Spanish Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families ELL Parent Orientation Ongoing as per registration ELL Annual Parent Meetings May Parent Teacher Conferences As per DOE contract Field Trip Permission Slips As per class trip calendar Workshop Fliers Ongoing Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. The ELL Coordinator uses the translated versions available on the NYC DOE intranet page. The Parent Coordinator translates the document within 3-5 days. The Parent Coordinator translates the document within 3-5 days. There is a standard copy of the slip that is already translated and reproduced as needed. The Parent Coordinator translates the document within 3-5 days. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 82  Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Parent Teacher Conferences As per DOE contract ELL Parent Orientation Ongoing as per registration Annual ELL Parent Meetings May-June Parent Workshops Ongoing interpretation service(s)? Teachers, paraprofessionals, parent coordinator, and/or Children's Aid Society workers support translation during parent teacher conferences. Teachers, paraprofessionals, and/or parent coordinator support in providing translation during ELL parent orientation. Teachers, paraprofessionals, and/or parent coordinator support in providing translation during ELL parent orientation. Teachers, paraprofessionals, parent coordinator and/or Children's Aid Society workers support translation during parent teacher conferences. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. In September at our initial meeting as a staff, our Translation Policy will be made clear to staff members by having this document live on the Google Drive for viewing. We will also pass out the Translation and Interpretation Unit Brochure so staff members are aware of the services offered, the languages available for translation, and the phone number they can call. The list of languages and the phone numbers are also clearly posted in the main office on a large poster. There are also PD's listed on the yearly Professional Development agenda for language access resources. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 83  Our school will make limited-English Proficient parents aware of their right to receive information by: -providing the translation brochure to parents -posting translation poster from NYC DOE in the main office -using services such as Big Word and over-the-phone translation services to parents with low-incidence languages -translating signage around the school to direct parents -having bilingual office staff and parent coordinator -parent workshops run by Parent Coordinator and Children's Aid Society Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? The ENL Team and the Parent Coordinator will gather feedback from parents on the quality and availability of services regarding translation and interpretation formally through a survey given at the first Parent Conference day/night, informally throughout the school year, and once again at the second Parent Conference day/night. Feedback gathered from the first survey will help us to improve our services moving forward in the school year and feedback gathered from the second survey will provide us with data to let us know how effective our practices are and what we can do to improve upon them moving forward. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 84 
