2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 10X315 School Name: P.S. 315 LAB SCHOOL Principal: GABY FLORES 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Number (DBN): 10X315 PS/MS 315X 3210000315 K-8 2865 Claflin Avenue Bronx, NY 10468 9292377750 Phone Number: 9292377752 Fax: Gaby Flores GFlores22@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: 10 Superintendent’s Office Address: Email Address: Gaby Flores Nicole Scaccio Arelis Resendiz Gaby Flores Sandra Rodriguez Divina Fernandez Stephanie Pareja NA District Information MaribelHulla Superintendent: 1 Fordham Plaza, Bronx, NY 10458 MHulla@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-741-5852 Phone Number: 7187417098 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 CEP 3  FSC: Bronx Executive Director’s Office Address: Jose Ruiz Executive Director: 1 Fordham Plaza, Bronx, NY 10458 JRuiz2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-741-5436 Phone Number: 718-828-6280 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Gaby Flores Nicole Scaccio Edith Boatend Doris Quiroz Arelis Resendiz N/A Ruth Duran Chea Cristina Padilla Dilena Cruz *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member / Teacher Member / Teacher Member/ Parent 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Johnny Charvet Elvira Resendez Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Our school community strives to establish the Frameworks for Great schools in order to nurture students’ academic and social emotional development through rigorous instruction and ongoing support of students and family needs. The following is our School’s Mission Statement: P.S./M.S. 315 is a safe learning environment, where parents, staff, administration and the community at large collaborate to foster high expectations. As a team we support our general education students, students with special needs, as well as our English Language Learners to move them towards success. Through the use of technology, implementation of discussion protocols, the teaching of specific reading strategies, math problem solving skills, and project-based learning, we will engage students and give them a clear 2018-19 CEP 9  sense of purpose. We strive to produce well-developed individuals by promoting college and career readiness in all grades. The vision of the Lab School is to provide children and families with a nurturing educational environment of excellence in critical thinking, exploration, and experimentation. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Our school is composed of about 229 students. We have one class per grade in grades K to 8. We believe in instructing the whole child, and for our vision, we would like to teach our students to think critically and develop positive/strong ethical leadership skills for our community. For example, we would like for our students to embed positive behaviours; therefore, we follow a PBIS Matrix rubric where they can show attributes such as teamwork, integrity, responsibility, gratitude, service and respect. We also like to expose our students to different cultures through the social studies curriculum and music. This is so they can develop respect and knowledge of different cultures. In addition, we hold celebration events highlighting best student work practices. Furthermore, we highlight our students and families of the month. ELLs make up 16% of our student population. We offer them an integrated curriculum, and the ENL instructor collaborates with classroom teachers to support with embedding language objectives in order to address Advanced Literacy instruction. This also helps providing ENL students with the necessary linguistic tools/scaffolds in order for them to learn and succeed in the content areas. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. 16% of our student population are English Language Learners. They have expressive language needs. In addition, we have students that are in need of alternate assessments, as well as students with reading disabilities. Consequently, we provide multiple entry points and focus on Advanced Literacy acquisition skills for all of our students by working to improve the core curriculum. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Based on the Frameworks for Great Schools, our area of key focus is to improve in assessing student progress and helping students to monitor their own progress based on rigorous instruction. Our school showed progress in both ELA and Math. We want to continue to maintain our students' progress and look closely at formative assessments. Furthermore, we intend to focus on sustaining our improvement in the following Frameworks for Great schools:  Rigorous Instruction: Our curricula reflects themes that integrate literacy and other content areas while at the same time, it aligns the standards to meet our students' needs. Teachers meet weekly and design instructional tasks based on an LDC grant to help them adjust and refine curricula as we follow the Common Core and blend with Teachers' College. Additionally, our teachers will continue to participate in various teams and committees in order to track student progress that is both quantitative and qualitative. Based on our School Quality Guide, the data shows that we made gains in our NYC Written Performance Tasks and F & P Reading Level Assessments. The school has implemented a curriculum that is aligned with the Common Core Learning Standards for grades K to 8. The teachers meet weekly and monthly to make adjustments in their curricula in order to support student progress and achievement. Furthermore, we are working to follow the new time line for the New Generation Standards. We are also working on focusing on the conceptual learning approach in math vs. the procedural. We want to have more gains in the State Exams since we have suffered a loss in the previous year. In order to meet the chancellor's Four Pillars of Practice initiative, the school has three main goals, which are to increase the academic rigor, use assessments to design targeted instruction for all students, continue to improve 2018-19 CEP 10  student engagement by providing them with more learning challenges, increase in teacher questioning and student accountable talk. The teachers meet on a weekly basis on Mondays in order to conduct teacher data inquiry where they look closely at student assessments based on writing and reading. Teachers also meet weekly during ELA, math, and science committees. Collaborative Teachers: In order to build capacity, our school has gratefully been selected to participate for the first time in the Learning Partners city initiative. We are excited as it will help us build capacity within the school, and it will allow us to have model teachers in the classroom that will share best practices. Teachers will continue to meet on a weekly basis on Mondays for 35 minutes to analyze student data, and on Tuesdays, for 80 minutes to participate in professional learning conducted by the school ULIT coach, Model Teachers, Principal and Assistant Principal. Teachers are strengthening their collaboration skills as they develop action plans together to study student progress and achievement by working in teacher teams. For example, teachers are invited to summer and after school planning to refine the curriculum so that it is aligned to the CCLS. One of our key areas of focus is to deepen the teacher pedagogy so that it is aligned to the Danielson Framework. Supportive Environment: This is an area of focus for our school. Our school will work on improving in the area of strengthening a supportive environment based on the Frameworks for Great Schools. We plan on conducting professional development by using resources to deepen our learning regarding Cultural Responsive Pedagogy. Teachers will take part in a book study. Additionally, we will continue to deepen the structures of our Positive Behavior Intervention Matrix. Our PBIS team will continue to meet on a weekly basis. We will design an action plan to maintain a data base regarding positive behavior at our school. In addition, our school will continue to address project-based learning, music, dance, and infuse the arts in the curriculum. We will work on making student choice and voice be evident in the curriculum. Teachers will also continue to strengthen their teacher team skills through building capacity as they participate in LDC webinars. Effective School Leadership: The Principal and the Assistant Principal have initiated an instructional cabinet that includes the reading and math coaches, and teacher leader mentors. They will focus on establishing the schools' instructional focus. The team will conduct environmental and learning walkthroughs, instructional rounds, learning walks, low inference observations, and snapshot visits that will focus on addressing the Danielson Components. Teachers will be invited to participate in inter-visitations and intra-visitations within the school and outside in order to deepen and hone their practice. Trust: Through teacher teams' action research, lesson plan studies and book study groups, the teachers take on different roles and responsibilities to be able to build a professional learning community that allows them to refine and reflect on their practices. We will continue to work on understanding the school's values and vision. Teachers will continue to assist students learn how to improve in their social responsibility skills. 2018-19 CEP 11  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 10X315 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 0K,01,02,03,04,05,06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 249 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 20 21 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 23 18 10 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 98.0% % Attendance Rate 93.2% % Reduced Lunch 15.7% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.4% 84.3% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 0.4% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 7 0% 10% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 42.3% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 87% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES N/A NO YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A YES N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A N/A N/A 92.3% 4.4% 21.3% 13.3% 1.2% 0.8% 2 19% 9 29.0% 78% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 12  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Data trends based on the school year 2017-18 demonstrate that our school achieved an increase in both ELA and Math State scores, NYC Written and NYC Math Performance Assessments. This information was received based the June Instructional Report and NYS testing data. Additionally, the Advance MOTP showed growth for all students in the area of F & P's. Based on the feedback from our superintendent, we have made progress in our Learning Environment 1.4. Furthermore, in our NYC Learning School Survey, we made progress in Rigorous Instruction, Collaborative Teachers, Effective School Leadership, and Strong Family Community Ties. We also received a visit from the Quality Review office, which provided us feedback that we hold high expectations in instruction and student behavior at our school. In addition, our school served as a professional development site for reviewers. We maintain strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives to supplement our academic programs and enhance the school experience for every student. The following programs and activities are some of the collaborations that we have in our school community. These programs and activities include but are not limited to the following: 􏰁 Monthly Celebration Assemblies identify and recognize students 􏰁 Robotics and Coding for students 􏰁 Dream Yards Poetry Slam, Open Microphone, Theater, Dance, Puppetry in Practice and Animation 􏰁 Urban Advantage school trips and teacher professional development 􏰁 Cultural Arts Show (Music and Dance) 􏰁 Annual Writers' Café Celebration 􏰁 Annual Reading and Mathematics Café Celebrations and a School-wide Science Fair 􏰁 "I Will Graduate Program" College Readiness for Middle School students to visit colleges 􏰁 Respect for All and Digital Citizenship Kindness Campaign 􏰁 Technology programs to support learning outcomes such as i-Ready, and MyOn 2018-19 CEP 13  Our school's area of celebration ratings on our Quality Review are:  The school's curricular decisions build coherence and promote college and career readiness for all learners. Revisions to units of study are based upon ongoing data analysis. We also review them based on the feedback we receive from our superintendent's visit.  Teachers are engaged in structured collaborations around practice and student learning. Teacher teams involve vertical planning to build coherency in grades K to 8.  Teachers are using rubrics and assessments aligned with ELA and Math units and the CCLS.  High expectations are consistently communicated to the entire school community including teachers, students, and families.  Multiple communications to parents place students on a path of college and career readiness. In the area of Math, teachers will administer diagnostics, formative, and summative assessments in order to address the priority and supplemental math strands based on student data needs. P.S. /M.S. 315 rigorously incorporates the Go Math curriculum for all K to 5 grade levels and uses CMP3, NY Engage for grades 6 to 8, Ready-Gen Language Arts ELA curriculum in grades K to 5 and Code X in grades 6 to 8. Each program is aligned to the Common Core Standards. Our curriculum is tailored to our students' needs. We expand our base curriculum by incorporating various outside resources such as Engage-NY. We also adapt from various CCLS resources to develop coherent thematic units. Our school community aligns assessment to curricula and analyzes data from the following sources to improve the impact on student learning: Our areas of strength includes the following: 􏰁 We have seen an improvement in our Baseline and Mid-line assessments that include Go Math, Fountas and Pinnell Reading Levels, Writing Baselines, NYC Written Assessments and Periodic Assessments for English Language Learners. 􏰁 In addition, we have made some improvements in our End-of-the-Year assessments that include Go Math, Fountas and Pinnell Reading Growth, NYC Written assessments for MOSL, Periodic Assessments for English Language Learners, NYC ELA and Math Performance Assessments for the Beginning of the Year and End of the Year. 􏰁 Our teachers have implemented on-going checks for understanding from each curriculum area, and our students also maintain student growth portfolios. 􏰁 Our Teachers have designed rubrics that are aligned to CCLS and are used to assess student work products. 􏰁 Teachers use formative student watching tools such as the cruising clipboard during instruction to adjust learning plans for groups and individual students who require support or enrichment. 􏰁 the Go Math Share and Show in mathematics pinpoints specific learning targets during each lesson. Based on our school Quality Review report, it was recommended that an area of focus for our school to be indicator 1.2 for pedagogy. The feedback that we received showed that we need to focus on instructional rigor though a deeper emphasis of higher order questioning and thinking skills. At our school, we will foster the learning as we believe students learn best through inquiry and showing evidence through targeted questioning to support their findings. Our grades 3 to 8 started implementing strategies to promote critical thinking and higher order questioning such as Reciprocal Teaching, Debates, and Socratic Seminars in order to build students' discourse and increase accountable talk. Students will continue to strengthen their questioning skills when reading literature and informational text. * While pedagogy provides consistent instructional supports by the use of strategic entry points and scaffolds to meet the needs of all learners, the use of questioning and the ability to foster structures for student to student interactions develop deep reasoning independent of teacher direction, which varies across the school. 2018-19 CEP 14  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. During the school year 2018-19, 90 % of students in grades K to 8 will demonstrate at least two levels growth as measured by their F & P reading level assessments by June 2019. 2018-19 CEP 15 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All Students in grades K to 8 September 2018 – June 2019 Principal, Administration, Teachers, ULIT coach Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  All pedagogues will continue to receive professional development on the Danielson's Framework for teaching professional learning, highlighting 1A, 1E for Knowledge of Content, Designing Coherent Instruction and 3D Questioning and discussion, Engaging Students in Learning, and Using Assessment in Instruction in line with our instructional focus of how children learn best through inquiry, project-based learning in connection with the Math and ELA instructional shifts. Teachers will review how to include integration in their unit plans. They will continue to implement UBD/UDL CCLS aligned units, the workshop model in ELA, guided reading practices using the Comprehension Toolkit, Reciprocal Teaching, discussion protocols to increase student engagement, build students’ quality of writing through the writing process and writing about reading. Students will continue to use Close Reading strategies in order to enhance their comprehension of complex text as in the instructional shifts.  Teachers will also be embedding the use of thinking maps that will enable students to compartmentalize their thinking process by "Making Thinking and Comprehending Text Visible".  Students will be supported during writing conferences to use rubrics to set goals to improve the quality of their work. Students will use rubrics to provide peer feedback, and teachers will use rubrics to provide students with actionable feedback and next steps. The objective would be to encourage student self-assessment and increase student independence in the learning process. 2018-19 CEP 16   Students will be able to conduct student led conferences in order to help monitor their learning and have ownership of their progress as they share their data with their parents.  Teachers will continue to guide students to access complex text by implementing specific reading strategies, skills and practices.  By way of Accountable Talk, Reciprocal Teaching, Debates, Socratic Seminars, Partnership Reading, and encouraging text-based discussions, teachers will help students develop their critical thinking and analytical skills.  As part of the professional learning cycles, teacher teams will be trained on following the "DATAWISE" principles. Teacher teams will develop SMART Goals and follow an 8 week goals cycle. We will continue to train on viewing professional teacher resource videos with specific examples of level 3 (Effective) and level 4 (Highly Effective). Teacher teams will have inter-visitation schedules, and they will follow professional literature to strengthen best teaching practices. In addition, all teachers will continue to work in their teacher teams collaboratively to strengthen the instructional core of their curriculum units through multiple entry points with special consideration for our ELLs and Special Needs students.  The ENL teacher team will support with the analysis of student work to inform instructional next steps using New Language Progressions and/or the writing continuum. The ENL team will also provide professional learning where teachers may deepen their understanding of how they may implement the Targets of Measurement in reading, writing, speaking, and listening examples. In an effort to increase rigor throughout our curriculum, we will continue the use of diagnostics, formative and summative assessments to provide more strategic instruction aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards.  The school will conduct regular parent outreach meetings to assist parents in understanding the CCLS standards and assessments. Families will learn how to Use NYC Achieve to monitor their child's progress and support their children with strategies at home.  Parents will be able to support students at home with literacy and math goals through the use of Go Math Supplemental tasks, MyOn online reading, i-Ready, independent reading, and project-All Students in grades 3 to 8 September 2018 – June 2019 Teachers, ULIT Coach, Assistant Principal, Principal All Students in grades 3 to 8 September 2018 – June 2019 Curriculum Consultants, ULIT coach, Assistant Principal, Principal, Teachers 2018-19 CEP 17 based learning tasks. In addition, parent workshops will be offered on the following topics: Understanding the Common Core Standards, understanding your child’s reading level, utilizing the public library as a resource and supporting your child in mathematics through the use of games. In November 2018 all teachers will identify specific groups, which they will meet with at least 2-3 times a week focusing on teaching reading strategies. All students in grades K to 8 11/07/18 Teachers, Educational Assistants 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will be engaged by workshops provided by various teachers who have expertise with helping children increase their reading skills at home. We are also inviting our parents to volunteer and help us conduct or read aloud our book of the month with our students. The way that we will engage families and support their understanding of rigorous instruction and the Common Core Standards is through various venues such as, conducting curriculum family orientations, inviting families to visit classrooms, and asking our classroom teachers to present examples of what is required in the units being taught in the classrooms in ELA and Math. Our ENL teacher will also be providing workshops to support with language objective strategies for students with an IEP. Our school has created a list of yearly parent workshops that are overseen by the Assistant Principal and are coordinated by the Parent Coordinator who maintains the life skills and the academic workshop calendar. Parents also receive the Family/School Life Skills and Instructional Calendar. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human Resources: (Fair Student Funding, Title I) Consultants for 20 hours of training, Thinking maps trainers, teacher's per session. Instructional Resources Fair student funding (Fair Student Funding, Title I) Fountas and Pinell testing kits, Fundations kits, Math Exemplars CD's, MYOn online reading, i-Ready software. Scheduling Title 1 Vertical Grade Team meeting twice a month after school per session, MOSL Scoring teams, and Mondays Inquiry Team Work Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other 2018-19 CEP 18  Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 1. There will be a mid-point check benchmark in the month of February 2019. The time frame will consist of : September - Assessment of F & P reading levels, February - F & P reading levels, and May F & P reading levels. The teachers in grades K - 8 will administer Fountas and Pinell three times a year. NYC Written Assessments will be administered for grades 3 to 8 in the beginning of the year and end of the year. Teacher teams will track student progress three times a year (fall, winter, & spring). We will also track student progress by their mastery of the CCLS in the area of reading and writing addressed in each unit. Based on the data, teachers will develop rubrics/criteria across the grades (K- 8) that evaluate the 6 writing traits in order to assess the – Focus, Development, Reading, Organization, and Conventions of the writing piece. Rubrics will be developed in order to support students' understanding of how to use criteria checklists/rubrics aligned with the Common Core Learning Standards to self-monitor their own work. There will be a data collection at the end of all the units. We will conduct fall, winter, and spring benchmarks and collect the data in order to analyze and interpret next steps. In addition, we will collect F & Ps during October 2018, Mid-line data February 2019 and End-line data in May 2019. The information will be analyzed, and Smart Goals will be set. 2. The Principal and Assistant Principal will conduct progress review meetings with Teachers, Out-Of-Classroom Teachers and the ULIT coach in order to monitor students’ progress of the CCLS instructional learning goals. Students will be expected to share their work during classroom celebrations every 4-6 weeks and at the Writers' Café two times a year. A) 60% of all students will make at least 70% of a year's worth of growth on the F & Ps reading assessments administered in January 2019 as a midpoint benchmark as compared to the October 2018 baseline. B) Students will make an average gain of 20 percentage points on the raw score for the ELA NYC Performance-Based Tasks (MOSL) administered in January 2019. C) Students will make an average gain of 13 percentage points on the Go Math Middle of Year Assessment as compared to the Go Math Baseline. D) By January 2019, 65% of teachers will be rated as Effective or better in the observable component 1e: Designing Coherent Instruction in the Advance system. As of February 2019: A) 61% of all students in grades 1-5 will make at least 40% of a year's growth on the F & Ps administered as a midpoint benchmark as compared to the October 2018. Due to the results of this data, teachers will identify targeted inquiry groups and conduct guided reading instruction 2-3 times a week with these groups. B) Students will make an average growth of 16.2 percentage points on the mid-year ELA NYC Performance Based Task (MOSL) administered in January 2019. C) Students in grades 1-5 will make an average gain of 13 percentage points, while kindergarten will make an average gain of 26 percentage points on the Go Math Middle of the Year Assessment as compared to the Go Math baseline. D) By February 2019, 64% of teachers will be rated as Effective or better in the observable component 1e: Designing Coherent Instruction in the Advance system. 2018-19 CEP 19  Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) The following are the specific instrument of measures to assess reading comprehension: A) F & P reading levels tracking. B) NYC ELA Written Performance Tasks C) Fundations Assesment Tracker to measure phonics D) Ready-Gen and Engage-NY Unit Assessments Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 20  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Based on our feedback we have a strength in the Framework of Collaboration and providing a Supportive Environment: ● The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. ● The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students. ● Through Thrive NYC all school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health supports tied to the school’s vision. ● High expectations are consistently communicated to the entire school community including teachers, students and families. Multiple communications to parents place students on a path of college and career readiness. The school leader cultivates purposeful partnerships to promote student social-emotional health and academic achievement. The school leader with stakeholders will continue to ensure that there is a school-wide PBIS (Positive Behavior Intervention and Supports) process in place to support the social competence and academic achievement of all students. At PS/MS 315 , there is a continuum of school-wide, classroom and individual supports to sustain a positive learning environment and improve the well-being of the children. In addition, all staff continues to develop the ability of teachers, paraprofessionals and staff to respond to students’ social and emotional developmental needs. The staff will continue to learn various ways to meet the specific, ever changing needs of individual students while maintaining a positive, supportive and safe environment. Based on our school survey we have identified that the area of Student Social and Emotional Health, is an area of strength for our school. Our intention is to increase positive social skills and our PBIS and Respect for All Initiative. This initiative has helped us to create a positive learning environment for our students. We have ensured that our students’ social/emotional, as well as academic needs are met, by way of monthly Instructional Support Team (IST), Response to Intervention (RTI) Team and School Implementation Team (SIT) meetings, which are designed to focus on individual student’s academic and social needs. This year, we will continue to have our monthly SIT and RTI meetings to determine social/emotional and academic supports needed for our students, but in addition, we will give special attention to incorporating PBIS multiple data points to track students’ improvement both academically, as well as socially and emotionally. Furthermore, the 2018-19 CEP 21  administrative team will encourage and support the use of Respect for All points or PBIS points, behavior sheets (as needed) and academic data by teachers to help close the achievement gap. In addition, this year the school will continue to develop the ability of teachers, paraprofessionals, and staff to respond to students' social emotional developmental needs. The staff will continue to learn various ways to meet the specific, ever changing needs of individual students while maintaining a positive , supportive, and safe environment. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. During the school year 2018-19, 100% of our teachers will have 100% of our students follow the criteria in our PBIS matrix core values and based on the OORS data there will be a measured 3% reduction in our school infractions. 2018-19 CEP 22  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? The school RTI Team, SIT Team, Instructional Team, School Social Worker, School Psychologist, administrators, and all classroom teachers will be key personnel to support in implementing a supportive environment. Teachers and paraprofessionals will continue to participate in professional development opportunities to meet students' academic, social, and emotional needs throughout the year. Whole School September 2018 – June 2019 These professional development sessions will continue during Teacher Team meetings, Tuesday Professional Learning sessions, special education meetings, one-to-one support sessions, teacher mentoring, and our outside workshops. Topics will include but are not limited to : Specially Designed Instruction, PBIS, FBAs, BIPs, Quality IEPs, RTI Differentiation, De-Escalation, and crisis intervention techniques. Paraprofessionals will continue to be supported in the collection, analysis of data and behavior modification strategies and techniques. Students will participate in assemblies and receive recognition through rewards and compliments. 1) As we continue to build students’ social and emotional health, we have designated monthly themes to heighten students’ awareness of positive social skills and behaviors. Lessons will be taught by our Conflict Resolution Specialist with special attention to the following monthly themes: ● September: Responsibility ● October: Respect & Discipline ● November: Teamwork ● December: Service ● January: Gratitude ● February: Excellence 2018-19 CEP 23  ● March: Integrity ● April: Determination ● May: Courage ● June: Patience Our school PBIS Committee will acknowledge students for random acts of kindness and reflective behaviors that support monthly themes. 2) A social emotional support group and middle school advisory will be created to provide counseling support for at risk students. The following themes will be discussed: ● Advisory groups will be created in the middle school which will touch upon topics such as social awareness, organization/study skills, self-esteem, and social responsibility. We will conduct a monthly theme topic in which the restorative circle structures will be implemented in order for our students to meet the school vision by preparing them to be college and career ready. We will hold a college panel and a high school panel for our students to help them prepare for their journey into high school. Further development of after school clubs such as: ● Sports (Boys and Girls) ● Theater club ● Music club (Midori and Friends) ● Physical Education Club ● Academic Intervention After school and Saturday Programs The RTI/SIT team, and Resource Room/SETSS teachers will meet on a weekly basis to look at student progress and determine next steps based on instructional implications. They will also share resources in order to collaborate best teaching methods to support students that are ELLs and students with special needs. Teachers To encourage parent participation in an effort to meet this goal, a monthly parent calendar outlines all upcoming parent activities. During the school year, parent workshops will be given on the topic of conflict resolution as well as workshops on the topic of meeting the social and/or emotional needs of your child. In addition, we will host a newcomer ELL meeting for parents in order to provide orientation regarding our school community All parents, Teachers, Guidance Counselor, and Parent Coordinator September 2018 – June 2019 September 2018 – June 2019 The school RTI Team, SIT Team, Instructional Team, School Social Worker, The school RTI Team, SIT Team, Instructional Team, School Social Worker, School Psychologist, and administrators. 2018-19 CEP 24 and other available resources. Our parents will be invited to attend the College and High School Panel for our middle school students, as well as the middle school Science/Social Studies Exit Project Presentations. Teachers, Guidance Counselor and Parent Coordinator will provide information sessions and workshops to support their child's academic, social, emotional, and health needs throughout the year. School aides will participate in monthly meetings of the PBIS Committee and the social emotional readiness skills training offered by the guidance counselor during the professional learning cycle. School aides September 2018 – June 2019 School aide Guidance Counselor 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Based on the Parents' needs assessment survey and in meeting with the school leadership team, we determine the parent workshops to support our families.  The ENL teacher along with the Parent Coordinator, coach and other teachers facilitate workshops pertaining  to ENL parents' issues. In response, two calendars are developed to provide parents with monthly instructional-based workshops and life skills workshops.  Parents are invited to all celebratory events at the school: i.e. Writers' Café in-class celebrations and concerts (our school's cultural arts presentations).  Parents are encouraged to join the School Leadership Team, Parent Teacher Association and the School Volunteer Committee. Information is provided on our bilingual school website. In addition, flyers and memos are sent home.  Parents are invited to Principal-Family Breakfast meetings every other month.   Written communication is provided in Spanish and English.  Our Parent Coordinator maintains a chart that records parental involvement at the P.T.A. meetings, conferences, celebratory events and miscellaneous school activities.  Parents have been invited to reflect with SLT on ways in which to improve attendance and punctuality at the school, and an attendance plan has been developed.  The P.T.A. Executive Board meets with the Principal on a monthly basis to discuss activities and to address school issues.  The Parent Coordinator, the Coordinator of Student Support and the School-based Instructional Support Team are available to work with families in order to become collaborative partners in the school. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The budget and resource alignment in order to address these needs will come from Title I, Fair Student Funding, and Title III funding. 2018-19 CEP 25  Human Resources: (Title I, Title III, and Fair Student Funding)  School Social Worker  Teachers  Counselors  School-Based Support Team  Administrators  RTI Team  PBIS Team/Committee  Administrative Assistant/School aides, Educational Assistants Instructional Resources: (Title 1, Fair Student Funding)  PBIS Binder Resources Anti-bullying Curriculum  Morningside Center Character Curriculum  Advisory Resources Scheduling Adjustments: (Fair Student Funding)  ● ●  Embedded advisory and conflict resolution periods to support students  ● ●  Peer mentoring time during all lunch periods  Response to Intervention Team Meetings, Instructional Support Team Meetings, SIT Meetings Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. In February 2019, the school will monitor the number of professional development sessions dedicated to social emotional/academic growth based on the decrease of our OORs reporting to ensure progress is being made toward a goal of a 1% decrease by midyear. By February 2019, at least 3 professional development sessions will be conducted to support all staff members in helping meet students' social/emotional and academic growth. 2018-19 CEP 26  In addition: The PBIS team will meet on a weekly basis to track data for positive behavior. There will be a mid-point benchmark check during the month of October 2018. ● Weekly monitoring of at risk students and a 3% decrease in the use of student success sheets; ● Pre and post survey results; ● Monitoring student progress of all students to ensure at least 1⁄2 year of growth by the end of the year; ● The school Principal, Assistant Principal, instructional coach, ENL, RTI and SETSS/Resource Room teachers will participate in the SIT team. We will conduct weekly/monthly/cyclical RTI meetings. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. In order to assess our progress, we will analyze our ATS attendance reports and Parent Workshop evaluation forms, Advance observations, OORS reports, academic and personal behaviors on the report cards and the Progress Report Card. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 27  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Our school's strengths as areas of celebration based on the Quality Review rubric are: * School and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized around annual, unit and daily lesson plans that address student goals and needs. * Teachers provide coherent and appropriately aligned Common Core learning standards based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. * Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by using a variety of summative and formative data sources. On the school survey, teachers report a very high level of satisfaction, such as 90%, in working with each other to improve instructional practices and in satisfaction of working productively with a colleague. An area that needs to be currently addressed based on the school survey is continuing to determine the role of the educational assistants. Currently, our structures and activities that inform professional collaborations are strong. Teacher teams are established in each grade and in other pertinent areas that reach across grades such as the SIT Team, RTI team, Math Committees (middle and upper grades), ELA committee, ENL Team and Vertical Teams. Professional Inquiry learning time on Monday is used for collaboration with teacher teams across grades. In order to promote engagement, discussion, and independence for all learners our teachers are currently participating in a series of workshops facilitated by our coach and lead teachers to promote accountable talk, academic rigor through close reading, and ENL language objectives. This year we will be using the book entitled "Advanced Literacy" as a professional resource, as well as the Comprehension Tool Kit, Ralph Fletcher's writing resource, strategies that work, the Revision Tool Box, and we will implement the "DATAWISE" initiative as a resource. The teacher teams will be setting 8 week cycle goals. The RTI team will continue to focus on meeting the needs of identified students who require an alternate learning plan. The RTI team follows the medical rounds model for a descriptive review of the child protocol. Teachers share the specific challenge and strategies they have tried. The team includes administrators and service providers that provide teachers with a plan to address these specific challenges. Evidence that teams are making a difference can be noted in the following:  􏰁 Adjustment and adapting of unit plans based on student data 2018-19 CEP 28  􏰁 Curriculum coherence that is aligned to the CCLS across all grades  􏰁 Distributive leadership is evident with each team having identified a lead facilitator who facilitates each session  and informs administration of team result, progress, etc.   An area for ongoing focus in order to maintain the collaboration of teachers is to:  􏰁 Continue looking at baseline student work to identify strengths and gaps through use of protocols such as the “Consultancy Protocol” and the “Analysis of Student Work Protocol”.  􏰁 Giving student tasks that are informed by that evidence, tasks that simultaneously further learning and provide  ongoing formative assessments for that learning;  􏰁 Model middle school students recite daily affirmation during morning line up.  􏰁 Using formative assessments information to make instructional decisions day by day that lead to students’  progress;  􏰁 Using the student data to critique and improve curriculum and pedagogy  􏰁 Scoring culminating student work using rubric tied to common core standards * Using resulting information on what standards students have and have not met to plan subsequent module and  unit and to revise curriculum to better ensure success the next time it is used. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. During the 2018-19 school year and by June 2019, 100 % of all teachers will participate in teacher inquiry and teacher round process to strengthen the instructional core in writing measured by a 10% increase on the NYC Written End of Year performance task assessments. 2018-19 CEP 29  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teacher teams conduct the action research connected to Inquiry Work looking at student work using protocol, analyze data, and develop an action plan, adjust instruction, and track student data. All Students September 2018 – June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, Teachers, Staff, ULIT coaches Teacher teams will also continue designing literacy tasks through LDC (Literacy Design Collaborative). During this time they will: Administration will analyze and provide feedback to teacher teams and teams will also reflect on their collaboration skills based on the Analysis of Student work Protocol. We have developed a professional learning plan that addresses the instructional shifts, Danielson Domain, teacher impact, and student impact. To support trust and collaboration, teacher teams will develop common assessments aligned to Measures of Student Learning (MOSL) in the area of writing. The resulting student work will be assessed using the Generation Ready Writing Rubric and the MOSL rubric. Scaffolds for English Language Learners and students with disabilities in the form of sentence starters, and other support documents will be implemented. Data from these assessments will be analyzed to plan next steps for instruction. ● Analysis and use of formative assessments to plan for small groups; ● Assessing the quality of questioning and discussion during your lesson to improve accountable talk; ● Using rubrics to analyze student work and help students develop targets for improvements; ● Using rubrics to analyze and plan lessons to build writing skills and stamina; ● Using word study assessments, "Fundations" data analysis to plan gaps K-2; 2018-19 CEP 30  ● Reflecting, revising and refining calendars and units We will continue to build a culture of school wide collaboration through our frequent meeting opportunities such as: Whole School Teachers have also been receiving training for "Making Thinking Visible" through the use of Thinking Maps. We have been able to build capacity and learn how to become trainers of Thinking Maps instruction to help increase student critical thinking skills. September 2018 – June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, teachers, staff, ULIT coach ● Monday Professional Development ● Tuesday Professional Learning Opportunity ● Grade Level Meetings ● ELA and Math Committees ● LAB Sites (Teacher and Coach Lead) We continue to survey teachers and respond to teacher needs. In addition, we are building capacity by way of our professional development team and teachers leading hot topics. Our Japanese lesson study has provided teachers with an opportunity to engage in collaborative lesson planning in a risk free environment and to build best practices. Teacher Teams will use the chancellors inter-visitation schedule resource to help strengthen the teacher team work and we will also launch the Data Wise initiative to deepen our understanding of being stronger data practitioners. Whole School September 2018 – June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, teachers, staff, ULIT Coach Lesson plans will provide multiple entry points of entry for groups of students to promote high levels of student engagement and inquiry. School and class libraries are fully furnished with multiple levels and genres of books to engage students. For grades K to 2 students participate in the Fundations Intervention program. Technology programs (i-Ready, and MyOn) provide interventions and enrichment for all students. Regular parent outreach meetings to assist parents in understanding the CCLS standards and assessments and how to monitor their child's progress and support their children with strategies at home. September 2018 – June 2019 Parents of ELLs, SWDs and high need students Classroom teachers, parent coordinator, PA, Support Personnel, ULIT coach and school leaders 2018-19 CEP 31  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. In order to engage school families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and Strategies to promote teacher-parent collaborations and support their children at home, we will hold parent workshops and family orientations sharing our chancellor's goals in the area of having strong teacher collaborations, strong families and community ties. The school will also share the NYS ELA, Math, and Science Data with parents so that may see if there has been school progress and also to inform them of the areas of needs. Teachers will also be invited to hold the parent workshops during parent engagement time to share strategies with the families that they may try at home to help their child improve their academic progress. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 1. We will use our strong schools communities to funds & Vision for school improvement to help us fund for consulting services and model teachers programming in order to provide the staff to deepen engage in professional development with the district, ULIT coach, and outside consultants. 2. Per diem funds will be used to hire substitute teachers whenever teachers attend professional development. In addition, in order to meet needs for human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments, the teachers will be documenting in their parent communication binders how they reached out and embedded the parents into the curriculum. Parent leaders will be selected to also support with the building capacity framework in order to build trust and form a collaborative school environment. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. On going assessment using the Fountas and Pinell running records will provide data to progress monitor the reading progress of all students. This will allow us to measure the rigorous framework to see if there is an increase in reading comprehension. The mid point for testing 100% of students reading levels will take place during February 2019. Teacher teams will determine if 60% of all students made a 70% progress on the Fountas and Pinell by January 2018 midpoint benchmark compared to the October 2018 baseline results to measure progress towards student outcomes and school performance. If benchmark is not achieved, teacher teams will refine and revise the curriculum and instructional practices accordingly. 2018-19 CEP 32  1. During October 2018, Mid-year and June analysis of NYC Written assessments, with data reviews across our CCLS aligned curriculum to measure a minimum of one level of progress in the writing traits. 2-The Mid-point benchmark will take place in February 2019 and the Analysis of student progress forms will be collected from teacher team and professional development sessions with a teacher professional development survey responses. 3-Analysis of teacher units to ensure multiple entry points and alignment of the CCLS as a result of the use of data to work plan and revise addressing the needs of the students in writing. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Our Mid-year data based on our school writing baselines, Fundations for grades K to 2, Grades 3 to 8 will have be tested in the fall and in the spring NYC Written Performance assessments. Students will also be tested in the fall, winter, and spring by using Fountas and Pinell reading assessments, will indicate comparable growth to 2017-2018 data results in reading comprehension. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 33  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Our school strengths based on the Quality Review rubric are: *Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital resources. * The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district annual performance review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. We will focus on meeting the domains in the MPPR regarding culture. Based on our school visit feedback, the principal and the assistant principal work together to norm practices to implement quality feedback based on the Danielson Domain components. An area of focus is that the school needs to improve in checking for understanding. The teachers will be provided with opportunities to participate in instructional rounds and low inference observations to help each other improve in their teaching practice. Both the principal and the assistant principal will meet with the school math, ELA, and generation ready coaches to implement the school's instructional vision based on data driven and Quality Review feedback. Based on Advance data the school will continue to strengthen teacher practices under Domain 3. Our schools strengths includes the following: 􏰁 Increased student outcomes in year both the NYS ELA and Math 􏰁 The school has been chosen to participate in the Learning Partners program which consists of two cycles that address the problems of practice in order to address the Chancelllor's new initiatives such as, Accelerate Learning & Instruction, Partner with communities, develop people, and Adance 􏰁 Vertical Teacher Teams that will develop SMART Goals * The school will also introduce Thinking Maps in order to deepen critical thinking skills in all academic areas and social/emotional skills As identified in our Quality Review the area for improvement was noted as follows: 􏰁 Develop we need to improve how we conduct formative assessments and embed checks for understanding to ensure and keep track of how students master the content in all areas. In addition, based on our superintendents' feedback we need to improve in the area of 1.2, 2.2, and 5.1. We want the teacher pedagogy to deepen from a coherent set of beliefs about how students learn best that is informed by the instructional shifts and Danielson 2018-19 CEP 34  Framework for Teaching, aligned to the curricula, engaging, and meets the needs of all learners so that all students produced meaningful work products (1.2) The school leader and other school administrator will continue to monitor the plan for observing teachers and use observation and other measures of teacher effectiveness to assign/reassign, counsel, and provide on going targeted professional development opportunities in multiple formats (e.g., coaching, mentoring, peer support) to staff. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Throughout the school year 2018-2019, 100% of teachers will receive professional development to deepen their understanding of Advanced Literacy goals leading to at least 3% student progress increase on the NYS ELA State test. 2018-19 CEP 35  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). On-going Professional Learning every week for Administration and staff in utilizing as well as planning with Danielson Framework, observing teachers giving actionable feedback. School leaders will continue to use ADVANCE to examine the trends of highly effective, effective, and developing teacher practices and make programmatic and professional development decisions and adjustments to improve teacher planning and practice over 4 cycles. Teachers will meet with administrators regularly after every observation and to year to develop, monitor and evaluate goals and objectives set during the beginning of the year. Teachers set goals in the beginning of the year and also focus on aligning their goals.In order to support parents, we will provide ongoing workshops on ENL strategies and methodologies. The parent workshops will be alternately facilitated by the ENL teachers and they will take place once a month. The focus of these workshops will be on providing parents with skills and tools to use English in every day situations, as well as various ways of supporting their children's learning. The parent workshops will include topics such as, supporting ELLs with math through ENL strategies, etc, Making sense of the Common Core Learning Standards and how they affect our ELLs. Our parent coordinator, will provide oral translation during workshops as well as provide written translation in Spanish. Languages such as Bengali will be translated for parents using google translator. Monthly and weekly learning walks will take place, where teachers may participate to build capacity and enhance instructional practices. A highlight and sharing of best practices will take place to highlight student progress and also to allow teachers to acknowledge their colleagues. This will also serve to encourage teachers to seek out opportunities to advance their own learning. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All staff September 2018 – June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, Teachers, Staff All staff September 2018 – June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, Teachers, Staff All staff September 2018 – June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, Teachers, Staff 2018-19 CEP 36 All Staff September 2018 – June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, Teachers, Staff The Advanced Literacy ENL strategies that will be put into place to address the needs of English Language Learners, students with disabilities, and other high need student groups will include using semantic webbing and graphic organizers in order to scaffold the learning by presenting through visual learning representations. We will also connect our goals to our district model where we are embedding strategies for the 21st century. The school has examined the data and revised their Advanced Literacy based goals to go accordingly to help strengthen the instructional core. Teachers will work on addressing the five hallmarks from the Advanced Literacy. Teachers will also embed realia in order to bring real life experience learning in the curriculum. In addition, we will use the Gist Model for grades 3 to 8 in order help students to summarize by using key vocabulary words. Students will also be able to learn how to use strategies such as reader's theatre, get the picture, direct listening thinking activity, think aloud, think along, and think alone based on the teacher professional resource book called Comprehension and English Language Learners. In addition, regular parent outreach meetings will continue to be held to assist parents in understanding the CCLS; inform them of their child's progress; and provide parents with strategies to support their child at home. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. For the framework of supportive schools we have invited our mentor from the NYC Thrives programs to continue to provide staff and families with workshops on mental health and dealing with stress as well. Our school leadership will also learn more about our positive intervention systems to help our students learn how to problem solve when there is need for conflict resolution. In addition, the principal and the assistant principal will be holding workshops with the families to share the school instructional goals and will also inform the families the quality review indicators that the school needs to meet in order to hold effective and best practices. Families will be given an overview of what are the the concepts entailed in order to meet the frameworks for great schools in the area of effective leadership and rigorous instruction. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 1. We will use our resources such as the grant we received for the Arts to create a supportive environment for students and families connected to the arts and literacy. 2. Through our learning partners program initiative we will be able to fund model and learning partners teachers to provide or deepen the training in order to have a culturally responsive school. 2018-19 CEP 37  3. There will be time created in our school schedule for teacher teams to meet collaboratively during the day planning time for after school. 4. Per diem funds will be used to hire substitute teachers whenever teachers attend professional development. The budget and resource alignment for the human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments in order to hold the Teacher Team Inquiry Protocol Professional Development. This will deepen the work through the teacher collaboration capacity framework element. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February, 2019, administration will review the teacher MOTP as per Advance Data Reports and analyze results and use implications to guide teacher professional learning and provide actionable feedback specific to engage students in learning. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Professional Development logs as well as monthly staff meetings will be used to review on going professional development. Teachers will also meet with administration regularly through the year including their beginning of year goal setting conference, mid year review, end of year review, after each observation, and through regular planning conferences to ensure these goals are being met. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 38  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Our school's strength based on our NYS ELA and Math test scores and school Quality Guide: We have a strength in teachers' collaborating with one another. In the 2018 school snapshot, 91% of parents felt that the school offers a wide enough variety of courses, extracurricular activities and services. Based on the School Survey reports and in connection with the Frameworks for Great Schools, we did well in Rigorous instruction, Collaborative Teachers and Effective School Leadership. Some examples are the following: 􏰁 Recognition of students who show exemplary progress in any of the following areas: academic, behavior, and social. Students are recognized for their best academic efforts during Writers' Café, Readers' Café, Mathematics Café and Summer Independent Project Presentations. 􏰁 School culture diversity goals: classroom discussion, accountable talk and building of the writing stamina. 􏰁 “Respect for All” campaign and our PBIS School Matrix so that students may learn about important ethical values such as, responsibility, respect, integrity, service and teamwork. 􏰁 Partnership with Midori and Friends - they provide a music enrichment program for student engagement. 􏰁 Communicating with families: We provided parents with the following: Parent Handbook, Student Handbook, Principal Family meetings, SLT meetings, Parent teacher conferences, School Open houses, School Events to promote reading, math, writing and other content areas. An area that the school will focus on enhancing this year is:  The school will work on improving in Danielson 3D and the use of data based on formative assessments.  We will continue to engage our students as they move forward to being college ready based on middle school initiative funding our "I Will Graduate" program. In addition, we will continue foster high expectations for our students.  Based on the school survey, parents are reporting that they are being well informed about academic and multicultural events throughout the school year; however, we would like to continue to foster more programs to allow for an increase in parent participation. The workshops we provide will inform of the new Generation Standards, Advanced Literacies, and the Chancellor's new initiatives such as, Accelerate Learning and Instruction, partner with communities, develop people, and Advance Equity Now (Equity and Excellence for All).  Based on the Frameworks for Great schools and Citywide Expectations, we will continue to establish a culture for learning that communicates high expectations for students and families that emphasize progress towards college and career readiness. 2018-19 CEP 39   We need to continue to provide our students with educational trips in order to motivate their participation towards their high school and college career readiness.  We also would like for our teachers in middle school to participate in an advisory in order to mentor students by providing them with college and career readiness as well as social awareness responsibility skills. We have established and continue to maintain strong partnerships with families and community members, and continue to provide a variety of support for parents such as: - We continue working in partnership with THRIVE NYC to support staff and students' social and emotional developmental health. We maintain partnerships with : Midori and Friends, Puppetry Practice, and Dreamyards. - We continue to inform sessions and workshops for Parents and Families on a monthly basis to engage parents and families on every aspect of school life. The monthly information sessions/workshops are facilitated by the Parent Coordinator, Guidance Counselor, Teachers and School Nurse. Some of the topics are: Bullying, The Discipline Code, Students in Temporary Housing, English Language Learners, and Nutrition. - The school will share data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school community members centered on student learning needs and successes. It will also encourage and empower families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their children. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Throughout the 2018-2019 school year and by June 2019, there will be 10% increase in parent participation in workshops and family orientation meetings that emphasize progress towards college and career readiness for all students as measured by attendance records. 2018-19 CEP 40 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All Staff September 2018 – June 2019 Administrators, Teachers, talent Coach, Consultants All Staff September 2018 – June 2019 Administrators, Teachers, talent Coach, Consultants Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). 􏰁 Assemblies in which students are commended for academic success on Summer Independent Projects, Published writing work during Writers' Café, math rigorous tasks during Math Café, and writing about the reading during Reader’s Café will continue to be celebrations to highlight our best authentic student work. We will also continue to hold monthly student portfolio celebrations where parents will be invited to join us. 􏰁 SLT collaborates with the school to set instructional goals and action plans towards college and career readiness. 􏰁 An active Parent Teacher Association that meets monthly. 􏰁 Vertical Teacher Teams plan parent workshops   based on the needs of their classes. In order to continue to increase parental involvement and engagement, parent surveys and Title I meetings are used to engage parents. Parents are invited monthly to various workshops to address student academic and social and/or emotional needs as well as life skills such as: ● Good Samaritans workshop for suicide prevention ● Breast cancer awareness ● Health and nutrition awareness ● Homework Help ● Developing Reading and Writing Habits at home ● Looking at Student Portfolios and student progress ● Financial Workshops for Parents and students Ridgewood Bank ● ESL Workshops for Parents 2018-19 CEP 41  ● Computer Classes for parents ● PBIS Workshops ● Book of the Month ● iReady workshops for parents to support students with Reading and Math skills ● College and career readiness lessons and parent workshops will be taught by teachers in grade appropriate lessons or all students including English Language Learners as well as Students with Disabilities. ● Descriptive review meetings are held to work with families to ensure that the current academic and social supports are helping students at risk. In order to promote trust, students, including those in high need sub-groups, will be provided with a log in account into our Engrade online grading system. Students will be able to track their progress in class over time and develop an understanding of factors to improve their grades. Informing parents about students social awareness skills through PBIS and Respect for All incentives initiatives implemented throughout the year. Focusing on setting a positive nurturing environment that will be achieved by way of our parent workshops, parent newsletter, and parent teacher meetings to ensure that parents are well informed and feel welcomed and valued as partners in this work. In addition, we will build trusting relationships with parents by sharing student progress, and embedding parents within the curriculum. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement All Staff September 2018 – June 2019 Administrators, Teachers, talent Coach, Consultants If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. The school will support families in maintaining strong community ties and will keep families informed through school newsletters and family letters sent home. The school Guidance Counselor, the RTI and SIT Team will also hold meetings to support families with students that may be at risk. Families will also take part in family orientations, school open houses, and students will hold "Student-Led" conferences in order to build strong family ties and have an impact on the school vision and mission. We would like to continue to build the participation of our families during our parent workshops, parent conferences and school visits. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The budget and resource alignment that will be used for the following will be from Fair Student Funding, Title I and Title III: 2018-19 CEP 42  1. Human resources: Parent Coordinator, Coaches, Classroom Teachers, and Administrators. 2. Instructional Resources: Smart Board, laptops, Curriculum Resources, Children’s Literature 3. Community Organizations: New York Life, Good Samaritans, NYFD, Ridgewood Bank Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 1) Teacher Parent Workshops Parent Participation in student work celebrations September 2018 to June 2019 2) Collection of Parent Workshop Agendas 3) Parent Needs Assessment Survey Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Monthly logs, as well as meetings will be used to review and measure progress made in school quality guide and learning environment survey. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 43  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Students scoring level 2 on the NYS ELA Exam or Below level as determined by school wide assessments Students scoring level 2 on the NYS Math Exam or Below level as determined by school wide assessments Students scoring level 2 on the NYS Science Exam or Below level as determined by school wide assessments Students scoring level 2 on the Social Studies Assessments Exam or Below level as determined by school wide assessments Students identified as in need of at-risk services by school staff, students with family crisis, etc. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Push-in during Alternating ELA week, After school tutorial for students scoring level 2 Push-in during Alternating Math week, After school tutorial for students scoring level 2 Integrated into Core knowledge in ELA in lower grades, also in Expeditionary learning for upper grades Integrated into Core knowledge in ELA in lower grades, also in Expeditionary learning for upper grades Psychologist, guidance counselor, and social worker provides counseling, restorative circles, and advisory to at risk students in grades K-8 Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Small group, one-to- one, tutoring During school day and/or after school Small group, one-to- one, tutoring During school day and/or after school Small group, one-to- one, tutoring During school day and/or after school Small group, one-to- one, tutoring During school day and/or after school Small group, one-to- one, tutoring During school day and/or after school 2018-19 CEP 44  2018-19 CEP 45  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 38 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Currently, we are developing a middle school advisory where our school counselor sits on the team. Through the middle school initiative funding we received, we will continue to provide students with college readiness and college access programming through the funding of the "I Will Graduate" program. In addition, we will participate in the learning partners programming and fund teacher training to learn more about Advancing Equity Now. Through arts instruction funding, students will be exposed to more understanding of New York and United States history, which includes an artist residency that will promote critical thinking and creative expression with a focus on social studies literature immersion. We also analyze our school survey in order to ensure that we are maintaining a supportive environment and trust. In addition to providing students with necessary school supplies, such as notebooks and backpacks, we work with our PTA and Parent Coordinator to ensure students have warm and appropriate clothes and coats through clothes drives and coat programs as well as provide the families with discounted vouchers and gift certificates, through our neighborhood partnership with the Midori and friends to provide students with enrichment skills, for school uniforms. We also provide them with counseling services through our guidance department and through our community programs and Parent Coordinator we give them resources to find permanent housing. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 46  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 CEP 47  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. We provide strategies and support to seek to retain and enhance their pedagogy through on-going support and professional development based on the identified academic needs of their students, as well as needs they identify for their own professional growth and development. We have a hiring committee that is part of a panel that interviews each candidate and each candidate is scored by a rubric in order to ensure that the rubric is aligned to our school's vision and mission. Each candidate's references, employee history and certifications will be checked. All hired educators will demonstrate mastery in the subject area that they are teaching in. They have a deep understanding of the real-world application and its impact on students from K to 8. All teachers will be provided with a Lab School Handbook outlining all school policies, systems, professional learning norms and protocol. Throughout the school year, teachers will participate in ongoing Professional Development through whole group, differentiated sessions, "lunch and learns", study groups, as well as sessions outside of the school facilitated by expert consultants in the field. Teachers new to the profession will have the additional support of a mentor that will be assigned to them by administration. Mentors will log and submit the amount of time they work with their mentee. As a professional learning norm, teachers will receive feedback following daily learning walks conducted by school leaders and teacher team leaders. Teachers will receive minutes describing the highlights of the lesson and/or areas of concern with next steps. Professional support and guidance to ensure highly qualified teachers will be at the core of our educational plan. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Our school will provide differentiated professional development that involves vertical planning during teacher team sessions. Teachers in different vertical teams will meet for addressing student instruction in the area of ELA, Math, and other content areas. Each teacher team will have different members such as a facilitator in order to build capacity. There will be agendas for each team, a target population, and a team goal in order to address the implications for instruction based on data driven needs and in order to differentiate the professional learning. Teacher teams will share out their findings during the mid-point of the year in January. P.S./M.S. 315 is committed to building capacity by having strong teacher collaborations and family school ties. We have a hiring committee and we have a hiring rubric to help us hire qualified teachers for our school. Given that research indicates that teacher quality 2018-19 CEP 48  is the single most powerful influence on student achievement, it is essential to ensure that teachers are provided with ongoing, high quality professional development to sustain and enhance their practice. Indeed, teacher professional development is an essential element of comprehensive school improvement. The professional development needs of other members of school community, including administrators and support personnel, must also be addressed to ensure a focus on continuous learning and to create the conditions necessary for closing the achievement gap and improving the achievement of all students. These standards provide guidance for achieving high quality professional development planning, design, delivery and assessment, and should serve as a foundation for all professional development in our schools. 􏰁 Designing Professional Development: Professional development design is based on data; it is derived from the experience, expertise and needs of the recipients; reflects best practices in sustained job-embedded learning; and incorporates knowledge of how adults learn. 􏰁 Content Knowledge and Quality Teaching: Professional development expands educators’ content knowledge and the knowledge and skills necessary to provide developmentally appropriate instructional strategies and assess student progress. 􏰁 Research-based Professional Learning: Professional development is research-based and provides educators with opportunities to analyze, apply and engage in research. 􏰁 Collaboration: Professional development ensures that educators have the knowledge, skill and opportunity to collaborate in a respectful and trusting environment. 􏰁 Diverse Learning: Professional development ensures that educators have the knowledge and skills to meet the diverse learning needs of all students. 􏰁 Student Learning Environments: Professional development ensures that educators are able to create safe, secure, supportive, and equitable learning environments for all students. 􏰁 Parent, Family and Community Engagement: Professional development ensures that educators have the knowledge, skills, and opportunity to engage and collaborate with parents, families, and other community members as active partners in children’s education. The school will develop and follow a year long Professional Learning Plan, in which coaches and lead teachers have participated in designing it. We will provide a differentiated professional development based on the needs of our students, feedback from PPO visits, and Quality Review feedback. Currently, we have various vertical planning teams that target Reading in Early Literacy, Math in Upper Grades, Math in Early Grades, Science Data Tracking/Planning, Enrichment Program Planning, Primary Data Team, Response to Intervention Team, School Intervention Team, PBIS Team, ENL Team, Mentoring Team, and teachers that are planning for curriculum. As a school we are addressing our Quality Review, School Visits and School Feedback. Furthermore, we would like to focus on three main instructional goals based on the feedback we were given, which are the following: 1. To Increase student engagement through writing about reading and math; 2. To Increase Academic Rigor through teacher and student questioning (1.2); 3. To increase checks for understanding through action research data analysis (2.2 ); 2018-19 CEP 49  4. To improve in the QR area of 5.1. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). Currently, P.S./M.S. 315 does not have a Pre-Kindergarten; however, throughout the year, we hold parent workshops to support parents with ideas for literacy development, and parents are also invited to attend to learn how to support their children in other content areas. Parents are also invited to go to trips based on the Science Urban Advantage Program. Also, we invite parents to attend events where they can see the work that is expected from students based on the CCLS for Kindergarten. We also hold kindergarten parent orientation workshops to provide parents with an awareness and information regarding Kindergarten academic learning. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Our school has developed a PBIS (Positive Behavior Intervention Team), RTI Team, and an SIT Team, where we conduct descriptive review processes so that we are addressing the needs of the whole child. The teams will meet once a week on a weekly basis. We will also be inviting parents to join us during their child's whole study process. We will be providing our staff professional development on learning more about the restorative processes. Our school Guidance Counselor will conduct parent workshops and teacher training on de-escalation process. We will also be sending staff to training on learning more regarding the Respect for All Program. We hold Kindergarten Orientation Workshops and Family Curriculum Open House Nights to help provide our parents with information on helping our children engage in a supportive environment. We will have agendas, resources for parents and teachers to conduct these workshops. Our teachers will also be participating in a Book Club to enhance their knowledge around the area of having a Culturally Responsive Pedagogy. 2018-19 CEP 50  4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Title I Part A (Basic) Federal Title II, Part A Federal Title III, Part A Federal Title III, Immigrant Federal 263,370.00 88,536.00 12,366.00 45,106.00 Tax Levy (FSF) Local 1,627,716.00 X X X x X Column B Section Reference(s) After School student programs, Saturday School programs, Enrichment programs Teachers' salaries Puppetry in Practice for ELLs, LEP, translation Services After school services, student literature, student programs for language acquisition After school tutoring, curriculum planning, student instructional books, instructional supplies, instructional materials. 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, 2018-19 CEP 51  State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  2018-19 CEP 52   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 53  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. 10x315, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. 10x315 will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format and languages that parents can understand; 2018-19 CEP 54  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community. Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents and enhance the school’s Title I Program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I Program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussions and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills; understanding educational accountability; grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State Accountability System, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment and Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I Program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); 2018-19 CEP 55  ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address students' academic needs and what parents can do to help. Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation in School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) 10x315, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; 2018-19 CEP 56  ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned with the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA). I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting Parent-Teacher Conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I Program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in their child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I Programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year. Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with Limited English Speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences. 2018-19 CEP 57  Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments, and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs. Parents/Guardians responsibilities are: II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; 2018-19 CEP 58  ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child. Students' Responsibilities are: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 59 Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components: 1. 2. 3. The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers. Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. 1. 2. 3. 4. High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” 1. Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences. Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. 1. These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP 60  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the · · · · · · rationale subgroups and grade levels of students to be served schedule and duration language of instruction # and types of certified teachers types of materials Begin description here: We are planning to provide an ENL after-school Program for 20 of our English Language Learners. The program will begin in the beginning of October 2018 and it will run through the end of January 2019 in the following manner: Our 4th and 5th grade ELLs will be served every Wednesdays and Thursdays from 2:40PM to 4:00PM. In both of these grades, we have mostly expanding proficiency level ELLs with Fountas & Pinnell (F&P) reading levels ranging from P to S. Our 2017 NYSESLAT, Spring 2018 ELL Periodic Assessment, Spring 2018 ELA Benchmark, i-Ready and F&P data show that these selected ELLs need further support in the area of developing the necessary literacy skills to access grade-level complex text in order to find, use and analyze text evidence. In particular, they need to develop and apply their close reading skills in the areas of English language arts. Our ENL certified teacher, Ms. Yvette Ghoughassian will serve our ELLs in this after-school program. She will ensure that all students in this direct instruction program receive language development support each time the program meets. During this After-School Program, our ELLs will receive instruction in reference to explorations of complex text in the areas of English language arts and social studies through ENL strategies and methodologies. They will be able to develop their language, literacy, and content-area skills and concepts through authentic texts and Common Core Exemplars. Materials: We will use Common Core ELA Short Reads Text Evidence Set from Benchmark Education. This resource will assist our ELLs with developing the following skills: - Annotating complex text, which will be explicitly taught and effectively practiced; - Collaborative conversations that will develop understanding and clarify thinking; - Writing to sources that will enable students to find, use, analyze and create evidence-based answers. The Topic Sets include Mini-lessons, Lexile-leveled passages, and questions match the PARCC and SB formats: · · · · Explicit lessons focus on finding and using text evidence. Short passages are linked to key standards, skills, and genres. Questions include two-part formats and constructed response. Consumable books enable students to develop personal resources for review before tests. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. · · · · · rationale teachers to receive training schedule and duration topics to be covered name of provider 2018-19 CEP 61  Part C: Professional Development Begin description here: Title III funds will be used for a teacher study group, which will be open to all staff members based on a per-session arrangement. The staff members that will be participating in the study group are Ms. Ruth Chea Duran and Ms. Yvette Ghoughassian at no cost to Title III. Our focus will be to engage our ELLs in developing their academic vocabulary as well as their advanced literacy skills in order to be able to read complex texts and to be more prepared for the challenges of the State Common Core Standards. Our plan is to study a professional book called, TEACHING ADVANCED LITERACY SKILLS – A Guide for Leaders in Linguistically Diverse Schools by Nonie K. Lesaux, Emily Phillips Galloway and Sky H. Marietta. In addition, we will also use a book called, THINKING MAPS - School-Based Research, Results, and Models for Achievement Using Visual Tools by David N. Hyerle and Larry Alper to provide assistance to our students by helping them to truly understand and retain the concepts behind the facts, and to do this in an exciting and motivating way. These two books will give us ideas to integrate research-based strategies to strengthen our instructional core in all content areas. Specifically, we will use the five hallmarks (engaging texts, rich discussion, daily writing, vocabulary and developing school-wide protocols) to be able to close our students’ achievement gaps. Teachers will be able to create opportunities for discussions, reading and writing for explicit instruction of analyzing complex text. After studying each particular strategy, we will implement it in our own classrooms. Then, during our meetings, we will report back on the outcome of our efforts, through data, formal and informal assessments, to see how it impacted our ELLs' learning process. We are planning to meet for one hour every Wednesday from 3:00PM to 4:00PM. This will be conducted in the format of five study sessions starting November 2018. Our two certified ENL teachers will share responsibilities for chairing the sessions on a rotating basis. In addition, we will hire a Puppetry in Practice consultant, from the Brooklyn College School of Education, to provide model lessons for our teachers as a Professional Development opportunity. Such Professional Development is designed to increase teachers’ ability to provide engaging literacy instruction for ELLs. Teachers will be present to observe author-illustrator Mr. Angelo DeCesare while he models teaching students on a variety of literacy strategies through the arts programs based on the characters in his comic journals. This Program will be held once a week for one hour per grade, and it will start sometime in November 2018 for a total of 8 sessions. rationale schedule and duration topics to be covered name of provider how parents will be notified of these activities Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. · · · · · Begin description here: Title III funds will be used to offer ELLs' parents ongoing workshops on ENL strategies and methodologies. The parent workshop providers (at no cost to Title III) will be Ms. Yvette Ghoughassian and Ms. Ruth Chea Duran who are both ENL certified teachers. These workshops will take place once a month throughout the school year 2018-2019 mostly on Thursdays at 8:30AM. The focus of these workshops will be on providing parents with skills and tools to use English in everyday situations, as well as various ways of supporting their children's learning. These workshops will be around topics, such as: 2018-19 CEP 62 Part D: Parental Engagement Activities - Sharing the five hallmarks of the Advanced Literacy Framework (engaging texts, rich discussion, daily writing, vocabulary and developing school-wide protocols) to work towards closing the achievement gap. - Providing an appropriate environment for studying at home; - Supporting children with their reading at home; - Understanding how Close Reading works; - Making sense of the Common Core Standards and how they affect our ELLs; - Supporting ELLs with Math through ESL strategies, etc. Our Parent Coordinator, Ms. Carmen Martinez, will provide oral translation during workshops as well as provide written translation in Spanish. Languages such as Bengali will be translated for parents using Google translator. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. After and before school tutoring for ENL student population Puppetry in Practice Program infusing Art with ENL services Common Core ELA Short Reads Text Evidence Set from Benchmark Education and other new library editions. Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) 1. 2. Purchased services 1. Per session Per diem High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials 2. Must be supplemental. Additional curricula, instructional materials. Must be clearly listed. 3. 4. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL $4,400 $3,600 $4,366 $0 $0 $0 $12,366 2018-19 CEP 63  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information Borough Bronx District 10 School Name THE LAB SCHOOL FOR CHILDREN School Number 315 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Gaby Flores Coach N/A ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Yvette Ghoughassian Teacher/Subject Area Loraine Pitteruff Teacher/Subject Area Ruth Duran-Chea/ Related-Service Provider N/A Superintendent N/A Assistant Principal Kim Cruz Coach N/A School Counselor Estefania Rodriguez Parent Arelis Resendiz Parent Coordinator Carmen Martinez Field Support Center Staff Member Gail Linden/Resource Rm Teache Other (Name and Title) Brenda Abramowitz/Data Special C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 1 1 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 1 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 249 2018-19 CEP 64 Total number of ELLs 46 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 18.47%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 0 1 2 4 3 Lang. N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? We use Fountas and Pinnell, NYSITELL, NYSESLAT scores, NYC Performance Written Assessments K-8 and in-house writing baselines. The greatest area of need is in the area of reading fluency and oral language development. These various assessments provide teachers with the competency, strengths and weaknesses of our students. Our analysis of the 2017 Spring NYSESLAT has shown that most of our ELLs in grades 1 -8 have challenges mainly in the areas of listening and writing. 6 out of our 46 ELLs have scored at a commanding proficiency level; 22 of them have scored at an expanding level; 13 of them have scored at a transitioning level; 3 of them have scored at an emerging level and 1 of them at an entering level. Two new ELLs who scored at an entering and emerging levels were newcomers last year from a different school. 11 out of our 46 ELLs have moved up one proficiency level and 2 have moved up two proficiency levels. Furthermore, 7 of our ELLs have moved up more than 5 points within the same proficiency level. On the other hand, 14 ELLs have moved down more than 5 points within the same proficiency level. 2018-19 CEP 65  2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? We provide: Tier 2 and Tier 3 interventions (e.g., Great Leaps, Fundations, Vocabulary Workshop, i-Ready), After-school Programs, Common Core Supplemental Extension Programs for ELLs (Go-Math, ReadyGen and Code-X), and Guided Reading. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? We evaluate the success of our programs for ELLs through Informal assessments. We believe that ongoing assessments provide continual snapshots of where students are throughout the school year. By using informal assessments, we target students' specific problem areas by adapting instruction and intervening earlier rather than later. Since standardized tests in English do not usually reflect ELLs' true content knowledge or abilities, we believe that informal assessments provide a more well-rounded picture of their skills, abilities, and ongoing progress. We use the ELL Periodic Assessment, the NYC Written Performance Tasks, the NYC Math Performance Tasks, F&Ps, and Curriculum pre and post Unit Tests. Based on collected data, we have determined that our ELLs need to improve their writing skills by using and analyzing text evidence. In addition, they need to focus and hone their note-taking skills in order to develop their listening skills. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? With our Data Team and classroom teachers, we look at our breakdown of data such as, item skills analysis (State data and Schoolnet), end of unit test data, F&P data and Fundations data. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] ELLs who have difficulty with academic learning and have been alerted by the RtI Team receive supplemental assistance/instruction to remediate and narrow the gaps in their learning. This process is first started by the classroom teacher who provides differentiated instruction to the ELLs who need it in order to meet Tier1 and Tier2 Intervention requirements. When Tier1and Tier2 Interventions are not enough, the teacher brings up the ELL or the ELLs who are not showing progress in an RtI meeting discussion. During this meeting, the RtI team provides guidance and instruction in certain strategies. The teacher applies these strategies in his/her classroom. After six weeks, if this approach does not show any changes in the ELL(s)' academic growth, then the RtI Team comes up with a Tier2 Intervention, which may include small group instruction provided by the ENL Teacher and/or the AIS Provider. After six weeks, if this type of intervention does not bring forth the needed results, then the RtI Team recommends a Tier3 Intervention. Based on the particular student/s’ needs, he or she will receive one-on-one instruction by the ENL Teacher and/or the AIS Provider. After having reviewed progress or lack of it in another four weeks, the RtI and CSE Teams meet to discuss whether the ELL(s)' needs are a language acquisition issue or a language processing concern. Then both teams meet with the parents and the teacher of the ELL(s) in question to discuss further options. . 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. According to our school's 2017 NYSITELL scores, 7 of our incoming students in kindergarten, identified with a Spanish home language, scored at a commanding proficiency level. As per the Spring 2017 NYSESLAT scores, most of our ELLs in grades 1 -8 have challenges mainly in the areas of listening and writing. 6 out of our 46 ELLs have scored at a commanding proficiency level; 22 of them have scored at an expanding level; 13 of them have scored at a transitioning level; 3 of them have scored at an emerging level and 1 of them at an entering level. Two new ELLs who scored at an entering and emerging levels were newcomers last year from a different school. 11 out of our 46 ELLs have moved up one proficiency level and 2 have moved up two proficiency levels. Furthermore, 7 of our ELLs have moved up more than 5 points within the same proficiency level. On the other hand, 14 ELLs have moved down more than 5 points within the same proficiency level. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? 2018-19 CEP 66  In order to support the mandated hours for our ELLs, we have a full-time ENL teacher, a 4th and 6th grade teacher with an ENL License. These teachers collaborate and meet on a weekly basis to plan instruction and provide staff development in the area of English as a New Language. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. For now, we have a freestanding ENL program following the integrated and standalone model, which provides research based ENL strategies and methodologies to meet the needs of our ELLs. The integrated and standalone model is determined based on our ELLs' proficiency levels. We provide our ELLs with their mandated units of ENL instruction as required under CR Part 154. Entering ELLs receive 360 minutes of instruction per week (180 minutes of standalone ENL and 180 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA); emerging ELLs receive 360 minutes of instruction per week (90 minutes of standalone ENL, 180 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA and 90 minimum number minutes standalone or integrated ENL with ELA or any other content area); transitioning ELLs receive 180 minutes of instruction per week (90 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA and 90 minimum number minutes standalone or integrated ENL with ELA or any other content area); expanding ELLs receive 180 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA or other content area instruction per week and commanding ELLs receive 90 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA or other content area instruction per week. The ENL teacher collaborates with classroom teachers to build upon classroom instruction and modifies the lessons and assignments through appropriate scaffolding measures. This empowers ELLs because it makes classroom work more manageable and comprehensible. Our ELLs are grouped heterogeneously as well as homogeneously according to their proficiency levels, and they are provided with support based on their classroom curriculum. In addition, our former ELLs receive testing accommodations up to two years after reaching commanding proficiency. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? For now, we have a freestanding ENL program in our school. We provide our ELLs with their mandated units of ENL instruction as required under CR Part 154. Entering ELLs receive 360 minutes of instruction per week (180 minutes of standalone ENL and 180 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA); emerging ELLs receive 360 minutes of instruction per week (90 minutes of standalone ENL, 180 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA and 90 minimum number minutes standalone or integrated ENL with ELA or any other content area); transitioning ELLs receive 180 minutes of instruction per week (90 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA and 90 minimum number minutes standalone or integrated ENL with ELA or any other content area); expanding ELLs receive 180 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA or other content area instruction per week and commanding ELLs receive 90 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA or other content area instruction per week. Students in the elementary level grades receive small group push-in instruction by a certified ENL teacher. Students in the middle school receive push-in ENL 2018-19 CEP 67  instruction. They are homogeneously grouped according to their proficiency levels and provided with support based on their classroom curriculum. K-1 grade ELLs are provided English language instruction 5 times a week. 2nd grade ELLs receive ENL instruction following the push-in model 4 times a week for 45 minutes. 3-5 grade ELLs receive ENL services 4 times a week for 45 minutes. Our middle-school ELLs who are in self-contained special needs classrooms receive ENL instruction following the push-in model 5 times a week. The ENL teacher works closely with the classroom teachers to ensure that ELLs do not miss the content of their classroom lessons. As a result, she uses her ELLs' corresponding classroom lesson and embeds it with language objectives and other scaffolding strategies that they need. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. ELLs are presented with differentiated instruction during the school day through shared and guided reading, targeted small group instruction by an AIS teacher, content area - small group instruction, and at risk support with explicit modeling by the ENL teacher. We use the SIOP Model, through which language and content objectives are both incorporated into one lesson. All our lessons and methods are in alignment with the NYS Common Core Learning Standards. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? We administer the Spanish LAB for our Spanish speaking newcomer ELLs, who are new to the New York City school system, after we have determined that they are ELLs through the administratation of the NYSITELL. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a) Although we currently don't have any SIFE students, our action plan would consist of an after-school program for small group ELL instruction. It would include one-on-one support once a week and guided practice for scaffolding support. Moreover, we will use the support of the ENL and AIS teachers as well as the resource room teacher for push-in instruction and intervention during the normal school day. b) For these ELLs, we offer a freestanding ENL program with a full-time ENL certified teacher. In grades one through 8, we follow the balanced literacy model for English as a Second Language Instruction, in which we use lots of scaffolding in all four modalities of speaking, listening, reading and writing. We work in cooperative learning groups in both homogeneous and heterogeneous groupings, depending on the students' needs, to hone-in on writing skills as well as reading, speaking, and listening. Our school offers a nurturing school environment that encourages risk-taking. The goal of our ENL program is for students to acquire the language development necessary to transition to a commanding language proficiency level. Based on our data, we will invite our ELLs to participate in our after-school program as well as our Saturday Classes to assist them in the four modalities of Reading, Writing, Listening and Speaking. c) & d) These ELLs are mostly students who have special needs; they either receive Resource Room services or have been placed in full-time special needs classrooms. Their needs will continue to be addressed using ENL methodologies aligned with their IEPs and any modifications that apply. Our plan is to continue to provide them with differentiated instruction in their classrooms based on the modalities in which they require the most support. We use an array of non-fiction materials, such as Passageways Series (non-fiction reading series for below-level readers by Curriculum Associates, Inc.), Hot Topics (high interest reading by Evan-Moor Educational Publishers) and the differentiated/scaffolded instruction segments of the Pearson ReadyGen and the Common Core Code X by Scholastic. They will also continue to receive support via After-school and Saturday Programs. Teachers will continue to use informal and formal diagnostics to plan instruction and support 2018-19 CEP 68  students' learning. Classroom teachers will also receive professional development in ENL approaches and strategies. e) Our former ELLs will continue to receive ENL services for two additional years after they reach a commanding language proficiency level. Their ENL instruction will be provided through integrated ENL/ELA or other content area instruction via a push-in model, and they will be monitored to assure their smooth transition and development in their general education classrooms. During testing, we provide our ELLs with their mandated accommodations of a separate testing location and an allotted time of a time and a half. For our ELLs who have an individualized education program, we allow their IEPs to take precedence in terms of their testing accommodation requirements. In addition, our commanding ELLs are still provided with a separate testing location and an allotted time of a time and a half for extra two years after they transition out of the ENL Program. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? The ENL teacher provides content area support for ELLs by scaffolding lessons through different types of graphic organizers, modeling, visuals, think-aloud, and by using various ENL strategies that will assist ELLs with their comprehension (GIST Model, reciprocal teaching, think-pair-share, content rewrites and adapting written text). We use an array of non-fiction materials, such as Passageways Series (non-fiction reading series for below-level readers by Curriculum Associates, Inc.), Hot Topics (high interest reading by Evan-Moor Educational Publishers) and the differentiated/scaffolded instruction segments of the Pearson ReadyGen and the Common Core Code X by Scholastic. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? ELLs with special needs either receive Resource Room services or have been placed in full-time special education classrooms. Our plan is to continue providing them with differentiated instruction in their classrooms based on the modalities in which they require the most support. We use an array of non-fiction materials, such as Passageways Series (nonfiction reading series for below-level readers by Curriculum Associates, Inc.), Hot Topics (high interest reading by Evan-Moor Educational Publishers) and the differentiated/scaffolded instruction segments of the Pearson ReadyGen and the Common Core Code X by Scholastic. They will also continue to receive support via After-school and Saturday Programs. Teachers will continue to use informal and formal diagnostics to plan instruction and support student learning. Classroom teachers will also receive professional development in ENL approaches and strategies. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. The language in which our intervention services are offered is English. All of our ELLs will be presented with differentiated intervention services during the school day through guided reading, content area small group instruction, Extended Day and at risk support by the ENL teacher. In addition, we will eventually have targeted intervention services through Saturday Program and After-school Program. Furthermore, we will provide our ELLs with content area glossary/dictionaries in their native language. Additionally, our ELLs will be provided with targeted interventions for Social Studies and Science according to their needs. We will draw our instructional next steps within the data accumulated through our school-wide periodic assessments such as, Fountas and Pinnell, the NYSESLAT scores, NYC Performance Math and Written Assessments K-8, as well as in-house writing baselines, social studies and science classroom tests. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? 2018-19 CEP 69  We are going to use the Pearson ReadyGen and the Common Core Code X by Scholastic, especially their differentiated/scaffolded instruction segments. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? We will not discontinue any programs/services for ELLs. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs will be offered to attend our After-School Program and eventually, our Saturday School Program. Invitations are extended school-wide to all students, including ELLs, to attend enrichment as well as test-prep programs. We are planning to provide an ENL after-school Program for 40 of our English Language Learners. The program will begin in the beginning of November 2017 and it will run through the middle of April 2018 in the following manner:Our 3rd-4th grade ELLs (Group A) and our 5th-6th grade ELLs (Group B) will be served every Wednesdays and Thursdays from 2:40PM to 4:00PM. In Group A, we have mostly transitioning proficiency level ELLs with Fountas & Pinnell (F&P) reading levels ranging from H to L. Moreover in Group B, we have mostly expanding proficiency level ELLs with F&P reading levels ranging from L to R. Our NYSESLAT, Fall ELL Periodic Assessment, Fall Baseline and F&P data shows that these selected ELLs need further support in the area of academic vocabulary and language development, along with the necessary literacy skills to access grade-level complex text. In particular, they need to develop and apply their close reading skills in the areas of English language arts and social studies. Our ENL certified teacher, Ms. Yvette Ghoughassian, and our content area teacher, Ms. Gail Linden, who also holds a special education License, will serve our ELLs in this after-school program. These two teachers will be co-planning and using rotating groups to ensure that all students in this direct instruction program receive language development support from an appropriately certified teacher each time the program meets.During this After-School Program, our ELLs will receive instruction in reference to explorations of complex text in the areas of English language arts and social studies through ENL strategies and methodologies. They will be able to develop their language, literacy, and content-area skills and concepts through authentic texts, primary sources and Common Core Exemplars.Materials: We will use ACT (Accessing Complex Texts) from Benchmark Education. This resource will assist our ELLs with developing the following skills:- Annotating complex text, which will be explicitly taught and effectively practiced;- Collaborative conversations that will develop understanding and clarify thinking;- Writing to sources that will enable students to create evidence-based answers.The Topic Sets include authentic texts, primary sources, and Common Core Exemplars. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. We use an array of non-fiction materials, such as Passageways Series (non-fiction reading series for below-level readers by Curriculum Associates, Inc.), Hot Topics (high interest reading by Evan-Moor Educational Publishers) and the differentiated/scaffolded instruction segments of the Pearson ReadyGen and the Common Core Code X by Scholastic. In addition, we also use the i-Ready Program for ELA and Math along with Digital Learning. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? The ENL teacher encourages the usage of native language dictionaries, and she buddies-up more proficient ELLs with the ones who have lower proficiency in English in order to raise their confidence and make them understand that they can use their prior knowledge in order to learn a new language. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. In our school, the required services/supports correspond to ELLs' ages and grade levels. For most of our ELLs who struggle with their reading skills, we use resources that cater to a high interest/low level reader, such as Passageways Series (non-2018-19 CEP 70  fiction reading series for below-level readers by Curriculum Associates, Inc.), Hot Topics (high interest reading by Evan-Moor Educational Publishers) and Times for Kids. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? We do not share a building with other schools. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). We provide newly enrolled ELLs and their families with an orientation provided by our ENL teacher and parent coordinator, where we give them a tour and introduce them to the activities they can have access to in our school. In addition, for now, based on our parents' choice, we offer a freestanding ENL program with a full-time ENL certified teacher. In grades 1 through 8, we follow the balanced literacy model for English as a Second Language Instruction. We work in cooperative learning groups in both homogeneous and heterogeneous groupings, depending on the need, to hone in on writing skills as well as reading, speaking, and listening. Our school offers a nurturing school environment that encourages risk-taking. The goal of our freestanding ENL program is for students to acquire the language development necessary to transition to commanding language proficiency levels. The language of instruction we offer in our school is English. We have a freestanding ENL program from K-8. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? For now, we do not have any language electives. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? We are planning for our teachers to receive support in reciprocal teaching, data analysis, UBD unit planning, vertical planning aligned to NYS Common Core Learning Standards. We will continue to have formal/informal meetings between classroom teachers and our ENL teacher in reference to embedding ENL strategies in all content areas. In addition, our ENL teacher will attend outside professional development workshops to stay abreast with the most current thinking and strategies in the ENL field, with the purpose of both implementing and turn-keying them to our school staff. Furthermore, she will turnkey ENL strategies to all other teachers. Professional development will be provided to teachers during the school day as needed by the ENL Committee. In addition, teachers will receive professional development with embedded ENL strategies through our monthly staff curriculum meetings, 2018-19 CEP 71  grade conferences, once a month vertical planning and other in-house learning opportunities. Also, teachers will engage in action research once a week in their respective data inquiry teams, through the lens of Danielson's Framework for Teaching, with a focus on targeted ELLs. We provide professional development to our staff around the four modalities of speaking, listening, reading and writing. In addition, we offer weekly curriculum meetings to help with design of units to effectively plan scaffolding strategies for our ELLs. We provide social/emotional training to our guidance counselor in order to work with newly arrived ELLs. The selected topics of our professional development plan for all teachers are: Close reading strategies for ELLs; How to keep on writing effective language objectives; Questioning techniques relating to ELLs; Aligning instruction to the NYS Bilingual Common Core Initiative; How to use ToMS (NYSESLAT Targets of Measurement) and PLDs (Writing Performance Level Descriptions) alongside each other. The following is a calendar of PD dates for the school year 2017-2018: 9/12 - 9/26 - 10/10 - 11/7 - 12/5 - 1/2 - 2/6 - 3/6 - 4/10 - 5/8 - 5/29 and 6/5. The professional development offered to teachers of ELLs will be workshops that emphasize the usage of the New York State bilingual Common Core Initiative rubrics per grade, which is connected with the Common Core Learning Standards. In addition, ENL teachers will be trained in how to integrate the NYSESLAT Targets of Measurement (ToMS) for all the modalities of listening, speaking, reading and writing in their instructional units. Our non-pedagogic staff is invited to all of our ENL PDs. In addition, we share outside opportunities by sending them to UFT sponsored Professional Developments as well as Great Leaps training for supporting ELLs and students with IEPs. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Our guidance counselor, Ms. Estefania Rodriguez, receives professional development in High School articulation, accommodations for Testing and all our ENL Staff PDs in order to support our ELLs as they transition from elementary to middle and middle to high school. We will implement our ENL professional development planning piece in order to meet the PD requirements for all teachers, which will be delivered on a weekly basis. The ENL Committee (consisting of our ENL Teacher and our 6 th grade teacher who is also ENL licensed) will present the required 15% of total hours PD to all teachers on a weekly basis during our Tuesday Staff PD period, which is an 80 minutes block. In order to meet the required 50% of total hours PD, our ENL teacher will keep on attending outside ENL professional development workshops , and in return she will turnkey all the information to the rest of the teachers. The records of The ENL training for all staff are maintained by our school's secretary, Ms. Brenda Abramowitz. In addition, we keep a signing sheet to monitor teachers' attendance. 2018-19 CEP 72  Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? On Mondays, during our Parent Engagement period (2:30-3:10PM), The ENL teacher will schedule meetings with ELL parents to discuss ELLs' language development progress, language proficiency assessment results and language development needs in all content areas. In addition, she will also provide parents with ENL strategies that they could use at home to support their child. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. The following describes our school's parental involvement: Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here 2018-19 CEP 73  2018-19 CEP 74 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Gaby Flores, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 75  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: The Lab School for Children School DBN: 10X315 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Gaby Flores Title Principal Kim Cruz Assistant Principal Carmen Martinez Parent Coordinator Yvette Ghoughassian ENL/Bilingual Teacher Arelis Resendiz Parent Loraine Pitteruff Teacher/Subject Area Ruth Duran-Chea Teacher/Subject Area N/A N/A Coach Coach Estefania Rodriguez School Counselor N/A Gail Linden Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Resource Room Teacher N/A Other N/A Brenda Abramowitz Other Data Specialist N/A Other N/A Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 9/28/17 9/28/17 9/28/17 9/28/17 9/28/17 9/28/17 9/28//17 N/A N/A 9/28/17 N/A 9/28/17 N/A 9/28/17 N/A 2018-19 CEP 76  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 10X315 School Name: The Lab School for Children Superintendent: Maribel Hulla T The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Carmen Martinez Parent Coordinator Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. PS/MS 315’s alternate language population consists of 82.58% Hispanic, 0.44% White, 14.73% Black or African American, 1.78% Asian/Pacific Islander, 0% American-Indian/Alaskan Native and 0.44% Multi-Racial. All written communication distributed to parents is given out in both English and Spanish. Interpreters are available when required for meetings with parents and teachers, including parent teacher conferences. We assess language preferences of our parent community for both written and oral communication by accessing pertinent information from Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS), Student Emergency Contact cards, and ATS reports such as, RAPL (lists parents' preferred languages) and the UPPG (provides preferred written and oral communication for ELLs and Non-ELLs). 2018-19 CEP 77  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Bengali Ga English Mandinka (AKA Mandingo) Spanish 3 1 112 0 108 0.02 0.01 50.00 0 48.2 0 0 112 0 108 0 0 50.00 0 48.2 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency How do you plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision Distributed to Families One week prior to the upcoming event. One week prior to the upcoming event. One week prior to the upcoming event. School newsletters, calendars, and parent-teacher conference announcements. ENL Orientation, after-school program information, NYS testing dates, and general overview of student curriculum. of translated documents to parents. Through bilingual speaking staff who are proficient in both English and Spanish. Furthermore, we will use templates for school holidays, parent-teacher conferences and other DOE notices from the Translation and Interpretation Unit's intranet site: http://intranet.nycboe.netSchoolSupport/translation_and_interpretation_unit. Through bilingual speaking staff who are proficient in both English and Spanish. Furthermore, we will use templates for school holidays, parent-teacher conferences and other DOE notices from the Translation and Interpretation Unit's intranet site: http://intranet.nycboe.net/SchoolSupport/translation_and_interpretation_unit. Through bilingual speaking staff who are proficient in both English and Spanish. Furthermore, we will use templates for school holidays, parent-teacher conferences and other DOE notices from the Translation and Interpretation Unit's intranet site: http://intranet.nycboe.net/SchoolSupport/translation_and_interpretation_unit. Letters from the school leadership One week prior to the upcoming event. Through bilingual speaking staff who are proficient in both English and Spanish. Furthermore, we will use templates for school holidays, parent-teacher conferences and other DOE notices from the Translation and Interpretation Unit's intranet site: 2018-19 CEP 78  http://intranet.nycboe.net/SchoolSupport/translation_and_interpretation_unit. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Family Orientation Night School September 2018 School Open House weeks / High School Articulation Process October 2018 Parent Engagement time Every Monday from 2:30-3:10PM Parent -Teacher conferences / Portfolio days November 2018 March 2018 May 2018 interpretation service(s)? Through bilingual speaking staff who are proficient in both English and Spanish. Through bilingual speaking staff who are proficient in both English and Spanish. Through bilingual speaking staff who are proficient in both English and Spanish. Through bilingual speaking staff who are proficient in both English and Spanish. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Since we are a small school with approximately about 40 ELLs, we can reach our limited-English-proficient families by making individual phone calls. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. We will go over it during our beginning of the year Staff Meeting. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage 2018-19 CEP 79   Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Home language is determined upon a student’s entrance to our school, and that data is updated based on the home language survey. All materials are distributed in English and Spanish, and translations of those materials, created by the school, are presented to families who speak languages other than English and Spanish at home. Furthermore, we provide translations and oral interpretations based on our findings, and we share it with the rest of the staff in order to facilitate their communication with all parents. Furthermore, we will use templates for school holidays, parent-teacher conferences and other DOE notices from the Translation and Interpretation Unit's intranet site: http://intranet.nycboe.net/SchoolSupport/translation_and_interpretation_unit. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? We use the following mechanisms to gather feedback from parents: - Tripod Survey - Needs Assessment Survey - DOE Learning Environment Survey 2018-19 CEP 80 
