2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 09X327 School Name: COMPREHENSIVE MODEL SCHOOL PROJECT M.S. 327 Principal: ALIXANDRE RICCI 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Comprehensive Model School Project 327 320900010327 Sixth – Twelfth 1501 Jerome Avenue, Bronx, NY 10452 School Number (DBN): 09X327 718.294.8111 Phone Number: 718.294.8109 Fax: Alixandre Ricci ARicci2@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: Email Address: Alixandre Ricci Sara Coombs Isabel Vera Calderon Myrna Sanchez SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Marilyn Espada Emily Rosa Carolyn Martinez Vivian Vasquez District Information Geographical District: 09 Leticia Rodriguez-Rosario Superintendent: 1245 Washington Avenue, Bronx, NY 10456 Superintendent’s Office Address: LRosario@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718.579.7143 Phone Number: NA Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 CEP 3  Bronx (Districts 7,8,9,10,11,12) FSC: Jose Ruiz Executive Director: 1 Fordham Plaza, Bronx, NY 10458 Executive Director’s Office Address: Executive Director’s Email Address: 718.828.7776 Phone Number: JRuiz2@schools.nyc.gov Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Alixandre Ricci Sara Coombs Isabel Vera Calderon Ulises Jimenez Marilyn Espada Carolyn Martinez Emily Rosa Vivian Vazquez Cara Connors Amanda Fraioli Erick Baez *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/Teacher Member/Teacher Member/Teacher 2018-19 CEP 5  Myrna Sanchez Jil Sanyutz Esperanza Vasquez Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/ Teacher Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Student Representative Member/ Teacher Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Section 4: CEP Overview Our Mission at CMSP is we have high expectations for every student which is based on the belief that all students can and will learn. We believe that providing students with rigorous instruction, time, and support will ensure students' success. Through our commitment to student success we serve as a strong foundation for our students' future 2018-19 CEP 9  achievement in college and beyond. The learning and growth of each individual child is the focus of all activity within the school community. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. CMSP 327 is located in the southwest section of the Bronx within the New Settlement Community Campus. Our curriculum serves as a precursor for future academic success. Students, who learn under our model, have shown significant success on standardized tests, coursework, and in college. CMSP 327's 2017-2018 HS graduation rate is approximately 84%. The college readiness percentage of graduation seniors in 2017-18 was 60% compared to last year's college readiness level in the Bronx of 34% and District 9's 47%. CMSP 327 educates students in grades six through twelve. Our school is designed to ensure that students are well prepared for college and/or career readiness upon graduation. Our expectation is that all of our students can and will graduate and attend a four-year college prepared for the coursework they encounter. English and Mathematics are the building blocks for all successful school learning in all subjects. The foundation of education is the ability to read, write and think critically about mathematics. This is the reason CMSP believes in offering two (2) complimentary courses in both English (i.e.: ELA Reading and ELA Writing) and Math (i.e.: CMSP Math and Impact Math) throughout middle school and in several grades in high school. CMSP 327 has a partnership with the College Now program at Lehman College, offers AP classes to high school students, and high school Regents classes to all 8th grade students. In partnership with parents, students, and teachers : Provide a safe, nurturing, child-centered environment. Hold students to high academic standards. Implement a challenging, integrated curriculum. Maintain balanced and heterogeneous class grouping. Recognize that the home/school connection is vital to the success of our children. Be dedicated to the development of our children as productive and thoughtful lifelong learners. 2018-19 CEP 10  3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Centered around a focus for CMSP, from the Framework For Great Schools, CMSP's Instructional Focus is assessment. This specifically includes differentiated assessment with a focus on our SWD and ELL populations. Specific needs include targeted reading support and targeted interventions in all content areas. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Trust: CMSP has worked to assure that the entire building knows and is part of achieving all goals and the instructional focus. CMSP is continuing to work on rigorous instruction- with the school's instructional focus of assessment we are determined to differentiate to increase rigor at every level. 2018-19 CEP 11  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 09X327 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 06,07,08,09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 734 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 67 66 4 14 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 62 39 5 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 91.0% % Attendance Rate 87.9% % Reduced Lunch 11.9% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.1% 77.2% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 1.2% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 4.1 4% 24% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 41.1% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 84% 75% 83.0% 16.1% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES N/A NO YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES N/A YSH YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A NO N/A N/A NO High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A NO N/A N/A NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES N/A N/A YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES N/A N/A YES No N/A 6 6 2 90.0% 2.7% 24.8% 21.0% 0.3% 0.3% 4 31% 5.3 43.4% N/A 94% 90% N/A N/A No No YES N/A N/A NO YES YES N/A N/A YES YES N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A YES 2018-19 CEP 12  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. As an area of need, according to the 2017-2018 MOLP the District 9 Superintendent stated, "It is important to ensure that rigor is attained in every class. Continue to work on student centered instruction." Based on this feedback, CMSP plans to focus on the need to differentiate instruction in order to engage all students in rigorous instruction. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. To infuse differentiation strategies, thus increasing rigor for all students, especially for subgroups, 100% of teachers and paraprofessionals will participate in a professional development series around differentiation throughout the 2018-2019 school year as measurable by the Danielson Framework. 2018-19 CEP 13  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). 1. A Professional Development series focused on strategies to differentiate within the classroom. 2. Coaching/Mentoring series facilitated by literacy coaches, math coaches, SPED liaison, and ESL lead teacher. 3. Formal and Informal observations, including post observation conferences with administration using the Danielson Framework. 4. Peer observations to assess implementation of differentiation strategies. 5. Use of online library sources (i.e.- Capstone) to find and provide leveled texts, and MyLibrary NYC. Teachers and paraprofessionals will make up the target group. Sep 2018- June 2019 Coaches, liaisons, model and lead teachers as well as administration will be responsible for the professional development series. Coaches will be responsible for weekly coaching sessions with teachers. Teachers will be responsible for sharing best practices at grade level meetings. Administration will conduct informal and formal observations using the Danielson Framework. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement . How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. 2018-19 CEP 14  CMSP offers an orientation to incoming 6th and 9th grade students at the conclusion of the previous school year. In addition, CMSP offers a September event where families can come in, meet the teachers, engage in activities similar to those their children experiences, and go step-by-step through curriculum and common core information. These events are all held by the teachers and administration of CMSP. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 1. Teachers will be provided with one weekly grade level meeting and monthly content specific meetings. 2. School will renew contract with Capstone. 3. Per session funds for coaches, SPED liaisons, and ENL lead teacher. * As a prose school we have time in the day to hold grade level meetings* Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. All teachers will have a minimum of two observations by January that will help assess if differentiation is occurring throughout all classrooms in all content areas. Admin will begin with formal observations as per guidance from Superintendent's office Students will participate in a STAR reading assessment & I-Ready and a home-grown math assessment to assess their progress by January. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) The Danielson Framework will be the instrument of measure that will be used to assess teacher progress. STAR reading, I- Ready, and a home-grown math assessment will be used to assess student progress. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 15  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? According to the School Quality Guide, 89% of students feel safe and 74% responded positively to questions about supportive environment. 66% of teachers responded that the adults at their school recognize disruptive behavior as social emotional learning opportunities and 66% responded that the school teaches students they need to regulate their behavior. 52% of students responded that their teacher supports them when they are upset. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. CMSP will foster a supportive environment as indicated by the creation of social emotional support groups for all students. This includes the expansion and streamlining of the school's PBIS system as well as a series of after school activities to support student social emotional well being. 2018-19 CEP 16  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). 1.Partnership with New Settlement for MS & HS after school programs Teachers, paraprofessionals, and students will be targeted. September 2018-June 2019 Deans Guidance 2. Coaching/Mentoring series facilitated by literacy coaches, math coaches, SPED liaison, and ESL lead teacher. 3. PD for all staff around social emotional awareness and de-escalation Admin 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. CMSP will use Engrade, e-mails, and robo calls to keep parents engaged and up to date. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 1. Budget/Resources for incentives 2. Time built in to schedule to PD 2018-19 CEP 17  3. After school per session for activities Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. All teachers will have a minimum of two observations by January that will help assess if deep levels of student engagement is occurring throughout all classrooms in all content areas and amongst all students. There will be a focus during these observations on area 1E,2B, and 3B. Students will be observed during formal and informal observations to determine if students are taking initiative, voicing choice in classroom activities, and challenging one another in their thinking. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Low inference notes as compared to The Danielson Framework (1E, 2B, &3B) will be the instrument of measure that will be used to assess teacher and student progress with regards to student autonomy. Interviews with students will also be used to measure progress. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 18  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. According to the 2017-2018 MOLP, District 9 Superintendent stated, "Engage teachers and students in data based conversations that allow the participants to reflect and plan based on what is discussed." In order to support a collaborative environment- CMSP determined it was necessary to increase and organize/manage the amount of inter visitations being completed, and monitor the implementation of best practices founded from these visits. This is also a part of the school's PROSE platform. The teachers' personal goals as well as the school's instructional focus will be used in the peer observation process. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Teachers and administrators will participate on inquiry teams in the 2018-2019 school year. Inquiry teams will utilize state, city, and locally created data sources to monitor teaching practice and student performance. Inquiry teams will share data with grade level and departmental teams asking them to explore goals and make mid-term adjustments if needed. In order to continue to promote a culture of respect and collaboration, 100% of teachers will participate in the school's Peer Observation System throughout the 2018-2019 school year. Each teacher will create a personal goal for the year, conduct 2 peer observations per month, have 2 feedback conversations, and PD throughout the year will be based on best practices found in these visits. 2018-19 CEP 19  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? 1. 2 peer observations per month and 2 feedback sessions per month. Teachers will be targeted 2. Whole staff sharing of best practices at staff meetings and grade level meetings. 3. Sharing of best practices at weekly grade level meetings. 4. Teacher led PD around areas of best practices. September 2018-June2019 Grade Level Leaders will oversee the peer observation system and records binder. Administration will meet with the selected teachers to check in. Completion will be monitored by feedback form. 5. Survey 2x per year to assess effectiveness according to staff. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. CMSP administration and teachers will continue to hold meetings with parents and reinforce the open door policy. Parents and teachers will be able to communicate with each other through the Engrade platform. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 1. Peer observation schedule will be created based off of school rotating daily schedule. 2018-19 CEP 20  2. Inquiry team will have schedule of regular meetings. 3.Teachers will be provided with time during to observe and debrief. *The school has meeting times programmed into the day as a PROSE school* Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 80% of teaching staff will actively share out best practices at weekly grade level meetings & monthly staff meetings and upwards of 70% of peer observation form submissions will indicate that teachers engaged in collaobrative self reflection with a colleague during the observation cycle. Anonymous surveys of staff will be taken 2x a year to assess effectiveness. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Verbal feedback, anonymous surveys, and peer observation record forms will be used to assess progress. Progress will also be assessed by checking in with grade level leaders, admin attending grade level meetings, sharing at staff meetings, and by examining observation form data via excel forms. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 21  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. CMSP understands the importance of continually norming the administration, ensuring best practices, and consistently being present in classrooms. In an effort to support all staff, there is a need to align all feedback. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Once a month the administration and lead teachers will participate in learning walks in order to lead by example and develop the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. This will result in increased reliability among different observers. 2018-19 CEP 22  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Learning walks to align observations, feedback, and noticings. This will provide teachers with an aligned source of actionable feedback which will then allow them to design instruction that targets all students. Administration and lead teachers September 2018-June 2019 Principal and Assistant Principals Learning walk activities will include observing classroom culture, observing lessons, speaking to students, looking at bulletin boards etc. Debriefing meetings to discuss what is seen and formulate feedback together so all teachers experience a normed observation and feedback session in the future. * Learning walks and debrief sessions will also focus specifically on SWD and ELL populations to see how they are being supported and what more can be done* 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Literacy and math coach Assistant principals Assistant principals Special education and ENL liaisons How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Administration will reach out to families to lead events such as multicultural night, college alumni day, career day, etc. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 1. Time will be provided during the day to give administration and lead teachers time to conduct learning walks and time to debrief. * As a prose school there is time in the day to meet* Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant 2018-19 CEP 23  C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Learning walks will be conducted once a month with a debrief immediately following. Results will be used to inform future decisions regarding instruction and culture. By January there will be 5 learning walks conducted to aid in norming of administrative observations and feedback. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Low inference notes from learning walks, normed findings, and administration reflection will be used to assess progress. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 24  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. We recognize the importance of having strong family and community ties which will translate into higher academic expectations at home. This strong home-school connection will serve as a contagious effect of rigor in both environments. CMSP recognizes the need to increase parent involvement and provide parents with the resources they need to support their students in unity with the school. CMSP also has a focus for the 2018-2019 school year to create a student/ family led service project for the community. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. In order to create a welcoming environment for families and the community, the school will create a minimum of 4 events, for all members of the CMSP community throughout the 2018-2019 school year. We will continue to utilize various media for communicating with parents resulting in 15% increase in attendance at all outreach events as compared to 2017-18. In order to take part in community development, the stakeholders of CMSP will create and carry our a community service project for the 2018-2019 school year. 2018-19 CEP 25 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? The targeted group will be all 327 stakeholders and the surrounding community. September 2018- June 2019 Teachers, students, parents, and administration will facilitate the workshops. Teachers and students will organize the multicultural event. Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). 1. Family orientated workshops and community focused workshops will be facilitated by students, teachers, parents, & administrators on various topics. Possible topics will include: ESL Curriculum Common Core Computer Tech (Topics will be voted on through the PA by the parents) 2. A culminating multicultural event that is organized by the teachers and students and includes food, attire, and music about the various cultures within the CMSP family. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. New Settlement Community Campus WITS Groundswell CUP 2018-19 CEP 26  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 1. Per session will be used to compensate those teachers who conduct workshops after school hours. 2.Time will be provided, during and after the school day, to prepare for workshops and the multicultural event. 3. PA meetings will be used to inform parents of workshops and events. 4. School calendar & Robo Call system will be used to inform parents of workshops and events. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Parents will be given an exit survey at the close of each event. (4 total) In addition, attendance will be taken at each event. Student council will be used to determine the community service project. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Parent surveys and attendance sheets will be the instruments of measure. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 27  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Academic intervention services will be provided to students that score below a 3 on The NYS assessments or below an 80 on the Regents exam and local in-house assessments including an assessment of their STAR reading score. Academic intervention services will be provided to students that score below a 3 on The NYS assessments or below an 80 on math Regents exams and local in-house assessments. Academic intervention will be provided to students who score below a 3 on the NYS 8 th grade Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) ● Guided reading ● STAR reading assessment ● Achieve 3000 ● Daily independent reading (5 x’s/week Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Small group push-in and pull-out service. Lower student teacher ratio in the reading/writing classes by assigning a teacher to push-in to the class. When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) After-school, Saturday tutoring, & during the school day. ● MS students receive two (2) complimentary math classes (CMSP Math and Impact Math/Algebra) 6 th – 8 th grade Small group push-in and pull-out service. Lower student teacher ratio in the math classes by assigning a teacher to push-in to the class. After-school, Saturday tutoring, & during the school day. ● HS students will also receive an additional math course each year that focuses on fundamentals of that particular course. Students are offered additional assistance after school from 3:15- Small group (one hour after school, four hours on Saturday.) After-school, Saturday tutoring, & during the school day. 2018-19 CEP 28 assessment or below an 80 on science Regents exams. Academic intervention will be provided to students who score below a 3 on the the NYS assessments or below an 80 on history Regents exams. Montefiore Clinic located in the building meets with students and staff to provide resources for determining intervention needs. 4:15 from Monday to Friday. HS students are offered additional courses to support their core science class. Students are offered additional assistance after school from 3:15- 4:15 from Monday to Friday. HS students are offered additional courses to support their core history class. Counseling services (school based) Counseling services (Montefiore clinic based Psychologist (evaluation of students) Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Small group (one hour after school, four hours on Saturday. After-school, Saturday tutoring, and during the school day. Guidance suite Small group Montefiore Individual Medical office (on counseling as campus) needed, or as SBST office rm stated on the 315 IEP. EPC conferences 2018-19 CEP 29  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 90 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. The school provides clothing and school supplies to the STH population, as well as counseling services when needed. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 30  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 CEP 31  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. We take several steps to ensure that the staff of CMPS 327 is highly qualified. First, all of our teachers must hold: a full state certification, a Master's Degree, and demonstrate subject-matter competency in each academic subject they teach. Second, to fully support and retain our new teachers we provide them with a permanent in-house mentor. Our veteran teachers work with our new teachers to help build efficacy and classroom management skills. Third, our HQT are required to set three professional goals and track the achievement of those goals throughout the school year. Fourth, we ensure full teacher competency by providing timely, adequate Professional Development. We provide Professional Development that meets the immediate needs and requests of our teachers enabling them to provide sound instruction and address the specific learning needs of each of our students. We will ensure that our high quality teachers remain in our school by creating a professional learning environment that is safe, respectful and challenging; and by creating a school culture that values collaboration and learning, offers relevant professional development opportunities for professional growth, and multiple opportunities for staff to contribute to our school development. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Professional development will be offered through the Department of Education as well as in house. We will encourage our staff to attend workshops that will benefit them and in turn improve the academic performance of our students. In-house teachers, principals, and paraprofessional and staff will participate in professional development that includes learning by example and observing good practitioners: observing other teachers teaching , watching a colleague present an assembly , observing a visiting expert , shadowing a fellow teacher , visiting and seeing other schools in action . PD will be personalized for different levels of teachers including differentiation, team teaching, literacy in content areas, adding discussion to the math classroom etc. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. 2018-19 CEP 32  NA 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). NA Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). NA 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. At the onset of the school year, our teachers play an integral role in the decision making process regarding the selection of appropriate assessment measures. Members of our School Local Measures Committee used a six-step process to make recommendations for Local Measures. Student starting points were identified in the fall, using historical student performance data and via baseline assessments administered in the classroom. The administration (3) and teachers will use the results of baseline assessments as additional information to plan instruction for the school year and focus on key areas of need for our students. The administration and teachers meet regularly to check-in throughout the year to assess student progress through formative and periodic assessments. At the end of each unit of study summative assessments are administered. Student growth scores are then determined using a growth model. The administration and teachers regularly discuss results and use information from the MOSL process to help drive instructional improvements throughout the school year. In addition, teachers are provided collaborative planning time. Each grade level meets with an administrator at least once a week. The purpose of this meeting is to review pacing guides, plan lessons, share instructional strategies, norm grading policies, score student work, analyze data and engage in professional development. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible 2018-19 CEP 33  for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) 5A-E 5A-E Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 648,690 0 0 0 4,304,650 X X 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2018-19 CEP 34  2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 35  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent Involvement Policy (PIP) Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. 09X327, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students CMSP 327 will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; 2018-19 CEP 36  ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 2018-19 CEP 37  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) 09X327, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum 2018-19 CEP 38  Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; 2018-19 CEP 39  ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; Parent/Guardian Responsibilities: II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; 2018-19 CEP 40  ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; III. Student Responsibilities Student Responsibilities: ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 41  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP 42  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: The ENL program at CMSP 327 serves students in grade six through twelve. Rationale: Our school’s language instruction program for English Language Learners will provide additional direct instructional services for them using Title III Funds. An after – school tutorial program will be held on Monday through Thursday from 3:15-4:15 (Total of 160 sessions). In addition to that, Saturday School Enhancement will also be offered, from 9:00-12:00, every Saturday (Total of 30 sessions). A minimum of ten ELL including students with special needs will participate in this program, per class, with a certified ENL teacher. The After school and Saturday program dates of operation are September 19th-June 16th. The students are grouped based on content area need as well as English proficiency level. ELLs with disabilities will be grouped together in order to receive the adequate help based on their learning disability as well as their language need. During the week, tutoring will take place in four different classrooms. The ratio will be one ENL or bilingual certified teacher for every ten English Language learners. During Saturday the program is for 3 hours and therefore the ENL and content area teacher will split the time they have with the students. The Saturday instruction will be done in 90 minute blocks of direct instruction to the ELL students. There will also be parallel teaching and flexible grouping, based on group needs. The language of instruction will be English with the support of home language. Students will be able to read books in their home language in order to increase their L1 proficiency. Students will also be grouped with other students who speak the same language, who can provide additional support for understanding. They will be encouraged to use home language to make connections to English in order to understand language structure and organization. Different assessment data were analyzed to determine that this target group needs extra support. These students exhibit inadequate growth on both academic and language matters. Their English language proficiency ranges between Entering to Commanding, while their reading level is far below their grade level. A certified ENL teacher will provide instruction for these students. Specific attention will be drawn on expanding their vocabulary, language development, and writing. Students will read, speak, and write about the different content areas with the purpose of enhancing their academic language needed for success. The use of scaffolding techniques, visuals, and real life objects will support our ELL students throughout this program mostly in the content areas of English Language Arts, Math, and Social Studies. The scaffolding techniques include: Modeling, Bridging, Schema Building, Contextualization, Text Representation and Metacognition. Authentic experiences will promote the connection to the real world as they increase their English language proficiency. 2018-19 CEP 43  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Formal and informal assessments will be constantly used to reassess students’ growth with the purpose of determining further instructional goals to better meet their needs. ENL students are required to attend both the After School Tutoring and Saturday Enhancement. After school tutoring and Saturday Enhancement programs begin September 19th and will continue until June 1st. The ENL coordinator will keep an attendance binder in room 332, where the attendance sheets will be kept in addition to the parent letters sent in the Home Language. The teachers working with our ELL population are Ms. Hasandocaj, Mr.Yan, Ms.Gonzalez (Bilingual Ed) , and Ms.Solano. After converting our ELLs NYSLESLAT raw scores to scale scores, using the Data Analysis Tool (EDAT), the data demonstrates that the ELLs need the most support in reading and writing. As a result of this deficiency in reading and writing skills, we have chosen to use materials that specifically target these areas. We have created a home grown ELA curriculum with elements of SIOP and all daily lessons will be created to incorporate strategies and modifications that will meet the needs of our ELL population. The curriculum is aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards and English as a Second Language Standards and covers all language and literacy standards with a connection to grade level content. We believe that using a collaborative and horizontally aligned curriculum will help our ELLs and all students make significant gains in both their State Exams and NYSESLAT exam with the plan to move beyond ENL instruction. Moreover, to assist our students in strengthening their literacy skills and allow for differentiated instructions within the classroom. We are using STAR Reading, a program that will track student progress and utilize student data to drive instruction, grouping and lesson planning. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: On-going Professional Development is an important part of teachers' efforts to better serve our ELL students at CMSP 327. Aligning teaching with the NYS ESL Learning Standards, and referring to performance indicators to ensure students have learned what is expected from them is an ongoing process in our school. The Title III ENL teacher articulates with the classroom teachers who have English language learners in their classes to discuss topics to be taught as well as best practices in ENL methodology. Separate sessions are scheduled on Scaffolding Language and Learning, Differentiated Instruction for students at different English proficiency levels, and Quality Teaching for English Language Learners’ strategies. All workshops are aligned to the instruction providing during the Title III after school tutoring sessions and Title III Saturday school sessions. In addition to this, we will offer co-teaching workshops to ensure best practices in the classroom. PDs will be provided by the certified ENL teacher, Ornela Hasandocaj. She will ensure to keep record of the agenda and attendance sheet for each PD provided. The following workshops will be provided for the mainstream teachers who have ELLs in their classes and who work directly with the Title III ENL teacher, during grade level meetings. 2018-19 CEP 44  Part C: Professional Development Duration is 45 minutes per session. Duration October-April Total of 15 sessions. - Writing Process for English Language Learners- October (3 sessions) October 18, 20, and 25 Curriculum and Instruction - Integrated Co-Teaching- Monthly - at grade level meetings - Strategies and Scaffolds/Co-teaching ELLs - January-April ( 10 sessions) January 10, 17, and 24 February 14, 28 March 7, 14, and 21 April 4, 25 - Assessment and Accommodations - February (2 sessions) February 9, 16 NO cost to the program- Offered during the school day The above mentioned PDs will provide the necessary preparation for teachers to help ELLs in their classroom. The PDs will enhance teacher knowledge and skills, which will result in changes to teaching practices. Ultimately if the teachers are better prepared to serve our ELL population, student language and academic achievement will be higher. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: At Comprehensive Model School Project, parents are partners of the school and their involvement is needed and valued. They are a vital part of our school's Leadership Team. Parents of both ELLs and the our immigrant population are oriented to the programs we offer as well as programs offered by the NYCDOE. They are informed of the related policies as well as assessments, state standards, school expectations and policies. We communicate regularly with parents through our monthly school calendar and PA meetings. The concerns of all parents are openly discussed during monthly School Leadership Team meetings as well. Workshops are also conducted for the parents to address their concerns. Bilingual staff is in attendance to provide translation. Parental notification of non English speaking parents is done through school personnel as mentioned above. The Principal’s communications regarding rules, regulations as well as school information is done via translated memorandum. Our Parent Coordinator and the family workers who are on the school premises are available during the day for the Spanish speaking families. We also access the translation unit’s services for oral translation over the phone for languages other than Spanish. We also have multilingual staff in the building that can 2018-19 CEP 45  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities translate. In this manner we are able to communicate to our non-English parents and students. Parents receive phone calls and letters from teachers that inform about the after school program and the student’s progress. We provide an over-the-phone interpreter when calling parents. We make sure that activities in the Title III program for parents are based on parental interest gathered from surveys and questionnaires in both English and Spanish. We value parent involvement in their children’s education as an important factor to achieve our goals as educators. We have ongoing contacts with parents of ELL students three times a year (September, November, and April). In addition, we have planned to provide the following: Total of 23 sessions Duration September 16-June 16 1. ELD -English Language Development November 4, 2016 (1 hour) Target number of parents: 15 2. Common Core Learning Standards-Math Fluency January 13, 2017 (1 hour) Target number of parents: 15 3. Develop a Family Literacy Program for Parents February 2017 (To continue for 6 sessions on Mondays/Wednesdays for a total of 12 hours) - Once a week parents will learn English and basic computer skills. Target number of parents is 15. Side By Side book and student workbook will be used. Duration February 1 - February 27 ( 2 hours- 3:30-5:30) 4. Homework Success September 3, 2016-November 18, 2016 ( Friday/Biweekly 3:15-4:15) Total 4 sessions 5. Multicultural Family Night- May 31, 2017 ( 1 session/2 hours) 6. ELL parent meetings - Monthly/ September-June ( 45 minutes) Total of 10 sessions During the school day - Thursday meeting ( parental engagement) Our certified ENL teacher, Ms. Hasandocaj, will be teaching ENL and Computer Literacy to parents. She will be paid using Title III funds. The ENL teacher and the Parent Coordinator, will reach out to parents through notification letters, flyers, and phone calls. Records will be kept in a binder in Room 332 by Ms. Hasandocaj. This binder will include the agendas, attendance sheets, and invitations sent to parents in their preferred language. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ 0 Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. 2018-19 CEP 46  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ 0 Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 2018-19 CEP 47  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 9 School Name Comprehensive Model School Project Borough Bronx School Number 327 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Alixandre Ricci Coach Roubi Eliopulous ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Ornela Hasandocaj Teacher/Subject Area Stephanie Solano/ELA Teacher/Subject Area Caroline Rivera/Sped Related-Service Provider Sheila Corporan Superintendent Leticia Rosario Assistant Principal Randi Brown Coach Philip Marcus School Counselor Nancy Pichardo Parent Marisol Burgos Parent Coordinator Mercedelli Graciano Field Support Center Staff Member type here Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 2 1 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 3 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 1 1 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 700 2018-19 CEP 48 Total number of ELLs 86 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 12.29%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 3 4 2 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? At Comprehensive Model School Project, we use ELL Periodic Assessment as an initial assessment. School leadership uses the results of the ELL Periodic Assessment to know performance levels of different classes in the school in reading, writing and listening. Knowledge of common strengths and weaknesses aids our administrators in planning curriculum and selecting leveled text for units of study. Through item analysis, the ENL teacher uses the results to plan lessons for whole classes and individual students. Teachers also ascertain which particular skill areas students are proficient in, as well as, where they are having difficulty. Based on the ELL Periodic Assessment data, we know that ELLs can benefit from increased reading and writing practice. Through differentiated instruction, teachers use alternate text and varied writing activities to help students build literacy. We also use the NYSESLAT, NYSITELL, the ELA exam results, and the teacher made tests/observations to learn which specific learning skills our ELLs are not meeting the standard on and based on these data, we make plans to target these skills in their 2018-19 CEP 49  instruction. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? In order to support this effort, we start planning in the summer with the content area teachers. we create a schedule for the assessments to be conducted and compare data on a regular basis. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? The success of our ELL program is evaluated by the number of students who advance from entering, emerging, transitioning to expanding and ultimately commanding as evidenced by the NYSESLAT results. We also use the STAR Reading results. Our teachers work together during professional periods and during our grade level meetings to plan and revise units of study to meet the needs of our diverse population of ELL students. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? We have an RTI team, directed by the ENL coordinator, which will meet in order to address needs based on the data. Ms. Hasandocaj will also attend various professional developments and workshops in order to learn about the latest successful interventions to be implemented with our students. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] N/A 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The NYSESLAT report indicates that the ELLs data pattern across proficiency levels have increased based on the report from 2015 to 2016. Data shows that students in a three-year span have increased from an entering level to a commanding level of proficiency. The report also indicates students progressing with gains throughout the modalities even though very few are still at the same proficiency level. When students enter in September of the school year and take the NYSESLAT in the spring, scores indicate gains. The 2016 NYSESLAT data reveals that the majority of the ELLs in our school are in the expanding level. However, while many of the ELLs scored proficient in the writing/speaking modality, most of them scored intermediate or advanced in the reading/listening modality. We also look at the ELA and Math state scores, performance tasks and the Regents. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? We print ATS reports of all testing data from the previous school year. Then we look through the data for our ELLs where we create a spreadsheet of all results and share them with the teachers in the beginning of the school year in a PD. The RTI team meets in order to make the necessary adjustment to scheduling, programming and instructional focus. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). 2018-19 CEP 50  a. Freestanding ENL program. Students identified as English language learners are placed in monolingual English-speaking classes. These students receive the required periods of English as a Second Language from a certified ENL teacher. We utilize a Freestanding ENL program, with stand-alone and integrated models. Students are placed as per their grade and age appropriate level. Their English proficiency varies between very few entering, emerging and transitioning and a majority in expanding, therefore differentiated small group instruction is provided in order to better accommodate their language and academic needs. Standalone ENL groups are based on their proficiency level and receive a total of 180 minutes a week. In certain grades, the ENL teacher Ms. Hasandocaj co-teaches with classroom teachers during assigned periods of the day to deliver integrated instruction to students who have achieved an expanding or commanding based on this year's NYSESLAT test or tested out of ENL within the past 2 years. For the students at the entering level, a stand-alone ENL program is designed and aligned with the ELA curriculum. Students receive 180 minutes of stand-alone ENL and 180 integrated into the ELA class. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? We make sure that the mandated instructional minutes are provided according to the proficiency levels. The ENL teacher is aware of the New York State mandated minutes of instruction for their ELLs. CMSP 327 is in compliance in regards to our programming and scheduling based upon these state mandates. ENL students identified as either Entering (EN) or Emerging (EM) receive 360 minutes of ENL instruction per week, and ENL students identified as Transitional (TR) or Expanding (EX) receive 180 minutes of ENL instruction per week. For our high-school ENL Entering students we provide 540 minutes of ENL instruction a week, for the Emerging ELLs 360 minutes a week, and for the Transitioning and Expanding ELLs 180 minutes of ENL. The students who have tested out in the last two years, (Commanding) will be provided with 90 minutes of ENL services a week. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. At CMSP 327 the teachers use instructional practices that make content more accessible and comprehensible for ELLs using SIOP practices inclusive of building background, relating the material to the students cultural understanding, using language accessible to the students and emphasizing key vocabulary through a variety of activities. Additionally the content area teachers provide multiple opportunities for discussion and comprehension development based on experiments and projects conducted in class with readily available opportunities for students to analyze data, and learn the scientific experiment methods. In addition, ENL classes include instruction designed to improve content area achievement. For example, the use of various non-fiction texts in ENL classes gives teachers the opportunity to teach and reinforce non-fiction, content area reading, and writing strategies. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Spanish LAB is administered to identify English language learners whose home language is Spanish. Students are screened as per CR 154, Part 117 for a learning disability as well as per their language deficiencies. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing 2018-19 CEP 51  d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a. At CMSP, we work with SIFE students, if any, making sure that we build a supportive environment that responds to the immediate social, cultural, and linguistic needs of such students. We work on activating students' prior knowledge to stimulate student motivation, and determine where to start instruction as well as lay out the next steps. Some other strategies include: word associations, KWL charts, and anticipation guides. A print-rich environment, grade-appropriate texts or texts that are written for a lower reading level, high interest, low ability books, and bilingual glossaries are provided to support such students' learning. Additional small group instruction strategies used include: Total Physical Response, modeling, bridging, contextualization, and text representation. b. Instruction for students who have been in the program less than three years is presented using several modalities in order to address different proficiency level and different learning styles as well. Newcomers are paired with a highly proficient ENL student as learning buddy. The ELL student buddy helps the newcomer adjust to the cultural aspects of the school and expectations within each class. He acts as a mentor and tutor to the newcomer. Vocabulary development, visuals, repetition, and other scaffolding strategies are used to differentiate instruction and to move students from Basic Interpersonal Communication Skills (BICS) to Cognitive Academic Language Proficiency (CALP). c./d. Students who have received ENL services for 4 to 6 years or have completed six years are eligible to receive Academic Intervention Services. This is provided for long-term ELLs, ELLs with special needs, and ELLs who need transitional support in academic areas. Students who exhibit inadequate growth on reading assessments receive additional minutes per day in literacy instruction using a reading intervention program focused on helping them achieve grade-level proficiency in each essential reading component like phonemic awareness, comprehension, etc. They are placed in flexible groups that change according to need and progress. Students are also provided with additional instructional time during extended day and after school. Problem solving is another way we use to support them as we implement Response to Intervention (RTI) model. Pair and group work is planned for long-term ELLs to ease their frustration and to further support their understanding. Sharing in small groups develops their listening and speaking skills as they gain confidence and prepare to share in a larger group. Pre-writing activities and thinking aloud while modeling for students is crucial to understanding and preparing ELLs for different tasks as we gradually increase the level of difficulty and higher order thinking skills. e. Former ELLs are supported using differentiated instruction, and small groups. Using multiple sources for information gives former ELLs a chance to access information using different modalities. They continue to build their academic language through an emphasis on learning vocabulary in context. They are also entitled to use dictionaries for word-for-word translations on state exams for the first two years after they score proficient. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? The same ELA and Math curriculum is used for students with disabilities. This curriculum is modified and scaffolded to fit the needs of ELLs with disabilities. An RTI program is in place to target specific needs of students. In order to differentiate instruction for the ELLs, our school has several programs in place that provide supplementary support. Texts that better assist students in learning core academic objectives will be used, in order to provide access to the key grade-level appropriate concepts in the curriculum. This assists our students to strengthen their literacy skills and allows for differentiated instruction within the classroom. Cooperative learning, comprehensible input, technology, and current events to help students reach and exceed their reading and writing levels. In addition, our school uses Lexia, another program that assists students in the development of their phonemic awareness, decoding skills, fluency, and spelling. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Differentiated instructional methods include the use of small groups and cooperative learning (with occasional one-on-one instruction), both of which seem to enhance inclusion, peer acceptance, access to the general education curriculum, and improved student achievement based on classroom observation data. Additionally, teachers use guided reading and small-group instruction. They adapt instruction for ELL-SWD students. ELL-SWD students requiring accommodations (i.e. additional time for classroom tests/projects, etc) work directly with our IEP coordinator, who has a schedule which has been programmed to allow for flexibility to work with these students when needed. Some of our ELL-SWD students are mainstreamed for certain subjects and some others attend a research writing class with non-disabled peers. 2018-19 CEP 52  8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. After school classes and tutoring in ENL, ELA, Math, Regents Preparation, Science and Social Studies are offered to support the transition of ELLs. Bilingual dictionaries and visuals are used in content area classes to support content comprehension and mastery. Intervention Services are provided for all of our English Language Learners. The Extended Day/ After-School Program for Beginners and Intermediate ENL students takes place between 3:15 P.M. to 4:15 P.M. Monday-Friday. Here, these students receive additional support in the four modalities of reading, writing, listening, and speaking. We also offer a Saturday Enrichment Program in which the ENL teachers utilize a balanced literacy instructional approach. Reading and writing workshops are comprised of independent reading, a mini-lesson, an active engagement, a work period and a closing. The Advanced ELL students work through author, genre, and thematic studies. The beginning and intermediate ELL students will focus on the skills of reading, writing, listening, and speaking through the use of thematic units of study. In addition, all ELL students are offered after school and Saturday programs in ELA, Math, and other content area subjects. All ELL students will also be offered a NYSESLAT preparation course after school in the spring semester. Native language support is given to the students through the teacher who is bilingual or classmates. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? For the upcoming year, we are considering block periods to accommodate the students at the entering level. RTI program will also be expanded. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? N/A 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. Our ELLs are afforded equal access to all school programs.Intervention Services are provided for all of our English Language Learners. The Extended Day/ After-School Program for Beginners and Intermediate ENL students takes place between 3:15 P.M. to 4:15 P.M. Monday-Friday. Here, these students receive additional support in the four modalities of reading, writing, listening, and speaking. We also offer a Saturday Enrichment Program in which the ENL teachers utilize a balanced literacy instructional approach. Students participate in 90 minute literacy blocks which contain a reading and writing workshop. These reading and writing workshops are comprised of independent reading, a mini-lesson, an active engagement, a work period and a closing. The Advanced ELL students will work through author, genre, and thematic studies. The beginning and intermediate ELL students focus on the skills of reading, writing, listening, and speaking through the use of thematic units of study. In addition, all ELL students are offered after school and Saturday programs in ELA, Math, and other content area subjects. They also participate in all extra-curricular activities and are members of all school clubs.All ELL students will also be offered a NYSESLAT preparation course after school in the spring semester. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Every ELA, ENL and Social Studies classroom is equipped with a classroom-leveled library. Each classroom has a smart board for teachers to help with visualization and reading, as well as laptops equipped with language acquisition and acceleration programs to be used in ENL classes.CMSP 327 recognizes that ELLs require specialized materials. The ENL teachers use books that are rich in content to promote language and conceptual development, and they are made accessible through the pictures or the print so that students at all levels can benefit. The ENL teacher uses large visuals, graphic organizers, and other materials essential to making content comprehensible. The Inside textbook series has an interactive technological component and we will also use Achieve 3000, Lexia, and Rosetta Stone to help students in their language development. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? 2018-19 CEP 53  In our Free-standing ENL program, our ELLs receive native language support through the use of bilingual dictionaries and bilingual content-area glossaries. Our special needs ELLs also receive additional native language support through the inclusion of bilingual paraprofessionals in their classroom. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Our required services support and our resources correspond to our English language learners' varying ages, grade levels, and different levels of language proficiencies. Our ENL students are supported through required services in their content area subjects and content area instruction in the classroom by both the ENL teacher and classroom teacher. All ELLs are offered standard-based instruction according to their age and grade level. Regents skills classes for Regents exams required in the high school grades are offered to the entire student body including ELLs. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Every ELA, ESL and Social Studies classroom is equipped with a classroom-leveled library. Each classroom has a smartboard for teachers to help with visualization and reading, as well as laptops equipped with language acquisition and acceleration programs to be used in ESL classes.CMSP 327 recognizes that ELLs require specialized materials. The ESL teachers use books that are rich in content to promote language and conceptual development, and they are made accessible through the pictures or the print so that students at all levels can benefit. The ESL teacher uses large visuals, graphic organizers, and other materials essential to making content comprehensible. The Inside textbook series has an interactive technological component and we also use Achieve 3000, Lexia, and Rosseta Stone to help students in their language development. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). To assist our ELLs in their transition from elementary school to the middle school and from middle school to high school, the Comprehensive Model School Project organizes a Summer Orientation event in July in which newly enrolled students learn to acclimate themselves to the school community through team-building activities and a tour of the school. The Principal addresses ELLs during an assembly in which required testing, graduation requirements, and ELLs’ right to extended time during testing are emphasized. In addition, students are assessed, and, using the results of these assessments, students with the lower scores are enrolled in a three-week Extended Summer Program in which they receive intensive instruction in ELA/ESL and Math. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Currently our school offers Spanish for8th grade and high school students. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? 2018-19 CEP 54  All of our ELL personnel and teachers of ELLs are highly encouraged to attend and participate in numerous professional development seminars intended to provide additional support and knowledge regarding the instruction of our ELL students, and all students throughout the academic school year. At CMSP 327, we hold weekly administration-initiated and/or teacher-initiated professional development workshops for all teachers. In addition, our ENL teachers frequently attend professional development seminars and workshops related to ENL curriculum and instruction throughout the academic year. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. This year we are focusing on Questioning and Discussion, RTI and SIOP training in many of our professional development seminars. Throughout the 2015 - 2016 school year, our ENL teacher will receive professional development in effective ESL instructional practices in-house and outside the school building courtesy of our CFN. Similar PD opportunities will be accessible to general education teachers as well. Through horizontal and vertical lesson planning collaboration, teachers will have the opportunity to share best common practices to best serve our ELL populations. 15% of professional development hours will be provided for all teachers, and 50% for the ENL/ESL teacher which will be specific to the needs of ELLs, co-teaching strategies, and integrating language and content instruction for ELLs. Staff development began in September 2015. The ENL teacher will provide the training for all classroom and special education teachers. The topics to be covered are as follows: a. ENL Methodologies and how to use them in mainstream classroom b. Content Area Instruction and ELLs c. LAP policy d. ELL promotional criteria e. SIOP model f. ENL Standards and Language Allocation Policy g. ELL students and testing accommodations h. ENL teaching strategies for classroom teacher i. Translation and Interpretation Services for parents of ELL students The topics chosen will help classroom teachers address the needs of ELL students in their classrooms. Ms. Hasandocaj will have a signing sheet at each training to record the attendance and will store these records. In addition, the ENL teachers will continue to attend professional developments offered by the Office of Language Learners as well as monthly ELL Liaison meetings, which are facilitated by our CFN. The school administrators fully support all the ELL teachers and all personnel that work with ELLs. They have made success for ELLs a central issue in school, and they have made sure that the ENL program is well understood by all the staff. They make sure ELLs have access to the full resources of the school. To accomplish this our school has created a cross-disciplinary school-wide team that includes the ELL teachers, content-area teachers who teach English language learners, the guidance counselor who specializes in the needs of ELLs, key school administrators, parent coordinator, and other staff. Such team has a common planning period and meets regularly to align curriculum; plan integrated, cross-content projects; address student concerns; and monitor student progress. School support staff (the librarian, social worker, technology leader, and so on) attend some meetings to ensure that ELLs have access to an array of learning resources and services. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? 2018-19 CEP 55  At Comprehensive Model School Project 327, we realize the importance of a strong home and school partnership. We work diligently to ensure that parents are involved in our school. Parents are part of our Leadership Team.Our Parent Coordinator and Parent’s Association President collaborate to increase parent involvement. Parents participate in different activities organized by the school or the Parent Association such as meetings, parent-teacher conferences, workshops, school functions, homework assistance/tutoring, home educational enrichment, decision-making, and other aspects of our school governance. etc. Some of them volunteer to chaperone on trips, field days, school dances, and other festivities. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. The parent can arrange a meeting at any time to talk with the ESL teacher about progress and goals for the student. We evaluate needs of parents through surveys and questionnaires in both English and Spanish. This year in order to enhance student literacy development we will provide a series of literacy workshops that actively engage parents in working directly with their children on literacy activities, e.g., teaching parents reading and writing strategies so that they could support homework assignment/projects at home. Another workshop we like to provide to the parents is teaching them how to use New York City as a resource. We will provide trips to expose parents to the rich resources available to them as being residents of New York City, e.g., museums, public library, Broadway theaters etc. By attending these workshops parents will be able to become more involved in helping their children improve their school work. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: N/A 2018-19 CEP 56 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Alixandre Ricci, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 57  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: CMSP327 School DBN: Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Alixandre Ricci Title Principal Tannis Sertima Assistant Principal Mercedelli Graciano Parent Coordinator Ornela Hasandocaj ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent Stephanie Solano Teacher/Subject Area Caroline Rivera Teacher/Subject Area Philip Marcus Roubi Eliopulous Coach Coach Nancy Pichardo School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 10/30/15 10/30/15 10/30/15 10/30/15 10/30/15 10/30/15 10/30/15 10/30/15 10/30/15 10/30/15 10/30/15 2018-19 CEP 58 2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools School Name: Comprehensive Model School Project Superintendent: Leticia Rosario DBN: 09x327 The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Melina Portuhondo Parent Coordinator Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. The data and methodologies used to assess our school`s written translation and oral presentation needs consist of the following: At registration we look at the language spoken by each parent when they complete various required forms: -Parent Language Surveys which asks parents in what language do they prefer written and oral correspondence. -Student Registration Form through informal interviews help us determine the language needs of our parents. -The Language Allocation Policy (LAP) which contains information about ELLs by grade in each language group. 2018-19 CEP 59  -The report of the place of birth (RPOB). -327 Orientations where parents and students surveys are administered. -Emergency contact cards parents write their language preference on it. Based on this data, we then conclude what languages our parents speak. A majority of our staff members are bilingual (Spanish, French, Arabic) and provide assistance when needed to ensure that all of our parents are provided with appropriate and timely information in a language they can understand. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral At this time 90% of our families needing translation services are Spanish speaking. Currently, there are 2 ELLs who speak Arabic,1 French, 1 Africana, 1 Twi, 1 Yoruba, and 2 These findings were reported to the school community at School Leadership Team meetings and Parent Association meetings. - English 100% English Spanish 100% Spanish 100% 100% - - - - 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. - Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. 2018-19 CEP 60  Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to Families How do you plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Translation is done by the LAC or by another bilingual staff member to ensure timely translation. September 2017-June2018 - - At CMSP 327, we provide written translation services in Spanish. Several members of the staff are able to assist with this effort including our Parent Coordinator and bilingual teachers, bilingual para-professionals as well as members of the Parent Association. The ESL teacher is also designated as the Language Assistant Coordinator. When the Language Assistant Coordinator is unavailable, a member of the bilingual staff will translate documents. For families needing translation other than Spanish, we connect them with other families in the school that speak the same language to translate communications. In addition, online translation devices are used to support the translation of all necessary documents. These documents include parent notifications, parent handbook, calendars, parent -teacher conference announcements, flyers, after-school program letters, Saturday school letters, NYS testing dates, parent math chapter letters, parent night announcements, permission slips, etc. - 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings Similar to written communications that need translation, we will provide interpretation services for Spanish speaking families. A large number of staff members are available to provide this service, including our Language Assistant/ESL teacher, parent coordinator, a family worker, our school September 2017-June 2018 How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? Translation is done by the LAC or by another bilingual staff member to 2018-19 CEP 61  nurse, bilingual teachers, bilingual paraprofessionals, and school aides. All oral interpretation will be provided by our school staff whenever possible. Staff members will be tapped upon to provide this service depending on the nature of the matter. When interpretation is needed for a language other than Spanish parent volunteers or staff who speak that same language and English will support us. This will be especially important for the few families that need oral interpretation in a language other than Spanish. The Department of Education Translation and Interpretation Unit will be used if we are unable to provide specific translation services for an appropriate language. Signs are posted in the main office indicating the appropriate languages that are offered for translation services. - ensure accurate translation. - - 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. The school uses a ROBO call that goes out in multiple languages. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. All staff members at CMSP 327 have seen this Chancellor's Regulation and it will be discussed on the first day of school in a staff meeting. Translation is made available to staff so they can have resources to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Parents whose primary language is other that English are provided with a copy of the Bill of Parent Rights and Responsibilities which include their rights regarding translation and interpretation services. To inform parents of available language services a sign is posted in the main office indicating the appropriate languages available for translation services. 2018-19 CEP 62  Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Parents are made aware of the services offered at our school. Parents who want to receive language access services are encouraged to contact the school. Surveys are used to gather information on the services and/or needs that parent may have. The parent coordinator and PA members make sure that they communicate on a regular basis with parents and bring their concerns and/or requests to the school leadership meeting. 2018-19 CEP 63 
