2018-19 RISE SCHOOL COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (R-CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 09X329 School Name: DREAMYARD PREPARATORY SCHOOL Principal: ALICIA WARGO 2018-19 CEP-RISE 1  Rise School Comprehensive Educational Plan (R-CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: Executive Summary and Organizing Principles Section 3: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 4: Rise School Narrative Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) Section 7: Community School Partnerships Section 8: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 9: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 10: Title I Program Information Section 11: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP-RISE 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Dreamyard Preparatory High School 09X329 320900011329 9-12 School Number (DBN): 240 East 172 nd Street Bronx NY 10457 718-410-4242 718-410-4312 Phone Number: Nydia Jimenez Fax: njimenez@dreamyard.com School Contact Person: Community School CBO: Principal: Community School Director: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): Geographical District: 9 DamarisRodriguez Email Address: Alicia Wargo MikaBurns Maria Gonzalez AunitaGrant Nicole Wynaar Sandra Salifu Daniel Zumba District Information Michael Alcoff Superintendent: 2MetrotechCenter, 3rd floor, Brooklyn, NY 11201 Superintendent’s Office Address: malcoff@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-935-3074 Phone Number: 718-935-3948 Fax: FSC: Bronx Field Support Center (FSC) Executive Director: Jose Ruiz 2018-19 CEP-RISE 3  Executive Director’s Office Address: 1 FordhamPlaza, Room841 JRuiz2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-828-7776 Phone Number: 718-828-7776 Fax: 2018-19 CEP-RISE 4  Section 2: Executive Summary and Organizing Principles The Objective To guide, support and accelerate the early progress demonstrated by the schools graduating out of the Renewal program, as Rising Schools of Excellence (Rise), with a compelling theory of action, clear strategy for sustainment, targeted individualized supports, continued accountability, gradual release of responsibility, such that they independently accelerate their growth trajectory. Background Rise Schools have demonstrated: ● ● they have the will and conditions in place to accelerate student growth and meet school improvement benchmarks. they have the capacity to lead/implement a school improvement strategy. Rise Schools have seen some gains1 across multiple measures including graduation rates, college readiness, state test scores and attendance. As a result, these schools will fully transition out of the Renewal Schools program at the end of the 2017-2018 SY and continue under the guidance of the Office of Field Support, in partnership with the Office of School Support and Supervision. 1All Rise Schools met at least 67% of their benchmarks, are not on the State’s Priority list, and have demonstrated a sustainable school improvement structure that will allow them to build on their progress. Six Rise Keys for Continued Improvement 1. Strengthen the Instructional Core 2. Strengthen Instructional Leadership Capacity 3. 4. Apply a tiered approach to student intervention 5. Promote a positive, inclusive school environment for students, staff, parents and Improve Data Driven Practices community partners Increase monitoring and accountability 6. Theory of Action If the NYC Department of Education provides customized supports to Rise schools and principals designed around the “Six Rise School Keys for continued improvement” then, Rise principals and their teams will have the tools and resources to accelerate outcomes for ALL students and increase students’ access to an excellent and equitable education. Structure of the Rise School Comprehensive Educational Plan (R-CEP) The Rise School Comprehensive Educational Plan (R-CEP) will serve as the organizing and overarching document for each Rise school and will be directly aligned and developed around the elements of the Framework for Great Schools, New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, and Strong Schools, Strong Communities, including the following: ● Rise Benchmarks: please refer to the 2018-19 Rise benchmarks provided to your school. ● Establishing an overarching summative vision aligned with elements of the Framework for Great Schools and documenting key areas of celebration and Rise through analysis of assessments and by envisioning what the desired outcome for each school will be at the end of the School Rise process. ● Setting mid-year point benchmarks that create the path for improvement by focusing on desired outcomes and goals. In this way, the plan will be mapped to the overarching summative vision. In addition to the five discrete goals formed around the elements of the Framework for Great Schools, each school will create an action plan. ● Transformation into a community school in order to increase student and family access to physical and mental health services and other social-emotional supports made available in or near the school. ● Expanded learning opportunities for all students, including additional instruction provided during afterschool and/or summer programming provided in collaboration with community partners. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 5  ● Intensive professional development for all staff to ensure effective implementation of curriculum and instruction aligned to the Next Generation Learning Standards (NGLS) and to support staff in effectively responding to the differentiated academic and social-emotional needs of all students. ● Additional, focused strategies to increase parent and family engagement. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Information on the Framework for Great Schools and the DTSDE Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department has established programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students supports to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and the R-CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Rise School Comprehensive Educational Plan (R-CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint for continuous improvement that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to increase student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five (5) goals and action plans that align with the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 6  The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. Accountability Tools and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is informed by the New York State Education Department’s (NYSED) Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) Tenets, the American Institute of Research (AIR) Needs Assessment, the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYSED’s Six DTSDE Tenets To strengthen the existing system, the NYSED has developed a tool that captures the best practices from each of the current tools – they call it a Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness. This new tool encompasses multiple instruments such as interviews, classroom observations and surveys. The protocol will begin with a clear and cogent statement of the optimal conditions of an effective school and the instruments comprising the protocol will measure how close or far away a particular school is to the optimal conditions identified. Once reviewed, the school and district will create a strategic plan to address the areas in need of improvement. All Priority and Focus Schools and Focus 2018-19 CEP-RISE 7  Districts must use the new tool; and districts that are required to submit District Comprehensive Improvement Plans and Comprehensive Education Plans also will use the tool. The DTSDE protocol includes a rubric, which identifies clear and coherent expectations of the optimal conditions of an effective school and school district across the following six tenets:  Tenet 1: District Leadership and Capacity  Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions  Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support  Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions  Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health, and  Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 2017-18 Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Structures for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:  a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; 2018-19 CEP-RISE 8 a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC)  It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the R-CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the R-CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. Next Steps for R-CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists in every Rise school and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the American Institute of Research (AIR) needs assessment, the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: In Part 1A of the Section 5: Needs Assessment indicate the Rise Key and the corresponding statement of Practice (SOP) from the DTSDE Tenets that will be addressed in the action plan. Schools that received an Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) School Review should use the recommendations from the review to select their SOPs. Schools that did not undergo an IIT review should select SOPs informed by the major findings/recommendations from your most recent Quality Review (QR) or Central-led Review (CLR), and other qualitative and quantitative data.  Step 4: Discuss and respond to the guiding questions under each Framework element.  Step 5: Revisit your school’s current goals, and strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you have identified, and will let your school community know when you have reached your goal.  Step 6: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 7: Update your school’s AIS section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 8: Complete the Expanded Learning Time (ELT) and the Community School sections.  Step 9: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether strategies and activities outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust practices along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Rise Program Priorities Our Rise Theory of Action (page 4) is drawn from research1 on turnaround schools, the DOE Framework for Great Schools, DTSDE Tenets, and the Quality Review, which suggest that these key priorities have the greatest impact on student achievement. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 9  RISE Keys Priorities 1. Strengthen the Instructional Core 2. Strengthen Instructional Leadership Capacity 3. Improve Data Driven Practices 4. Apply a tiered approach to school support and intervention 5. Promote a positive, inclusive school environment for students, staff, parents and community partners 6. Increase monitoring and accountability  A clear focus aligned to students’ instructional needs, including college and career readiness  Access to common, standards-based curricula for all students, including ELLs and SWDs  Explicit and intentional embedding of culturally responsive Instruction in all content areas  Formative and summative assessments for all students in all grades that are aligned to curricula and produce clear evidence of learning  Tiered approach to teacher professional learning opportunities.  Partnership with families to increase engagement in students’ academic success  Implementation of a coherent vision for school improvement - a vision for leading learning, leading people, leading schools and leading change  Development of a system to support distributive leadership and build the capacity and sustainability of teacher leaders through continuous improvement  Developing leadership competencies, specific to turnaround efforts, including leveraging multiple stakeholders, a commitment to student learning and a sustained pursuit of measurable progress. Strategic allocation of resources to support instructional and professional learning plans and family engagement in leadership opportunities Integrative use of formative and summative assessment tools and practices to target resources and support throughout the year to achieve academic priorities    Ongoing analyses of school-wide and student-level data and adjustments to curricular resources and instructional moves  Prioritization of the use of standards and data to inform teaching and learning    Implementation of a tiered intervention system that engages teacher teams in frequent cycles of progress monitoring and adjustments to address diverse student needs School establishes coherent system, adopted by all to ensure that interventions are effective, differentiated and timely Increased use of teacher teams’ data-driven practices to accelerate student achievement  Clear strategy that establishes social norms within the school community and promotes a culture for learning with clear and high expectations for all students, in partnership with CBOs.  The sustainability of an environment where students feel safe, connected and engaged through practices that are culturally relevant and build their scholarly identity  The development of a whole school approach, in partnership with families, with   specific attention to social, physical and behavioral environments Social emotional learning practices embedded in teaching and learning as aligned to the Collaborative for Academic, Social and Emotional learning (CASEL) competencies and supported by CBOs. School leaders implement effective monitoring systems to ensure that instructional practices and interventions are monitored closely at the classroom, team, and school wide level  Establish effective teacher team practices that ensure teachers are accountable for data findings and set timely and appropriate interventions  Data analysis results in adjustments to the programs and priorities to better service   students Foster positive systems for accountability driven by reflection and action planning Support from district leaders to focus efforts toward results and problem solving actions that lead to turnaround success. 1. Darden/Curry PLE – Turnaround Leadership Competencies and Turnaround Action Shown to Influence Student Achievement 2018-19 CEP-RISE 10  Achievement Network – SY 18-19 Foundations Rubric COSEBOC Standards and Promising Practices for Schools Educating Boys of Color Harvard Graduate School of Education and Harvard Business School: Certificate in School Management and Leadership Learner-Centered Initiatives Multidimensional Principal Performance Rubric Monitoring and Accountability ● Rise schools will be monitored for implementation of the Rise Comprehensive Educational Plan (R+CEP) by Superintendents and Office of Field Support. ● Rise schools will be held accountable for making progress according to annual targets set by the Department of Education, as evidenced by their attainment of named benchmark scores for each annualized key metric. Schools not achieving annual targets by June 2019 are subject to additional oversight and consequences, to be determined at a later date. ● OFS will bring increased oversight and accountability by monitoring FSC supports to schools and ensure that these are aligned with the school’s instructional focus, student and teacher needs, and moving the school toward achieving interim goals. ● OSSS will monitor DSR oversight of all supports to Rise Schools. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 11  Section 3: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Directions: All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Rise School Comprehensive Educational Plan (R-CEP). SLT members’ signatures indicates that they have been consulted with and given the opportunity to provide feedback on the plan and the plan’s alignment with the school-based budget to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Expanded Learning Time, Community School initiative, Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. On the chart below: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the second column. 2. 3. In the first column, indicate using an “X” if the person is an SLT member. In the third column, record the position and constituent group represented such as staff, parent, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), or other contributor. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 4. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the R-CEP, not approval. 5. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Signature (Blue Ink) Check if SLT x x x x x x x x Name Position and Constituent Group Alicia Wargo Naomi Pharr Danielle Poole TenniaMorrison-Castro JoaoOrtega Eddie Torres Sandra Salifu Daniel Zumba Represented *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Community School Director (staff) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) 2018-19 CEP-RISE 12 Signature (Blue Ink) Check if SLT x x x x x Name Position and Constituent Group AunitaGrant Rosanna Reyes XiomaraNunez BraziliaMartin Represented Staff/ SLT Chairperson Parent Parent Parent Parent Staff/Parent/Other Contributor Staff/Parent/Other Contributor Staff/Parent/Other Contributor Staff/Parent/Other Contributor Staff/Parent/Other Contributor Staff/Parent/Other Contributor Staff/Parent/Other Contributor 2018-19 CEP-RISE 13  Section 4: Rise School Narrative In a brief narrative, describe the current state of the Rise school addressing the following and please use existing data, where applicable: 1. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including your school’s mission statement and a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Identify any special student populations that the school has and what their specific needs are. 2. 3. Describe your school’s approach to family engagement and progress made with establishing families as partners in furthering student achievement 4. Describe how your school is leveraging community school partnerships to support progress in elements of the Framework for Great Schools and your Rise Benchmarks and indicate where this has been a challenge. 5. Summarize the Expanded Learning Time (ELT) opportunities that have been offered to your students this year. Dreamyard Preparatory High School has 25% ELL students, 24% Students with Disabilities, 18% Students in Temporary Housing, 19% Overage Students. 25% of Dreamyard’s entire school population is comprised of over-the-counter students, which arrive after the school year has started. There are several students in our community that overlap categories. Our students enter high school with a variety of learning needs that range from reading below grade level to language acquisition to mathematical deficiencies. Some of our students have barriers that prevent them from attending school that include: needing to work to support their families, attending appointments with parents or caregivers that do not speak English, historical disengagement with school, having children of their own, and social-emotional difficulties directed related to structural issues of racism and poverty. It is our mission at Dreamyard Prep to provide equitable access to a high-quality, college preparatory-aligned curriculum to all of our students, no matter what challenges they face. At Dreamyard Preparatory High School, we believe that students learn best when they are engaged in learning activities aligned to our school’s mission of making students Life-Ready. Life-Readiness means: ● Students are ready for a meaningful career, whether that means going to a college or a technical or trade school. ● Students have the social-emotional skills necessary to help them navigate challenging situations, difficult emotions and adversity. ● Students believe that they can become successful adults ● Students genuinely care about other people and want to contribute to society in a meaningful way We divided our school’s instructional focus of Life-Readiness into 3 categories: Academic, Socio-Emotional, and College and Career- Ready. These categories align with our school’s 3 Core Values of Scholarship, Artistry and Character, which have existed since the inception of the school in 2006. As a community, all of our instructional practices, community norms and socio-emotional support structures are aligned to our overall goal of making our students Life-Ready. In considering the Framework for Great Schools and our school goals for 2017-18, Dreamyard Prep made the most progress in the areas of: Rigorous Instruction and Strong Family and Community Ties. The following structures were maintained in the 2017-18 School Year and will be sustained in the 2018-19 School Year: ● Shared core values/character posted in every classroom and re-enforced through Character awards given every semester at school assemblies. In addition to the three core values, our school provides explicit learning experiences around our core character values of perseverance, empathy, ambition, responsibility, self-discipline and respect. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 14  Students are offered the opportunity to engage with these values in Life-Ready Classes on each grade, which supports our young people in achieving the school's mission and vision. ● An established culture of restorative practices (circles) to promote high behavioral expectations focused around our core/character values as well as teach and learn what it means to be a community member. This has provided our young people with skills to deal with conflict resolution, decreased overall incidents of conflict and the need for administrative disciplinary measures. On the 2017-18 Learning Environment Survey, 90% of students reported that they felt safe in their classes and 84% said they feel safe in hallways, locker rooms, bathrooms and cafeteria. ● Life Ready Tasks are a standards-aligned culminating event/project that is a part of every unit at our school. Life Ready Tasks require students to engage with the unit of learning and apply it to real life skills necessary to be successful in the real world and that connect to one of our primary school goals of life readiness. An example of a Life Ready Task is a Socratic Seminar. Socratic Seminars represent a school initiative that all instructors have embraced as a strong Life Ready Task in which students engage in a dialogue anchored in evidence and research; primarily student run. This has created school-wide consistency across contents and student ownership over his/her education. ● Life-Ready Conferences, wherein the student is made responsible for communicating his/her progress to parents/guardians--onus is placed on the students and has encouraged self reflection and ownership of academic progress and prepared students for the life ready task of self advocacy. ● Biannual college tours (per grade) that have encouraged college/career readiness and engaged students in future behavioral expectations. Our 10th and 11th grade students engage in overnight college trips as a class to support our vision for equitable college access for all. ● Students in the arts programs are required to participate in biennial Arts Sharing wherein students showcase the work they have been creating in their respective arts classes to the rest of the school community and families. These Sharings communicate to students that they are expected to learn how to present their work in a professional manner, demonstrate growth over time, become familiar with public speaking, and stresses the responsibility of collaborating in an ensemble. ● Grade teams implement biannual “Kid Talk,” heterogeneous panels of students that are asked questions specifically designed to adjust teacher practice and improve DYP culture. Students demonstrate an ownership over the DYP community and recognize that they are major contributors to DYP culture. ● Leadership Class: The principal teaches a Leadership Class two mornings a week where she meets with a group of students representative of all grade levels. Student Leaders use this class to plan and facilitate community-building activities. Student Leaders in this class also serve as mentors to students in the 9th and 10th grades that have exhibited signs of being off-track. Student Mentoring happens once a week where mentors meet with their mentees to discuss their academic and behavioral progress and provide additional support with difficult assignments. In the 2018-19 School Year, tow of our ENL teachers will facilitate an "ELLs Leadership Class" to directly support our English Language Learners to assume leadership roles in our school community. ● Monthly Assemblies: The school conducts monthly assemblies around one of our Core Character Values of Empathy, Responsibility, Respect, Self-Discipline, Perseverance and Ambition. Students are integral in planning these events and often students from the Leadership Class facilitate school-wide circles immediately before the start of the assembly. ● We Are The School Committee (SLT): We changed the name of our SLT to “We Are The School Committee” in order to promote parent and student involvement. The team meets once a month to discuss school-wide initiatives and events, and is comprised of students, parents, teachers, and support staff. The team meets in the circle room, a space designated for restorative circle work. We sit in a circle during our meetings and utilize a talking piece. These changes have improved parent and student involvements in school-wide initiatives. Some of the events that the We Are The School Committee have conducted this school year are a Day of Appreciation, a school-wide Thanksgiving-style feast, 2018-19 CEP-RISE 15  as well as coordinating our first Parent/Teacher Conferences, which we call “Life Ready Conferences.” During these events, the team creates school-wide circles that all students participate in. Sometimes these are conducted in advisories, sometimes we divide students into cross-grade groupings, but during school-wide celebrations, all students participate in community-building circles at the same time. Some of these circles have included icebreaker games, collaborative art projects, and discussions about where we come from and who we are. These school-wide events have improved school culture and family involvement, as some students and parents have been attending meetings throughout the year. ● Life Ready Classes: We changed the name of Advisory to Life-Ready Classes. These classes meet twice a week. This time is used for Circles, homework support, and implementation of our college and career curriculum. ● School-wide Celebrations and Circles: We identify days/themes throughout a semester to promote community-building and student voice. Student Leaders help to plan and facilitate these days. On these days, we have a school-wide Circles where each Life-Ready Class participates in a Circle written by students, our dean, or members of the We are the School Committee. Recent themes have included: Day of Diversity, Day of Appreciation, Day of Solidarity, Community-Building, and DYP's Most Amazing Day. In order to build upon the 2017-18 Instructional Focus of implementing layered curriculum to meet the needs of all learners, DY Prep’s Instructional Focus for 2018-19 will be: If teachers use Interim Assessment Data to effectively layer daily learning experiences, then all students will have equitable access to rigorous thinking across academic subjects. In order to implement DY Prep’s instructional focus for the 2018-19 School Year, the following structures of support are in place: ● Common Planning Time for teachers across Grade Levels ● Weekly Department and Grade Team Meetings focused on Strategic Inquiry ● All Departments following the Data Wise Cycle of Inquiry ● Bi-monthly Department Head meetings focused on the academic achievement of English Language Learners ● Professional Development focused on developing challenge work for higher performing students, as well as developing appropriate scaffolds and a time line for releasing those scaffolds for our English Language Learners and Students with Disabilities. ● Professional Development provided by Q-Tel for teachers around best practices for ENL instruction. in order to improve in our family and community ties, DY Prep will continue its work as a Community School with Counseling in Schools as our Lead Partner. Dreamyard Prep is working closely with Counseling in Schools to increase family and student support, which has directly reduced Chronic Absenteeism from 52% in the 2016-17 School Year to 35% in the 2017-18 School Year. The following structures of support for students exhibiting signs of Chronic Absenteeism are in place: ● Success mentors for at-risk students ● Workshops for families on nutrition, finance, supporting your child through high-school ● College Workshops for our families and students beginning in 9th Grade ● We are the School Committee with members from all stakeholder groups 2018-19 CEP-RISE 16  ● Weekly counseling sessions for students that are exhibiting signs of chronic absenteeism and support meetings for families struggling with supporting their child to be in school on time each day. In addition to Counseling in Schools, DY Prep partners with the following outside organizations to support students and families in our community: 1. DY Prep’s lead partner is Dreamyard Project , which gives the school $250,000 to underwrite its Arts Programming, which allow students to major in an arts discipline in their junior and senior years, attend field trips and live performances, perform on stage at a variety of venues throughout the city, and be exposed to professionals in the field. Dreamyard Project also supports the school by paying the salaries of our Digital Learning Coordinator and Life-Ready Coordinator, which helps us infuse technology into the school and support our seniors as they transition from high school to the next stage of their lives. They also underwrite our International Travel Program, and paid for our students to travel to Amsterdam, Barcelona and Rome. Dreamyard supports our school-wide core value of Artistry. 2. New Settlement: Provides the school with a full-time, on-site college counselor who runs a Senior Seminar Class designed to support seniors with the college application process, organizes college trips, provides a SAT Prep built into the school day, facilitates college process applications for parents, and plans Career Days for students on every grade level. This partnership will help us achieve our goal of College and Career Life-Readiness 3. Step Up: Through money granted to the school by OSYD, this partnership provides the school with 4 Social Workers who meet with students exhibiting signs of chronic absenteeism on a bi-monthly basis in individual and group settings. This is to increase our overall attendance, as well as is aligned to our Core Value of Character. 4. Here to Here: Here to Here is an organization that provides students with Career Development opportunities starting in 9th Grade. This program provided Career-Readiness Workshops to our students this year, facilitated Career Days for our 9th and 10th Graders, and connected our 11th and 12th Graders with internship opportunities. 5. The Moth: The Moth provides us with an after-school program where students tell stories of their lives. Over half of the students in this program are students with IEPs. This program supports us in our core values of Artistry and Character 6. Project Destined: This organization, begun by Alex Rodriguez, administers a real estate applied youth education program designed to promote financial literacy, leadership development and mentoring to urban youth. ELT (Extended Learning Time) opportunities for students in the 2017-18 School Year included: 1. SAT Prep 2. Computer Science Classes 3. Additional support in Math, English, Science and Social Studies 4. Paid Internships for on-track seniors 5. Additional Literacy Support for ELLs 2018-19 CEP-RISE 17  6. Debate 7. Career-based classes such as: Barbershop, Culinary Arts, Fashion Design, Cosmetology, Digital Photography, Dance, Musical Production, Poetry Slam and Career Exploration. After-School opportunities for the 2017-18 School Year included: After-School Arts Program known to re-engage students that have disengaged from school happened 4 days a week from 4:00 to 5:30pm. These offerings include: Animee Class, Musical, Video Game Club, Book Club, Debate Team, and Visual Arts After-School. 2. The Moth which gave students opportunities to engage in story-telling. 3. The Mouse Squad ran a program where students explored technology and learn graphic design skills as well as practical skills of how to repair computers and other technology. 4.A Rainbow Road Club that meets twice a week during the student’s lunch period that targets youth from our LBGT community that are at risk of feeling bullied or dropping out. 5. The Prinicipal taught a Leadership Class twice a week in the morning before the regular school day. Students in this class serve as mentors to students that have been identified by their teachers as in need of additional academic and behavioral support. 6. Dreamyard Project provided staff members to engage students in a musical production of A Chorus Line. 7. Step Up, a partnership through OYSD and NYU, met with students exhibiting signs of chronic absenteeism bi-monthly after-school. 8.All students testing with Lexile Reading Scores below grade level received an additional English Skill Building Class. We plan to continue all of these after-school offerings in the 2018-19 School Year. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 18  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 09X329 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 266 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 15 8 9 3 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 27 20 7 6 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 86.0% % Attendance Rate 85.3% % Reduced Lunch 29.3% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.0% 70.7% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 0.4% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 6.42 0% 41% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 67% 59% 64.1% 0.0% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No No Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups Hispanic, ED Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A YSH N/A N/A NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YSH N/A N/A NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES N/A N/A YES No N/A 62 73 7 84.2% 0.0% 19.9% 27.8% 0.8% 0.4% 2 14% 5.8 N/A N/A 63% 54% 71.4% 1% N/A No Yes N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A YES 2018-19 CEP-RISE 19  2018-19 CEP-RISE 20  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 3 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 3.2 The school leader ensures and supports the quality implementation of a systematic plan of rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of students. (aligned to Rise Keys 2 and 6) Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction (DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and address student achievement needs. (aligned to Rise Key 3) The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. (aligned to Rise Keys 1 and 4) Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. (aligned to Rise Key 1) 3.3 3.4 3.5 SOP(s) Addressed x x x x Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? Strengths (From our Quality Review in 2016-17): 3.2: The school leader ensures and supports the quality implementation of a systematic plan of rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of students. 3.3: Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction (DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and address student achievement needs. ● Curricular documents across grades and content areas evidence consistent alignment with CCLS and the instructional shifts. ● Curricular documents in ELA, Science and History include evidence of integrating the ELA instructional shifts. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 21  ● Across grades and content areas, curricula are planned and refined so that diverse learners have access to challenging materials through placement in groups based on assessment data, differentiated materials, and a variety of scaffolds. Areas of Improvement: (From our Quality Review in 2016-17): 3.4: The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. 3.5: Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning.  While some lesson plans evidence specific planning for the highest-achieving students' access to the curricula, this level of planning was not evident across the majority of lesson plans. Priority need that will be addressed in this section: ● Teachers will regularly gather data to assess and meet the needs of all students, particularly our high-achieving students that are not being adequately challenged and our ENL students who are not being provided with equitable access to rigorous tasks. Part 2 – Summative Vision for Rigorous Instruction What is your school’s instructional focus? What is your vision for promoting the instructional focus consistently across classrooms? DreamYard Prep's Instructional Focus for the 2018-19 School Year is If teachers use student performance data to effectively layer daily learning experiences, then all students will have equitable access to rigorous thinking across academic subjects. In order to support this focus, DreamYard teachers will have time to collaborate around instructional practices and planning. Having a more profound understanding of students' performance in respect to Regents-aligned skills, teachers will implement instructional strategies to support various learners without eliminating opportunities to engage with rigorous material. These strategies and supports will be seen consistently across disciplines and grade levels. All teachers will implement strategic grouping and interventions based on data collected on Interim Assessments and Mock Regents. Teachers are currently provided with weekly planning time with their cooperating teachers, as well as time to collaborate within their grades and departments every Wednesday afternoon. All departments engage in the Data Wise Cycle of Inquiry, which includes inter-visitations, looking at student work products and lesson plans, and analyzing Regents, Mock Regents, and Interim Assessment data. In our third year of implementing the Data Wise Cycle for Inquiry, teams will use data gathered from these assessments as a predictor of how students will perform on the Regents and determine department-wide interventions for students. Teams and individual teachers will be asked to used this data to 2018-19 CEP-RISE 22  implement layered curriculum for all students that include ELLs, SWDs and higher-performing students. Teachers will have the opportunity to work on curriculum maps, units and lesson plans with cooperating teachers on a regular basis. DY Prep's Monday Professional Development will emphasize the following topics to support teachers in their implementation of the school's instructional focus: Using Data to Implement Layered Curriculum Best Practices for ENL instruction (supported by Q-Tel) Issues of Equity and Access in implementation of Layered Curriculum Prioritizing Regents Skills in Unit Planning DY Prep will continue to participate in AP for ALL during the 2018-19 School Year. We will be offering five AP Classes that will include: AP English Language, AP English Literature, AP Psychology, AP Spanish and AP Government. Teachers from each of our main content areas will attend Pre-AP and AP training to create vertical alignment in departments to prepare students to engage in higher level, college standards-aligned work. In the 2018-19 School Year, DY Prep will partner with A-net to support assessment design so that our assessments are aligned to Regents Skills and teachers can disaggregate data from those assessments to determine interventions within our layered curriculum. How will you implement a standards-aligned curricula that meets the needs of your diverse learners, including ELLs and SWDs? Math and ELA teachers will use Engage NY Curriculum as a support for their unit and lesson planning. Social Studies and Science Teachers will use the New Visions Social Studies Curriculum. The school will continue to use Standards-based Grading in the 2018-19 School Year. Teachers will be expected to choose Regents-aligned skills as the basis of their Grade Books. IEP goals will be included into the metric of Standards-Based Grading for our SWDs. ELLs will be given opportunities to demonstrate mastery in their native language. As a part of our Standards-Based Grading System, the school will use a Character Rubric to evaluate non-academic behaviors that are aligned to the school's Core Values of Perseverance, Ambition, Respect, Responsibility, Discipline and Empathy. As part of each unit of study, teachers will be required to design a "challenge portion" in each unit which is aligned to CCLS and is created to push higher achieving students, but also must be accessible to all learners in the room. Teachers 2018-19 CEP-RISE 23  attending the Pre-AP and AP training as part of AP for ALL will lead their departments in the creation of the "challenge portion" of each unit to push vertical alignment to CCLS in each unit. Our end-of-unit Life-Ready Tasks will incorporate the ability to use higher-level analysis skills outlined by the Common Core with high-interest, real-world situations to engage all learners while increasing student achievement. Our school's Equity Team will meet once a week to examine instructional practices through the lens of equity. Namely, we will determine if our implementation of layered curriculum is truly supporting access to rigorous thinking or creating a barrier to access of high level work. We will also begin to define what culturally responsive teaching means at DY Prep and how we can begin to insert culturally responsive teaching practices into our units of instruction. The Equity Team will turn-key our findings to the rest of our staff and support them through professional development around issues of equity and access for all learners. In the 2018-19 School Year, DY Prep will partner with Q-TEL, who will provide a series of Professional Development sessions to all teachers around best instructional practices for supporting ENL students. We will also continue to work with ENL and SPED coaches from the Bronx Field Support Center. What is your vision for ensuring that all student have access to rigorous coursework that moves them towards career and college readiness? How will you support the personal and academic skills, habits, and behaviors needed for students to be career and college ready? Students are given Life-Ready (Advisory) Classes on each grade level, and seniors are offered a class called Senior Seminar. These classes are informed by the College and Career Readiness standards. Additionally, our ELT program supports students in Career Readiness because we offer a variety of classes that provide students opportunities to be taught by professionals in Culinary Arts, Barbershop, Fashion Design, Music Production and Cosmetology. Students are also offered SAT Prep as part of our ELT program. We will be working with Here-to-Here to develop Career-Readiness skills in the 9th and 10th grade so that students will be prepared to engage in an internship in 11th and 12th Grades. Because our students each major in an Arts Discipline in their junior and senior years, they not only acquire skills in an arts discipline, but also participate in the experience of specializing in a subject, which is aligned to the college experience. In the 2017-18 School Year, DY Prep was chosen to be a DOE Pilot School for SYEP and about half of our student population participated in work-readiness workshops to be part of the SYEP Program. In the 2018-19, we will continue to offer paid internships to our on-track seniors to increase job training and access to a wide variety of careers. As part of Summer in the City, students are given the opportunity to participate in Career Clue, a Science program that combines hands-on learning with off-site field trips to organizations specializing in the field of Science. DY Prep will continue to partner with Here-to-Here to provide more internship opportunities to students. In the 2017-18 School Year, all DY Prep students participated in a school-wide Career Day, where all students left the building to participate in field trips at actual work sites aligned to their career interests. We plan to continue our implementation of Career Day in the 2018-19 School Year and expand career-aligned student learning experiences leading up to the day. Upon reflecting on the implementation of our Standards-based Grading Policy, our Grade Team Leaders along with administration decided to revise our standards-aligned rubric to align DY Prep's grading rubric with how students are 2018-19 CEP-RISE 24  graded on actual Regents rubrics. While we have always aligned our rubrics to Regents Standards, what constitutes a "1" on the Regents was not fully aligned with DY Prep's expectations for the use of that rubric grade. All teachers are also required to hand out syllabi to all students during the first day of class and use these syllabi to guide their work throughout the year. As part of our AP for All program, all seniors that have met the college readiness benchmark for ELA will be programmed for AP English Literature. How do you envision embedding the elements of culturally responsive instruction and how will you know that implementation is successful? Dreamyard Prep has been accepted into a Learning Partners triad for Culturally Responsive Education as a partner school. The goal of our work in the triad is for the school to define what we mean by "Culturally Responsive Teaching" and begin to provide professional development to staff around how to insert elements of Culturally Responsive Instruction into units. We will use Zaretta Hammond's book Culturally Responsive Teaching and the Brain as an anchor text for the work. A large part of inserting Culturally Responsive Education into our instructional practices will be our work around supporting our ELLs. Through Life-Ready Classes, ELLs Leadership group and working with families as partners, we intend to spend time at the beginning of the school year to know our families and students and determining what they need to learn effectively as a basis for our Culturally Responsive work. We will know it's working when our ELLs credit accumulation and Regents results are on par with their General Education and their Special Education peers. What is your vision for the use of a comprehensive assessment strategy (diagnostic, formative, benchmark, and summative) to drive curricular, instructional, and organizational decisions that impact student outcomes? We have created an Interim Assessment calendar that has been shared with all staff to support their summer curriculum planning. All classes will administer a Regents skills-aligned diagnostic within the first two weeks of school. Information from this diagnostic will be used to organize students into three layered groups based on performance level. Students in each layer will receive strategic support to gain access to daily learning experiences that require rigorous thinking. This diagnostic will be followed by an Interim Assessment aligned to Regents skills in December, and full Mock Regents administered in March and May. After administration of all 3 assessments, teachers will re-visit curricular and strategic grouping decisions based on data collected from each exam. Departments will analyze data from all 4 assessments to determine Department-wide instructional intervention strategies. In between Interim Assessments, teachers will be expected to have a summative Life-Ready Task at the end of each unit to assess student progress between the benchmark assessments listed above. On a daily basis, teachers are required to administer a minimum of two checks for understanding within a lesson and provide students with an exit ticket, writing prompt or other form of daily assessment at the end of each lesson. Data collected from checks for understanding will inform instructional adjustments within the lesson and end of lesson assessments will inform strategic grouping for subsequent lessons. Students will have options to move between layered groups based on their own assessment of where they are in relationship to mastery of standards. How do you envision differentiating teacher professional learning opportunities to support instructional foci, meet students’ unique needs and advance culturally responsive education in your school? We will provide the following professional learning opportunities to different groups of teachers: 1. Participation in Learning Partners triad around Culturally Responsive Education 2. off-site Professional Development provided by New Visions for Science and Social Studies Teachers 2018-19 CEP-RISE 25  3. Participation in Equity in Action series to support our vision for Culturally Responsive Curriculum 4. Participation as an ESI Creates School to support the work of our Equity Team. 5. Coaching and mentoring for new teachers in our community. 6. Professional Development support from Q-Tel to support instruction for English Language Learners in our community. 7. Coaching from the BFSC around ELL and Sped instruction. Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Rise Benchmarks. By June of 2019, all teachers will participate in professional development opportunities offered by Q-Tel to improve the number of ENL students meeting Progress Toward Graduation Targets in Cohort W and Cohort V by 10%. This will be measured by the amount of ENL students in Cohort W earning 10 credits and passing 2 Regents and the amount of ENL students in Cohort V earning 10 credits and passing 4 Regents by June of 2019. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Rigorous Instruction Annual Goal: Which school benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Rigorous Instruction Annual Goal? Regents Completion Rate College Readiness . Progress Toward Graduation n/a 2018-19 CEP-RISE 26  Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Participation in AP for All training Teachers instructing AP and one teacher from each Dept College Readiness August 2018 to June 2019 Assistant Principal and Principal Participation in the DataWise Cycle of Inquiry Dept Heads and the Principal Progress Toward Graduation, College Readiness, Regents Completion Rate Summer 2018 to June 2019 PD provided by DOE, Principal and Dept Heads Professional Development provided by Q-Tel All Teachers Progress Toward Graduation, College Readiness, Regents Completion Rate June 2018 to June 2018 Principal, ENL Teachers and SPED Teachers How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) Increase in amount of students earning a 3 or higher on an AP Exam and increase in amount of students participating in an AP course Increase in students attaining Mastery as measured by amount of students earning a 3 or higher on a CCLS-aligned rubric, Increase in Regents pass rates Increase in ELLS meeting Regents Completion Rate of 3 Regents by the end of Year 2 and 5 Regents by the end of Year 3 2018-19 CEP-RISE 27  Monthly workshops supporting parents in understanding the requirements of Regents-aligned curriculum All Parents, particularly those of SWD and ELLs 4b – Parent and Family Engagement Progress Toward Graduation, College Readiness, Regents Completion Rate Sept 2018 to June 2019 Guidance Counselors and Parent Coordinator . How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. End of August: New Families Orientation: There will be an orientation for new 9th Grade families where expectations for entering high school, as well as explaining to parents the importance of transcripts, credits, attendance and passing classes. The principal, assistant principal, Guidance Counselors, Parent Coordinator, teachers and our Community Schools Director will be present at this meeting. September to May: Parent Workshops: From September to May, the WATS Committee, along with Guidance Counselors from each respective grade will host a series of workshops for families to support their understanding of academic preparedness and expectations on each respective grade. The following topics will be offered: Understanding the Common Core How Your Child's Transcript Creates College Options PSAT/SAT: Why they are important Study Habits: How Parents Can Help Attendance: Why it Matters Financial Aid for College Access Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, lead CBO’s community school budget, FSC Supports, etc. Human resources: Director of School Renewal, Principal, Assistant Principal for Professional Development Department Head meetings after-school Outside Professional Development: Q-Tel Bronx Field Support Office for coaching Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA P/F Set-aside 21st Century C4E 2018-19 CEP-RISE 28  Title I 1003(a) Title III PTA Funded SIG Grant School Achievement X Other Funding Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By February of 2019 50% of ELLs from Cohort W and Cohort V will be on track to meet Progress Toward Graduation Targets based on analysis of Interim Assessment data and classroom performance. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. New Visions Data Sorter, Interim Assessment, Mock Regents and ultimately Regents performance. Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 29  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 5 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 5.2 The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. (aligned to Rise Key 4) 5.3 The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students. (aligned to Rise Key 4) 5.4 All school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health supports tied to the school’s vision. (aligned to Rise Key 5) 5.5 The school leader and student support staff work together with teachers to establish structures to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental health needs. (aligned to Rise Key 5) Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: SOP(s) Addressed yes yes yes yes 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? 5. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? Areas of Strength are from the 2016-17 Quality Review: School's Strengths: 5.2: The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. 5.3:The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students 5.4: The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students The school's approach to culture-building, discipline, and social-emotional support is comprehensive, guided by student voice and interests, and results in a safe environment that is inclusive and respectful. Guidance and advisement 2018-19 CEP-RISE 30  structures are in place that have an impact on student academic and personal behaviors and put them on a path to success. Students from all grades participate in a leadership class facilitated by the principal. Leadership students discuss current events and issues or concerns around school culture and determine areas to focus on in which the whole school might benefit. Grade Teams meet periodically to review students' social-emotional and academic progress. Data analysis results in recommendations for students to become a part of the attendance team's target group. The school practices and implements Restorative Circles which impact every aspect of the school. Priority Need (from the School Quality Guide): 5.5: The school leader and student support staff work together with teachers to establish structures to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental health needs. Part 2 – Summative Vision for Supportive Environment What is your vision for a supportive school environment? How will you, in partnership with each CBO and families, enact your vision? The school stakeholders often describe DreamYard Preparatory School as a safe and welcoming environment, with a warm and positive culture for learning. All students feel welcome in our community and are given multiple opportunities to have their voice heard by various stakeholders. All stakeholders, parents and Community-based Organizations work collaboratively to provide support for the social-emotional functioning of students through restorative justice, systems of support and parent workshops. DY Prep provides opportunities in the arts, such as Sharings and performances, arts clubs, after-school clubs, The Moth, and the Mouse Squad, as outlets for student community building and engagement. All students are programmed in Life Ready classes that are designed to support both social-emotional and academic skills. Life-ready Classes are run by Advisors called Life-Coaches. These Life-Coaches are the adults in the building most responsible for the success of the student in our school community. Additionally, all staff members choose two to three students to "adopt" as their "child" for that student's senior year of high school. This adoptive parent meets regularly with the student and supports that student on his or her path toward graduation. The CBO’s at DY Prep are DreamYard Project, The Moth, New Settlement (College Counselor), Step Up and Here to Here. In the 2018-19 School Year, Counseling in Schools will continue to be our Community School Partner. These organizations invest time planning and creating programs that are geared to specific students that are targeted and identified to benefit from their respective services. DreamYard Project provides multiple opportunities for students to participate in performances, art exhibits, and take courses at the DreamYard Center. DreamYard Project provides the school with a $250,000 budget for the arts department at DYP that allows such department to provide intensive arts courses and teaching artists throughout the school year The Moth works with students to learn the art of storytelling, an art form that pushes students to become life ready by performing and telling their story for an audience and connecting to their school community through their personal stories. New Settlement provides DYP with a full time college counselor who works with students on an individual and group basis as they work to prepare and apply for college and beyond high school. Our college counselor sets up college application workshops and college fairs, and overnight college trips for all grades. The Step-Up Program provides mentors from NYU to work with targeted students in need of extra academic and social-emotional support. Mentors meet with students on a regular basis and consult and assist them with any school related issues. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 31  Counseling in Schools, as our lead Community School Partner, will continue to provide DreamYard Prep with services focused in three main categories: Increasing Attendance, Coordinating Internships and Job Opportunities, and Supporting Families. CIS (Counseling in Schools) will provide the school with mentors that will work with students whose attendance is below 70%. Each mentor will be assigned a group of students in this category. The CIS Mentor will conduct home visits, regularly meet with the students and families in this target group and work with school-based staff to create an individualized attendance plan for each student. Additionally, 50 students will be paired with Success Mentors from the larger DY Prep school community. These Success Mentors will check in with students on a daily basis and give the students weekly incentives if the mentee reaches his or her attendance goal for the week. Mental health services will be provided to students and families that are identified as in need of support. Counseling in Schools will provide weekly incentives to students and families that meet attendance benchmarks. A full-time internship coordinator will work with DY Prep in the 2018-19 School Year to match on-track seniors with internships in their field of interest. These internships will be credit-bearing and will enhance the school’s overall mission of Life-Readiness. This internship coordinator will interface with Here-to-Here and work alongside them to continue to provide work-based learning opportunities to all students within our community. Student voice and leadership is supported in numerous ways at DYP. The school has a Leadership class that meets twice a week. In it student leaders are trained to take on school wide community issues and spearhead Circles and school wide events. In the 2018-19 School Year, there will be an additional Leadership Class for ENL students to support them in developing their leadership skills. This group will work in tandem with students from the principal-led Leadership Class to create more inclusive community-building activities for all students. Life Ready Classes also meet twice a week. In Life Ready Class, students take an active role in issues concerning the school, practice participating in Circles, and are involved in community building activities. Students also learn to prepare Life Ready documents such as resumes, read their transcripts and keep track of their credits. These documents are put into a digital file called a Life-Plan that follows students from grade to grade. At the end of their senior year, students will be asked to present this Life-Plan to a panel of teachers, parents, and outside experts as part of their graduation requirement. At DY Prep, our SIT (grade teams) engage in Kid Talk which creates a forum for students to represent their respective grades at least once a semester. This forum provides the opportunity to voice any concerns regarding the school and their own learning. School wide Assemblies are once a month and celebrate student academic achievement and showcase student talent. Mouse Squad runs the technical aspect of assemblies. There are various student clubs at DYP. Many of these clubs were created from student interest and run primarily by students such as the Anime Club and the Debate Team. Our school teams will measure social-emotional development over time with data derived from attendance, cutting, disciplinary actions; frequency of conflicts/ students needing repeating Circles and graduation rate and the percentage of students on track to graduate on time. Each student will set individual goals in Life-Ready Class for attendance, course and Regents pass rates, and behaviors related to our Core Character Values. Students will be responsible for tracking their progress in each of these areas at the end of every month. Life-Coaches will be responsible for tracking goals for all students in their Life-Ready Classes. SIT teams will look at progress every month to evaluate who is on target or off target to meeting their goals. SIT team leaders will meet with the principal to share this data and devise intervention plans based on the amount of off-track students. SIT teams will dedicate time during meeting per month to address the needs of our Students with Disabilities. These monthly meetings will include examining and revising IEP goals and specifically analyzing not only the academic progress, but also the social-emotional progress of these students. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 32  Our ENL Department will hold monthly breakfast meetings for parents of our ELLs to discuss academic and social-emotional progress. Additionally, this department will organize trips for families of ELL students to build community amongst our ELL population. Our Culture Team will hold circles on an as-needed-basis for students that exhibit signs of behavioral challenges. Attendance reward challenges will occur once a marking period. All students achieving a personal attendance goal of 90% or higher will receive an individual reward As part of weekly attendance team meetings, the attendance team will pull data from the New Visions Student Sorter to track progress of target populations and will use data to identify any new students in need of an interventions. In order for DYP to respond to students’ needs in a timely manner, SIT teams meet on a regular basis to identify and target students with low attendance, who are often late or cut classes and are exhibiting behaviors that indicate they are in need of additional social-emotional support. All SIT team leaders, Support Services staff and select teachers will participate in Collaborative Problem Solving Training, which will support our staff in how to craft specific intervention plans for targeted students. SIT teams use parent engagement time to outreach parents and plan meetings with families as a forum in which to discuss student progress, behavioral issues, promotion in doubt, cutting, and attendance. Describe your plan to implement a culture of trust and high expectations for teachers, students, families and community partners. At DY Prep, we expect all staff, students, and families to participate in community building circles. The structure of circles provides intentional spaces for stakeholders to be seen and heard, and provides opportunities for listening to each other's points of view. Circles create a culture of trust and support between all groups. In addition to circles, we have days of community-building, which include: Day of Appreciation, Guardian Appreciation Day, our Stepping Up Ceremony, and Life-Ready Conferences. The principal sends out a weekly memo to all staff called Word in the Yard. This memo outlines clear expectations for all staff, and includes Shout Outs to staff members that have demonstrated excellence in school leadership the week prior. Additionally, the principal sends frequent emails to students outlining school-wide expectations and the Parent Coordinator sends out monthly calendars to families to communicate expectations for key academic events. Who are your CBO partners? How will each CBO sustain and support the social-emotional and academic growth of your students? CBO Partner CBO Focus Counseling in Schools CIS main focus will be to work with the school community to increase attendance. CIS will provide social emotional support to students and families by working with a target population of 50 students identified as at-risk for chronic absenteeism. These students will receive weekly counseling sessions, and their families will receive home visits. An additional 50 students will be targeted for Success Mentoring, where students will be required to check in with a Success Mentor on a daily basis. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 33 DreamYard Project/Here-to-Here DreamYard Project supports a robust in-school and after-school Arts Program. Here-to-Here, as an outgrowth of DreamYard Project, provides students with work-based learning experiences, internships, and work-readiness training. How will you, in partnership with your CBO, create a supportive and engaging environment for your students’ families? Our Parent Coordinator, along with social workers from Counseling in Schools will organize monthly workshops based on family interest. Additionally, Counseling in Schools will organize a community Health Forum once a semester to provide families with resources in the community to meet their needs. All students that have been identified as being on our target population for attendance interventions will receive home visits from social workers employed by Counseling in Schools. As part of these home visits, families will be given linkages and resources to support any barriers families may have that prevent students from being successful in school. We also have a Parent Welcome Center that has computers, translated materials and additional resources to provide families with social-emotional support. What essential questions, or key themes, will be explored by all staff and students that acknowledge and celebrate the culture and heritage of the student body? In the 2018-19 School Year, DY Prep will plan assemblies, events, and circles around the following themes: Hispanic Heritage Black History Month Women's History Month Day of Appreciation Culture Week where we celebrate different aspects of students' cultural identities Student-led events where students identify areas and aspects of school and community culture that they want to celebrate. What evidence will you use to gauge the impact of your plan to create a positive school environment? We will continue to see a decrease in chronic absenteeism and see an increase in daily attendance. We also will continue to see a decrease in incidents in bullying as measured by OORs reports. Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Supportive Environment. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – 2018-19 CEP-RISE 34  Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Rise Benchmarks. By June of 2019, our school's support staff which includes guidance counselors, social workers and culture team members in collaboration with our Community School's Partner, Counseling in Schools, will engage in Success Mentoring, home visits and targeted and individual group counseling that will result in a 5% decrease in Chronic Absenteeism for ENL students as measured by ATS data. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Supportive Environment Annual Goal: Which school benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Supportive Environment Annual Goal? Overall daily attendance will increase. Chronic Absenteesim will decrease. n/a n/a 2018-19 CEP-RISE 35  Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. Targeted Success Mentoring for ENL students. Counseling in Schools working with targeted students whose attendance is below 70% overall. 50 students that fall into this category will receive weekly counseling from CIS social workers. Monthly workshops offered to families to expand their understanding of how to support their children in respect to attendance and responsible behavior Life-Ready and Leadership Classes for all students. New Leadership Class for ENL students. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) All SIT leaders, support staff and select teachers Students with attendance below 70% Attendance/ Chronic Absenteeism Sept 2018 to June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, Cultural Coordinator Attendance/ Chronic Absenteeism July 2018 to June 2019 Community Director, Parent Coordinator and SIT team leaders All families Attendance/ Chronic Absenteeism August 2018 to June 2019 Community Director, Social Worker, Principal and Parent Coordinator All students Attendance/ Chronic Absenteesim Sept 2018 to June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal and Life-Coaches How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) Decrease in Chronic Absenteeism for ENL students. Increase in daily attendance for students on the target population. Decrease of families in need of outside counseling support or ACS cases Increase of daily attendance for all students. 4b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. End of August: New Families Orientation: There will be an orientation for new 9th Grade families where expectations for entering high school, as well as explaining to parents the importance of transcripts, credits, attendance and 2018-19 CEP-RISE 36  passing classes. Included in this orientation will be introduction to circles, resources and key strategies for supporting their child from a social emotional perspective. The Principal, Assistant Principal, Guidance Counselors, Parent Coordinator, teachers and our Community Schools Director will be present at this meeting. September to May: Targeted Family Circles: From September to May, grade team leaders, along with administration and guidance staff, will facilitate targeted parent circles that include the following topics: Strategies to Combat Chronic Absenteeism Supporting your Child to Stay on Track Supporting your Child to maintain Healthy Relationships New comer ENL Circle Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, lead CBO’s community school budget, FSC Supports, etc. DreamYard Project funding after-school DreamYard Project Professional Developing on integrating the Arts into instruction Community Schools Budget Per session for staff conducting workshops Counseling in Schools Community Director, Attendance Liaision Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By February 2019, chronic absenteeism for ENL students will be on track to be reduced by 5%, as measured by ATS reports. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. ATS attendance reports New Visions Attendance Heat Map Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 37  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 4 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 4.2 School and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. (aligned to Rise Key 2) 4.3 Teachers provide coherent, and appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. (aligned to Rise Key 1) 4.4 Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences and tailored to the strengths and needs of all students. (aligned to Rise Key 4) 4.5 Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, and progress monitoring). (aligned to Rise Key 3) Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: SOP(s) Addressed yes yes yes yes 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? The areas of improvement are from the most recent Quality Review in 2016-17: 4.3: Teachers provide coherent, and appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. 4.4:Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences and tailored to the strengths and needs of all students. 4.5: Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, and progress monitoring). Strengths: ● Collaborations within grade teams and the vertical inquiry team have strengthened teachers' instructional capacity resulting in school-wide instructional coherence and student achievement. Across the school within content-based teacher teams, teachers have an integral role in key decisions around instructional strategy foci which affect student learning across the school. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 38  Teachers use of assessments and rubrics provide actionable feedback to students. Additionally, teachers guide students toward peer-and self-assessment and continually check for understanding during lessons, making adjustments in order to ensure that all students' needs are being met. Priority need (from June 2017 Regents data): 4.2: School and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. Teachers need to more effectively meet the needs of all of our students, particularly English Language Learners, so that students are passing Regents earlier in their high school career. Part 2 – Summative Vision for Collaborative Teachers What is your vision for collaborative teaching? Teachers are able to collaborate most effectively when they are engaged in a process of inquiry aligned to a clear goal. In the 2017-18 School Year, all teachers and departments were engaged in the Data Wise Cycle of Inquiry aligned to an inquiry question of: What obstacles are preventing all students from engaging in Rigorous Thinking? As part of this cycle of inquiry, all teams were asked to analyze student data and determine a department-specific inquiry question that is aligned to the overall school-wide question. All department teams examined teacher practice through the use of debriefing videotaped lessons and constructed a teacher-centered problem of practice. From this problem of practice, teams examined student work products and interim assessment data to form a student-centered learner problem. From the learner-centered problem, teachers in each department chose an instructional intervention strategy to address the learner-centered problem and engaged in a cycle of inter-visitations, looking at student work and exam data to determine the effectiveness of their chosen strategy. The Data Wise Cycle of Inquiry streamlined the work of teacher teams and DY Prep plans to continue this cycle of inquiry in the 2018-19 School Year. Departments administer Interim Assessments four times per year and data gathered from their Interim Assessments have become a main data point for the Data Wise Cycle of Inquiry. Upon reflecting on the 2017-18 School Year implementation of Data Wise, the school has determined that we need to refine our inquiry process to include examination of how we are using data to effectively layer curriculum as the focal point of our inquiry for the 2018-19 School Year. Additionally, all Dreamyard Prep teachers meet in Grade (SIT) and Department meetings every Wed afternoon, while DreamYard Project Teaching Artists, and contracted staff from Counseling in Schools work with students. Weekly co-planning meetings for team teaching are built into teachers schedules. Teachers also have common prep time according to grade level. SIT team leaders meet weekly with the Principal and Assistant Principal to plan agendas, look at data and track students according to grade level. Department Heads meet twice a month after-school for 90 minutes with the Principal and Assistant Principal to Look at Student Work, set and monitor Department Goals and drive the instructional vision for the school. The community has created the We Are the School Committee as its SLT. The We are the School Committee is comprised of staff, students, parents and administration and plans events, looks at data and discusses the overall progress of the school in meeting its goals. The staff meets weekly to engage in interactive professional development aligned to the school’s Academic, Social-Emotional, and College and Career Life-Readiness goals. Most staff meetings and professional development sessions are run in Circles. Staff Appreciation and Community Building 2018-19 CEP-RISE 39  Circles to allow for deeper collaboration and provide an open forum for discussion school-wide concerns and issues. Teachers also participate in inter-visitations across departments and grade teams to further strengthen their own pedagogy and align instructional practices to our overall goal of Life-Readiness. Departments Look at Student Work in conjunction with the inter-visitations to examine how instructional practice impacts the quality of student work. As part of professional development, teachers meet in Grade Teams to examine and provide feedback on how intervention strategies are working grade-wide. Teachers currently submit unit plans on a monthly basis on Atlas, a digital platform for unit planning. The Principal and Assistant Principal provide timely feedback to teachers on these unit plans on overall alignment to the Common Core and to the school’s vision of Life-Readiness. All units have an overarching high level Essential Question and daily high-level guided questions to drive learning that are aligned to the Essential Question. Each unit is required to have an end-of-unit, Life-Ready Task that is aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards, pushes student thinking, and allows students an opportunity to explore the unit’s Essential Question through discussion and writing. An example of a Life-Ready Task is one that has an open-ended question that is explored through a Socratic Seminar followed by an extended writing assignment where students must make a claim in relationship to the Essential Question, offer a counter-claim and use evidence provided by multiple texts to support their claim. In the 2017-18 School Year, DY Prep created an Equity Team that is comprised of the Principal, Assistant Principal, 3 teachers, the School Social Worker, and Cultural Coordinator (dean). This team was supported by ESI and the District Charter Collaborative to examine issues of equity within our school community. This work will continue in the 2018-19 School Year, where the team will define what Culturally Responsive Education means at DY Prep and develop a professional development series geared toward implementation of culturally responsive pedagogical practices into their unit plans. How do you envision enhancing collaboration amongst your Instructional Leadership Team to improve teacher practices and student learning? DY Prep's current instructional cabinet is comprised of the Principal, Assistant Principal, 3 Model Teachers and Department Heads. Our team meets twice a month for 90-minutes to discuss best instructional practices and determine instructional next steps for our school community. This year, select members from the instructional cabinet will continue participate in Data Wise training. The main focus of our cabinet meetings will be evaluating the impact of our Data Wise Cycle of Inquiry so that individual teachers and teacher teams become more facile at using data gathered on a daily basis to impact the design of instruction for ELLs, SWDs, and our higher-performing students. In the 2018-19 School Year, the focus of the inquiry work of our Instructional Leadership Team will be on academic performance of our ELLs in Cohort W and Cohort V. We will examine student work products, lesson plans, and intervention strategies for this target group of students and share out best practices to the staff to impact school-wide ENL instruction. How do you envision collaboration within teacher teams to improve teacher practices and student learning? Teacher teams engage in the Data Wise Cycle of Inquiry which includes analyzing student data, determining a skill deficiency based on that data, determining a course of instructional intervention strategy and a round of inter-visitations based on that intervention. Teams will continually evaluate this cycle to determine the impact of the instructional intervention strategy and re-adjust their practices according to data analysis. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 40  In addition to meeting weekly using Collaborative Problem Solving Protocols to discuss targeted students, grade teams will also meet once every three weeks to examine student work across content areas to evaluate the effectiveness of the targeted intervention strategy chosen by departments in their Data Wise Cycle of Inquiry. Grade teams will also identify grade-specific target areas and use data to plan instructional interventions per grade level. How do you envision collaboration across teacher teams to improve data driven teacher practices that result in improvement in student achievement? What data will teachers and the Instructional Leadership Team regularly review to ensure that they are reflecting upon needed adjustments to teaching practices and meeting individual student learning needs? Data Reviewed Student work products IEPs and ENL proficiency levels To determine if the quality of student work is increasing based on strategic interventions Intent To ensure that tasks are being scaffolded according to student needs Diagnostic and Interim Assessment Data To ensure that students are making adequate progress toward mastery of Regents skills. To determine skill gaps for groups of students to determine instructional interventions. To inform layered groups and daily learning experiences. Describe the screening process you use to identify students who need extra help? How do you use this process to determine which intervention to provide? We triangulate the following data sources to determine students in need of extra help: Academic data: Regents data from the previous school year, diagnostic performance, unit exams and test grades Social emotional data: Number of behavioral anecdotes, classroom observations, grade team consultations Attendance data: Number of absences, lateness, and cutting classes SIT teams meet weekly to discuss student progress. When students are exhibiting signs of concern using any of the data points described above, teams determine an intervention which may include any of the following: Targeted scheduling of ELT classes aligned to academic needs of students Success mentoring Guidance intervention Saturday School After-school or lunch support Part 3 – Annual Goal 2018-19 CEP-RISE 41  Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Rise Benchmarks. By June 2019, all teachers will implement a Department-wide Instructional Intervention Strategy (like close reading, buzzwords or quick outlines) that will increase all students' capacity to demonstrate mastery of Regents-aligned skills, resulting in a 5% increase in our Regents Completion rate from 36% in 2017-18 to 41% in 2018-19. This will be measured by the amount of students in Cohort V and Cohort W earning a passing score in 3 to 5 Regents. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Collaborative Teachers Annual Goal: Which school benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Collaborative Teachers Annual Goal? College Readiness Index Progress Toward Graduation for Years 2 and 3 Regents Completion Rate n/a 2018-19 CEP-RISE 42  Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. Professional development around the use of data to inform layered curriculum Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) All teachers Regents Completion Rate Sept 2018 to June 2019 DataWise Team Members, Principal, Assistant Principal All teachers Progress Toward Graduation/r June 2018 to June 2019 Q-Tel Coaches, BFSC coachesPrincipal, Assistant Principal, Dept Heads Regents Completion Rate All teachers Regents Completion Rate and Progress Toward Graduation, June 2018 to June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, Dept Heads College Readiness Index All parents and teachers Regents Completion Rate and Progress Toward Graduation Sept 2017 to June 2018 SIT team leaders, Guidance Counselors and Parent Coordinator Professional development on elements of rigorous instruction and multiple entry points for ENL students Weekly meeting time for Departments, SIT teams and co-teachers focused on unit and lesson planning, Looking at Student Work, inter-visitations and analyzing data Common time school wide for Parent Engagement that includes team meetings with Parents, Parent Workshops, trainings How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) Increase in the amount of teachers using checks for understanding in their lessons as measured by an increase in the amount of teachers earning Effective or Higher on 3d: Using Assessment in Instruction. Increase in the amount of ELLs passing Regents Increase in the amount of students earning 3 Regents by Year 2 and 5 Regents by Year 3. Increase in the amount of students earning 3 Regents by Year 2 and 5 2018-19 CEP-RISE 43  on online grading system 4b – Parent and Family Engagement Regents by Year 3. How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We have Life-Ready Conferences four times a year that are aligned to the DOE Calendar for Parent Teacher Conferences. These conferences are in September, November, March and May. At our Life-Ready Conferences, all teachers from a specific SIT (grade) team meet with parents and students in the same room. These provides families with a cohesive understanding of their child's academic performance across all academic subjects in a particular grade. In our September Life-Ready Conferences, teams provide parents with an overview of expectations for their grade team. Additionally, SIT teams reach out over the course of the school year to families whose children are at risk of not getting promoted, graduating or passing Regents. Teams conduct academic intervention circles for these students with the students, parents, guidance counselor, and all members of the SIT team present. Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, lead CBO’s community school budget, FSC Supports, etc. Weekly Department and SIT meetings Data Wise Training Department Head Meetings Parent Workshops Q-Tel training BFSC coaching Time for Parent Engagement Meetings with the Parent Coordinator Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 44  Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By February 2018, teachers will engage in a cycle of inquiry guided by Data Wise training, resulting in 40% of students in Cohort W and Cohort V earning 3 to 5 Regents. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. New Visions Student Sorter and ATS REDS reports January Regents results Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 45  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 2 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 2.2 The school leader ensures that the school community shares the Specific, Measurable, Ambitious, Results-oriented, and Timely (SMART) goals/mission and long-term vision inclusive of core values that address the priorities outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP). (aligned with Rise Key 2) Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital resources. (aligned with Rise Key 6) 2.3 2.4 The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district's Annual Professional Performance Review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. (aligned with Rise Key 1) 2.5 Leaders effectively use evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve critical individual and school-wide practices as defined in the SCEP (student achievement, curriculum and teacher practices; leadership development; community/family engagement; and student social and emotional developmental health). (aligned with Rise Keys 4 and 5) Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: SOP(s) Addressed yes yes yes yes 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? The areas of strength are based on the 2015-16 Learning Environment Survey: 2.5: Leaders effectively use evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve critical individual and school-wide practices as defined in the RSCEP (student achievement, curriculum and teacher practices; leadership development; community/family engagement; and student social and emotional developmental health). 2.4: The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district’s Annual Professional Performance Review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 46  2.2: The school leader ensures that the school community shares the Specific, Measurable, Ambitious, Results-oriented, and Timely (SMART) goals/mission and long-term vision inclusive of core values that address the priorities outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (RSCEP). Strengths:  100% of teachers agreed with the statement: At this school, it is clear how all of the programs offered are connected to our school's instructional vision.  100% of teachers strongly agreed with the statement: The principal at this school makes clear to the staff his or her expectations for meeting instructional goals.  89% of parents agreed that the principal encourage feedback from parents and the community through regular meetings with parent and teacher leaders. Priority Need (from June 2018 Graduation Data) : 2.3Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital resources. The majority of students that did not graduate on time by June 2018 were ELLs, which impacted our overall graduation rate. Part 2 – Summative Vision for Effective School Leadership What is your vision for effective school leadership at your school? Effective school leadership involves maximizes resources to promoting student achievement while ensuring that all community stakeholders are not only bought into the mission and vision of the school, but also are adequately prepared to enact and uphold the school's core values. DreamYard Prep currently has a clear mission of Life-Readiness that is communicated regularly to all stakeholders. This mission was developed in the 2012-13 School Year collectively with the staff through the use a school-developed Follow a Kid Protocol that required all staff members to follow a student of their choice for an entire instructional day. At an end of the year retreat, teachers looked at data collected from these visits along with data from the Quality Review and Learning Environment Survey and developed our Life-Ready Vision that is outlined in the Renewal Summary. From this vision, the school developed three goals around the vision of Life-Readiness that is aligned to three categories: Academic Life-Readiness, Social-Emotional Life-Readiness and College and Career Life-Readiness. The Professional Development calendar is aligned to these three areas. Periodically throughout the year, the staff looks at data to evaluate the progress toward attaining these goals in each respective area. At the end of each school year, the school undertakes a similar process and sets new goals aligned to the DreamYard vision of Life-Readiness. These goals are messaged to the school community in a multitude of ways which include: vision posters in every room and throughout the hallway, end-of-unit Life-Ready Task, Life-Ready Classes, assemblies, Life-Ready Conferences, and in conversations with students and families. In the 2017-18 School Year, the structures for communicating the goals of Life-Readiness will be re-enforced. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 47  The Principal will continue to strengthen her relationship with Counseling in Schools, the Community School Partner. The Principal, Community Director, Internship Coordinator and mentors working with CIS will meet over the summer to discuss alignment of resources to support the school’s vision of Life-Readiness. Individuals working with Counseling in Schools will continue to attend Professional Development and SIT Team Meetings, and representatives from CIS will be invited to join the We are the School Committee. In the 2018-19 School Year, a representative from CIS will continue to participate in weekly Support Service Team Meeting. CIS will continue have input into all meetings that shape the direction of the school. The Principal will regularly evaluate data with the Community Director to assess the impact of CIS on supporting students in attaining the school’s vision of Life-Readiness. The Principal will schedule data evaluation meetings for the first week of every month where the We are the School Committee, Assistant Principal, SIT Leaders and Department Heads will look at a variety of student data including attendance, grades on our online grading system, cutting and lateness reports, OORS data to evaluate the progress toward Life-Ready Goals. SIT teams will be asked to identify students at risk of being off-track for graduation starting in the First Marking Period of the School Year. An intervention plan for each at risk student will be developed through SIT teams, Life-Coaches in concert with mentors from Counseling in Schools and Step Up. Weekly check-in meetings with the Principal, SIT Leaders and the Community Director will evaluate student progress in relationship to the intervention plan, and adjustments will be made if the plan does not prove to impact the student achievement. In the 2018-19 School Year, Dreamyard Prep will continue to refine their Data Wise Inquiry Cycle to continue to improve student outcomes, focusing specifically on academic progress of ENL students in Cohorts V and W. The principal and assistant principal will collaborate to ensure the success of this work. DY Prep currently has a weekly attendance meeting run by the principal that includes members of the Guidance Department, Culture Team, Parent Coordinator and representatives from Counseling in Schools. This team was able to reduce Chronic Absenteeism from 52% in the 2017-18 School Year to 38% in the 2018-19 School Year, based on attendance data in ATS. In agendas for the meetings will be determined by the Principal and the Community Director, who will facilitate the weekly Attendance meetings. Daily attendance is emailed out to staff so that they have an immediate sense of who is absent for the day and which students cut their classes. In the 2018-1 School Year, the team will continue to use the New Visions Student Sorter to identify students who are at risk of becoming chronically absent and create an intervention for that student. We will continue to use Success Mentoring as a high-leverage intervention strategy. Based on analysis of June 2018 Regents and graduation data, the school's leadership team noticed that while Regents completion and graduation rate continues to improve for general education and students with disabilities, English Language Learners are not graduating or passing Regents at a comparable rate, which is impacting the school's overall data in these areas. Therefore, the principal has contracted Q-Tel to support her teachers in best practices for supporting ELL students. What are your core belief(s) for school improvement and how they inform your vision for developing instructional leadership at your school? I believe that a curriculum doesn't turn around a school: A community does. Any singular instructional strategy will not take root in a school community if the community of adult learners is not strong. Because of this core belief, I invest in systems and structures that intentionally build distributive leadership and reflective learning. I rarely make decisions that will impact the entire school community without consulting my Instructional Cabinet. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 48 In our Department Head (Instructional Cabinet meetings), we model best practices for Looking at Student Work, analyzing data, developing assessments so that each Department Head leader can go back and implement that best practice with their teams. As part of our Data Wise Cycle for Inquiry, teachers visit one another and as part of our professional development cycle, teachers and teams share out best practices so that they can learn from one another. Additionally, when an instructional expectation is set, I make sure to take photos of the practices in action and send out to staff so that staff has clear examples of how those expectations can live in classrooms. In general, while I may set expectations as the school leader, I provide opportunities from the staff to give input as to how those expectations should be carried out. Because of this, DY Prep has strong buy-in from staff when an instructional initiative is introduced. What is your vision for developing differentiated leadership throughout your school? How will you utilize teacher leaders to build broad capacity within your school? In our most recent Quality Review, teacher teams and distributive leadership was an area of celebration. I currently have Department Heads, Grade Team Leaders, and 3 Model Teachers. Over half of my instructional staff holds some type of leadership role in our community. I also have 4 teachers that serve as mentors to new teachers. In all of these cases, teacher leaders are part of our decision-making process. I meet weekly with different groups of teacher leaders. In these meetings, teacher leaders give me feedback on the progress of their teams and I give them ideas as to how to make their teams more effective. Because each teacher leader is responsible for developing a different aspect of our school community, we have a strong capacity to implement school-wide initiatives. In the 2018-19 School Year, there will be two teachers who are currently in programs that will lead to them earning their School Building Leader Certification. I am giving these two teachers additional responsibilities that align directly to experiences that they will need to be effective school leaders. Some examples of these are: Looking at cohort data broken down by subgroups to drive intervention strategies, leading school-wide professional development, and responsibility for developing clear structures for co-teaching partnerships. How will the leader foster collaborative school governance processes, and ensure full family participation together with other stakeholders? Our We are the School Committee meets monthly for 2 hours. The committee is comprised of staff, leadership, families and students. This committee sets the tone for the school as it reviews data, suggests courses of action to improve the school and plans school-wide community building events. Because the We are the School Committee only involves a few parents in our community, I plan to create opportunities for parents to provide feedback to me during events that attract more parents and families. We are going to ask students to join our Equity Team and provide direct feedback to our Instructional cabinet. How will you use evidence-based systems to ensure school and teacher leaders are led by a cycle of continuous learning and use this to inform their teams’ priorities? 2018-19 CEP-RISE 49 Evidence-Based System Support(s) Collaborator(s) Score Tracker in Advance that shows individual and school observation trends Professional Development based on Advance Data, coaching visits, outside resources if necessary Principal, Assistant Principal, Department Heads Student Interim Assessment Data showing progress toward the standards Professional Development based on skill deficiencies evident in the data Principal, Assistant Principal, Department Heads Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Rise Benchmarks. The principal, assistant principal, and department heads will meet on a bi-monthly basis to continue to refine their Data Wise process of inquiry so that we will have a 20% increase in graduation rate of ELL students from 20% in June of 2018 for Cohort T to 40% in June of 2019 for Cohort U. This will be measured by the number of students completing graduation requirements by the completion of the academic year. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Effective School Leadership Annual Goal: Which school benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Effective School Leadership Annual Goal? Benchmarks Graduation rate n/a n/a 2018-19 CEP-RISE 50  Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. Professional Development of Teachers in using data to impact student achievement through participation in Data Wise Strategic Inquiry sessions and support from Q-Tel Data trackers aligned to student skill (emphasizing ELLs and SWDs) completed on a bi-weekly basis Feedback to teachers on a regular basis that include student work products, student data and indicators from Danielson Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) All teachers Progress Toward Graduation Sept 2018-June 2019 Educational Consultants, Principal and Assistant Principal All teachers Regents Completion Rate Sept 2018-June 2019 Datawise leads, Principal All teachers Regents Completion Rate, Progress Toward Graduation Sept 2018-June 2019 The Principal and Assistant Principal Monthly Parent Feedback sessions with the Principal Parents of off-track students Progress Toward Graduation Sept 2018-June 2019 The Principal and the Parent Coordinator How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) Increase in Credit Accumulation per Grade Increase in student performance in relationship to Regents Content based on Interim Assessment data Increase in teachers earning Effective or Higher in Domain 3 or Danielson Increase in parent participation as evidenced by attendance at parent meetings. 4b – Parent and Family Engagement 2018-19 CEP-RISE 51  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. In addition to all of the workshops listed in the previous sections of this document, the Principal, Assistant Principal and Parent Coordinator will conduct focus groups/circles for parents of ELLs so that their concerns can be understood and addressed within the context of larger school initiatives. Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, lead CBO’s community school budget, FSC Supports, etc. Data Training for Teachers Parent Meetings Looking at Student Work in Dept meetings Community Schools budget Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By February 2019, 35% of ELL students in Cohort U will be on track with required credit accumulation and Regents for June 2019 graduation. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. New Visions Student Sorter Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 52  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 6 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 6.2 The school leader ensures that regular communication with students and families fosters their high expectations for student academic achievement. (aligned with Rise Key 2) 6.3 The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders so that student strength and needs are identified and used to augment learning. (aligned with Rise Key 4 and 6) 6.4 The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to support student success. (aligned with Rise Key 5) 6.5 The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school community members centered on student learning and success and encourages and empowers families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their children. (aligned with Rise Key 3) x x x x Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: SOP(s) Addressed 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? The strengths are from the 2016-17 Quality Review: 6.2: The school leader ensures that regular communication with students and families fosters their high expectations for student academic achievement. 6.3: The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders so that student strength and needs are identified and used to augment learning. 6.5: The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school community members centered on student learning and success and encourages and empowers families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their children. Strengths: 2018-19 CEP-RISE 53  Communication from school leaders and teachers through systems such as an online grade book system provides opportunities for families to understand student progress towards meeting standards. A team of teachers work with administration to plan experiences and venues such as life-ready classes and senior seminar, designed to expose students to and prepare them for the high expectations of college and career.  Parents regularly receive information about workshops where they are guided through tips on helping their  children prepare fo standardized exams, as well as the college application and financial aid process. In partnership with a community organization, approximately forty internships have been awarded to students in grades eleven and twelve during the summer and school year. Priority Need (From 2015-16 Learning Environment Survey); 6.4: The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to support student success. While the school provides families of seniors with several workshops on the college process, these workshops need to be implemented for younger grades so that parents can become stronger partners in supporting their children in developing a post-secondary plan. Part 2 – Summative Vision for Strong Family and Community Ties What is your vision for strong family and community ties at your school? What opportunities exist for the school staff to know the students and their families in order to better communicate and partner with families and communities in the vision for the school? Our vision for strong family and community ties lies in building on the structures that DreamYard Prep already has in place to more effectively meet the needs of the young people that we serve. Strong family and community ties means leveraging the strengths of our families to promote academic success for our students. Families are currently welcomed into the life of the school in multiple ways. Our main office is a welcoming environment, both in the physical space and through interactions with the parent coordinator, who greets them and helps direct families to the right place. The principal has weekly office hours to meet with families, and our Guidance Department and Culture Team regularly schedules meetings with families. Parents and guardians attend weekly nutrition workshops spearheaded by our Parent Coordinator, and participate in community-building events like Afro-Caribbean and Latin Dance Night. The We are the School Committee, based on feedback from parents, has determined that in addition to nutrition workshops and other community-building events, DY Prep needs to do more to support parents and families to become 2018-19 CEP-RISE 54  stronger partners in their child's academic success. We have determined that we need to offer monthly workshops for all parents on academic preparedness on every grade level. Given that the majority of our students will be first in their families to apply to college, we plan to begin supporting families in 9th grade on the college process and connecting what is happening in their current classes to post-secondary success. Therefore, some of the topics for our monthly workshops will be: How your 9th grade GPA affects your ability to be accepted to your college of choice, How to support your child in preparing for the PSAT/SAT, The story your child's transcript tells, How to support study habits at home, How career exploration is important in considering the right college for your child. Guidance Counselors, the principal, parent coordinator and selected teachers will facilitate these workshops for parents. Two college trips exclusively for parents and guardians will be scheduled in the 2017-18 School Year to help alleviate some fears our families may have in sending their child away for school. The school uses the Circle Room, a dedicated space for family meetings, peer mediation and restorative circles to conduct family meetings. The Circle protocol that we use for social-emotional support is also implemented when staff meets with families and students. This protocol is a democratic one, and allows both students and families to feel safe to have sometimes difficult conversations about challenges their child is facing in our community. The Circle protocol is also used to celebrate student success and have positive conversations with families. The school currently uses Skedula, an online grading system to communicate student academic and behavioral progress with families. Teachers are expected to update Skedula on a weekly basis and our Support Services Department is expected to enter data about behavioral concerns as issues arise. Parents and guardians have access to this system and are encouraged to check Skedula weekly for updates on their child’s progress. The school will make a concerted effort in the 2018-19 School Year to get as many 9th Grade families as possible using Skedula to track their child's progress from the start of the school year. Daily phone calls are made home when a child is absent from school. SIT teams use weekly parent engagement time to call families to update them regarding progress of their child. Life-Ready Coaches regularly communicate with families via email, text and phone conversations. Parents or guardians of students who exhibit signs of chronic absenteeism or falling off-track academically are invited to meetings with Grade Teams. The child’s guidance counselor is also invited to these meetings. These meetings are effective in communicating with families around the school’s expectations and how the community can work together to support the child’s success in our community. Families are invited to Life-Ready Conferences multiple times during the year to engage in conversations with the student and teachers about the child’s academic progress. The first two Life-Ready Conferences are usually well-attended, but attendance dips as the year progresses. SIT teams will work with Counseling in Schools and our Parent Coordinator to implement strategies to increase attendance at these conferences. CIS and Step Up mentors will be invited to attend Life-Ready Conferences and family meetings throughout the year so that families are aware that CBO partners and DOE employees are working together to ensure their child’s success. Social workers from Counseling in Schools have been assigned a case-load of 50 students that SIT teams have identified as in need of additional support to increase attendance and academic performance. These social workers will make a minimum of one home visit per year to each student on their caseload. After these visits, the CIS social workers will 2018-19 CEP-RISE 55  follow up with the families to provide them training on how to access our online grading system, and have regular contact with parents or guardians of students on their caseloads to update them on the academic and social/emotional progress of their children. The ENL Department will meet with families of ENL students once a month to explain the school's curriculum, and ensure that parents of ELLs understand their child's academic progress in school. Additionally, these meetings will also cover topics that are particularly relevant to parents of ELLs, which include: how immigration status affects the college application process, finding work, adjusting to a new country, and how extended travel can impact your child's academic progress. In the 2017-18 School Year, we conducted a series of Know Your Rights Workshops and plan to continue this work in the 2018-19 School Year. Family members currently have a strong relationship with their child’s Life-Ready Coach, with whom they communicate regularly. For example, families will take a survey during the first Life-Ready Conference of the 2018-19 School Year to express workshops they would be interested in attending. Based on data from this survey, the Community Director will work with DY Prep’s Parent Coordinator to schedule and implement workshops to support families. The school will continue to partner with Counseling in Schools, to provide training to the staff of the school to help us better meet our students’ needs, such as educating us about the lives of children in foster care. Counseling in Schools will help students and families connect to community resources to help service their needs, such as helping with finding affordable housing, getting medical care such as eye-glasses, and providing mental-health services. CIS mentors will conduct home visits to families of students who are exhibiting signs of chronic absenteeism, and provide family counseling to families in need of this type of support . Within the Community School model, how will families be welcomed into the school and made a part of the school community? What support will administrators, teachers, school staff and school safety officers be given to help create a welcoming environment? Will there be a dedicated space for families in the school? DY Prep currently has a Parent Resource Room with computers and information on linkages. Families are welcomed in the main office by our Parent Coordinator and Counseling in Schools has space in our main office complex to meet with families. There is a family bulletin board and pictures of parents and their students are posted on the walls of the school. DY Prep also has a Circle Room which serves as a space for meetings with families. The principal of DY Prep is currently in conversation with other school leaders on the Taft Campus to create a campus-wide parent resource room on the 1st floor that will be used to welcome all families to the Taft Campus and foster cross-school collaboration between all of the parent coordinators in the building. Construction on this room began in the 2017-18 School Year and the room should be ready for opening in Fall of 2018-19. How will the school identify and develop families to take leadership roles in school decision making/school governance structures? 2018-19 CEP-RISE 56  The parent coordinator, along with our Parent Association, has decided to focus on families of incoming 9th graders this year to get them involved in our community from the beginning of their high school careers. She will work with the Parent Association, along with our grade teams, to identify parent leaders. These parent leaders will be asked to join the We are the School Committee and lead workshops for other parents. The principal has also decided to make parent feedback sessions part of all Life-Ready Conferences and remind parents of the school's goals, mission and vision during these events. Progress toward school goals will be shared with parents and families during Life-Ready Conferences and via monthly newsletters. How will the school engage the community and families? How will they ensure that teachers are able to learn from families about the children being taught? The PA will host workshops for DY Prep staff members that showcases the strength of our families. Some members of the PA have offered to create a Spanish food class to teach some of our staff members how to make Dominican pastries. The staff and students of DY Prep have been engaging in training and dialogue around issues of Implicit Bias. In the 2018-19 School Year, the school plans to include parents in these conversations and invite parents to participate in circles where they can share their experiences of implicit bias. The Equity Team will engage families early on in the 2018-19 School Year to provide input into our vision of Culturally Responsive Education at DY Prep. How do families partner with the school and CBO to support student success? Will there be dedicated space for families? Family partnerships with school: Parent Association hosts monthly meetings and workshops for families. The focus of the workshop this year will be on supporting academic preparedness. This year, parents will conduct some workshops for teachers and students. Family partnerships with CBO: Counseling in Schools provides families with linkages and resources to address their social-emotional, health and financial needs. New Settlement provides college workshops, FASFA workshops and other issues surrounding college to families Is there dedicated space for these partnerships? Yes. Counseling in Schools has an office in our school. There is a Parent Resource Room and a College Counseling Office What data and student progress feedback loops will be present at the school to ensure that families knowledgeable of their children’s scholastic success, in addition to report cards? Student attendance and information on Chronic Absenteeism Amount of students on-track to graduation on time per grade Progress reports mailed home to families monthly 2018-19 CEP-RISE 57  Life-Ready Conferences with families 4 times per year Progress on school goals at every Life-Ready Conference Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Rise Benchmarks. By June of 2019, the college counselor, guidance team, principal, Counseling in Schools staff members, and select teachers will facilitate workshops for 9th Grade parents about supporting their children with the transition from middle school to high school, resulting in 10% increase of 9th Graders passing both the Living Environment and Algebra Regents. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Strong Family and Community Ties Annual Goal: Which school benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Strong Family and Community Ties Annual Goal? List of school Benchmarks expected to improve Regents Completion Rate Framework: Support Environment n/a 2018-19 CEP-RISE 58  Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. Monthly workshops for families specifically targeting how to support your child in the demands of high school and how to support your child to be prepared for college Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) All families College and Career Preparatory August 2018-June 2019 Course Index Training for staff on supporting college readiness Life-Ready Coaches/all staff College Readiness Training for families of incoming 9th graders 9th Grade families Progress Toward Graduation, Regents Completion Rate Sept 2018 to June 2019 July 2017 to June 2018 Community Director, College Counselor Principal and Parent Coordinator College trips and workshops for families starting in the 9th Grade All Families College Readiness Sept 2017 to June 2018 College Counselor, Community Director and Parent Coordinator Increase in College Readiness Rate Increase in number of 9th graders passing 2 Regents exams Increase in students re-taking exams to earn College Readiness Benchmarks Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, lead CBO’s community school budget, FSC Supports, etc. Training for staff and parents College Trips Parent Workshops 2018-19 CEP-RISE 59  Community Schools Budget Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By February of 2019, 50% of 9th Graders will be on track to pass both the Algebra and Living Environment Regents, as measured by Interim Assessment Data. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Interim Assessment Data New Visions Data Sorter Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 60  Section 6: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) Program Description Directions: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) activities are directly aligned to the elements of the Framework for Great Schools, Rigorous Instruction, Supportive Environments, and Strong Family and Community Ties. ELT provides enriching educational experiences that happen outside of the traditional school day and blend skill acquisition, relationship-building and fun to foster academic and social-emotional growth. Summer learning, afterschool programming, and extended-day ELT models, when well-implemented, play a critical role in supporting students in all grades and ensuring that they graduate from high school, college and career ready. SED requires that Priority schools offer a minimum of 200 additional student contact hours as Expanded Learning Time in addition to the current mandated length of 900 hours of instruction per year (25 hours per week) in grades K-6 and 990 hours of instruction per year (27.5 hours per week) in grades 7-12. Effective ELT models will blend school staff with community partners, and will provide a balanced curriculum that can include ELA, math, STEM, arts, physical activity, and leadership development. Complete the sections on this page to demonstrate how the school will meet these requirements. Part 1 – ELT Program Goal(s) Describe the summative goal(s) of the ELT program for the 2018-19 school year. Goals for ELT should aligned to the Rise Benchmarks. How will the school will ensure that all students’ individual needs are served during the Rise ELT and how the school’s vision for ELT will impact both academic achievement and social emotional growth? Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. By June of 2019, 75% of all students participating in ELT will earn additional credits as a result of ELT, thus increasing credit accumulation by 5% for each grade level. Part 2 – ELT Program Type Is the ELT program voluntary or compulsory? Voluntary X Compulsory Rise ELT – Describe what accountability structures the school will employ to ensure participation of all students, including special populations, will participate fully in Rise ELT. Additional ELT - If there is a voluntary ELT program in addition to the compulsory Rise ELT, indicate how you will actively encourage the participation of all students, with the goal of serving at least 50% of students. N/A: ELT is compulsory. Part 3 – ELT Program Description Target Population: The ELT program for a Rise School will be offered to all students in the school. Describe how the school will meet the following SED requirements for an ELT program: How will the school integrate academics, enrichment, and skill development through hands-on experiences that make learning relevant and engaging? How will CBO staff and the school’s teachers be integrated to provide a seamless learning day?  Offer a range of activities that capture student interest and strengthen student engagement in learning so as to promote higher attendance, reduces risk for retention or drop out, and increases the likelihood of graduation.  Actively address the unique learning needs and interests of all types of students, especially those who may benefit from approaches and experiences not offered in the traditional classroom setting.  What new content areas and opportunities will be offered to students? How will the school ensure all IEP and language mandates are met during ELT?  Contain components designed to improve student academic, social, and emotional outcomes, including opportunities for enrichment programs such as in music and art. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 61   Ensure instruction in any core academic subject offered in the program will be delivered under the supervision of a teacher who is NYS certified in that particular content area.  How will community educators receive professional development? Are there plans to provide joint PD to school faculty and community partner staff?  What content will be led by pedagogical staff and what content will be led by CBO partners?  How will the school best utilize CBO partners to impact student achievement?  How will effective outreach be conducted to families?  How will programming be made easily accessible to students and families in order to encourage participation? DreamYard’s ELT program will focus on offering high-interest courses designed to meet student needs that are not offered during the regular school day. DY Prep teachers will teach credit-bearing courses on Tuesdays, Thursdays and Fridays. On Mondays and Wednesdays, Counseling in Schools and DreamYard Project will offer enrichment courses to meet student needs. Classroom teachers will design literacy and math focused courses designed to simultaneously engage students in rigorous thinking while addressing skill deficiencies in literacy and math that will result in increased academic achievement as measured by increased credit accumulation and overall Regents pass rates. Examples of these courses are. We will use support from Rewards and Think Math to supplement these programs. Additionally, ENL students will be programmed for classes according to their language acquisition level. On-track students will be programmed for College Now Classes or internships. Examples of the programs Counseling in Schools will offer to students: ● Multiple sections of SAT Prep ● STEM-based courses ● Internships to on-track seniors Examples of the programs Dreamyard Project will offer to students: ● Mouse Squad: This is a program designed to empower youth to lead, learn and create with technology. Students in this course will learn practical skills in how to operate and repair computers, design websites. These skills will prepare students for a technology career in the 21st century workplace. ● Portfolio Design: This course is designed to work with juniors and seniors that are interested in pursuing a career in the Arts prepare for the audition/college application process ● Theatre Production Class: Students will be trained in the technical aspects of Theatre which include: set design, stage management, lighting design, and set construction. DreamYard Project is partnering with the Public Theatre for this course to give students real-world skills that could lead to employment in the Arts after high school ● Digital Photography: Students will work with a professional photographer to hone their photography skills. The Community Director and Principal will work closely together to provide reciprocal professional development. This means that Counseling in Schools and our other CBO partners will offer professional development every other month to DY Prep staff around strategies for increasing attendance, meeting students’ social emotional needs, and effective strategies for parent outreach, and understanding the college application process. The Community Director, 2018-19 CEP-RISE 62  Internship Coordinator and Student mentors working with the school from Counseling in Schools will be invited to the Academic and College and Career strand of DY Prep’s Professional Development on a regular basis so that they are abreast of academic expectations and instructional supports being offered at the school. Mentors and the Community Director will attend SIT team meetings to offer insight and additional support to teachers dealing with academically and emotionally challenged young people. Families will be mailed home a letter over the summer explaining the ELT offerings and supports. There will be a New Family Orientation offered to parents and guardians of incoming 9th grade students during the last week of August to introduce new families and students to the structure and rationale of DY Prep’s ELT offering. An information session will be held during the first week of school for returning families to introduce families and students to the new ELT structure at DY Prep. During the school year, teachers and CBO partners offering ELT courses will be required to use DreamYard’s online grading system to keep students and families abreast of student progress in those classes. ELT teachers will be required to meet with students and their families during Life-Ready Conferences to update them of student progress in their courses. Part 4 – ELT Program Implementation and Oversight Part 4a. Who will implement the ELT program? Who will oversee the program? 1. Indicate the key personnel that will be responsible for implementing and overseeing the ELT program, including school-based staff and any high-quality community partners that will be involved. If applicable, describe the scope of involvement of all community partners and how the joint ELT program is structured. How will the school assess the impact of ELT on individual student achievement and social emotional development? 2. 3. The principal, assistant principal and Community Director will oversee the ELT program. Guidance counselors, in concert with SIT team leaders will be responsible for programming ELT and ensuring that students are programmed in courses most aligned to their academic and social-emotional needs. Counseling in Schools, DreamYard Project and DreamYard Prep teachers will all facilitate aspects of our ELT program. DreamYard Prep’s ELT Program will happen every day from 2:55pm to 3:55pm. Most students will participate in ELT course offerings located in the school building. On track seniors and high-performing juniors will be offered off-site internships and College Now Course. An Internship Coordinator provided by Counseling in Schools will oversee the internships and College Now portions of the ELT program. ELT courses are designed to be implemented for one semester. In January of 2019, ELT teachers will meet with the Community Director and the Principal to evaluate the impact of their course on overall student achievement. If the course has not impacted student achievement by raising credit accumulation, attendance, or Regents pass rates, the course will not be offered in the Spring semester and a new course will be offered in its place. Part 4b. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 63  Timeline for ELT: June 2018: · Principal meets with Community Schools Director to discuss previous ELT offerings and determine which courses should be continued and which should be replaced or expanded. · DY Prep staff meets to discuss how the school can use ELT time to support goals for the 2017-18 School Year · 75% of DY Prep teachers have expressed interest in teaching an ELT course: Teachers are asked to submit a proposal for the course to the principal · We are the School Committee reviews ELT plan and proposals July 2018: · Principal reviews ELT course proposals and communicates to teachers about which proposals have been accepted. She begins programming ELT offerings into the 2017-18 Course Schedule and works with guidance team to determine the best matches for students based on interests and needs. · Principal meets with Community Director to begin hiring for their part of ELT August 2018: · Letters go out to families around ELT offerings and the extended school day · Teachers are asked to submit course syllabi for review · New Families Orientation meeting is scheduled and ELT program is discussed · Guidance Counselors with input of SIT team leaders begin to program ELT September 2018: · Parent Meeting to discuss ELT offerings and the importance of students attending the program · Grade Team meetings to explain the extended school day happen · Life-Coaches explain ELT offerings to students · ELT program begins November 2018: · ELT teachers from CBO and DY Prep staff participate in Life-Ready Conferences to discuss student progress in ELT classes January 2019: 2018-19 CEP-RISE 64  · Principal, Assistant Principal, Guidance Team, Community Director and SIT Team Leaders meet to evaluate the progress of students in ELT courses and adjust schedules and programs according to the data found · Principal asks for new ELT course proposals from staff and CBO Partner · ELT Courses for Semester 2 are programmed · New classes for ELT are discussed with students in Life-Ready Classes February 2019 · Semester 2 of ELT begins · SIT Leaders meet with principal, assistant principal and Community Director to discuss Semester 1 Credit Accumulation by Grade to determine impact of ELT on credit accumulation March 2019 · ELT teachers from CBO and DY Prep staff participate in Life-Ready Conferences to discuss student progress in ELT classes June 2019 · SIT Leaders meet with Principal, Assistant Principal and Community Director to discuss Semester 2 Credit Accumulation by Grade to determine impact of ELT on credit accumulation · We are the School Committee Meets to review ELT data and discuss structure of ELT for the 2018-19 School Year Part 5 – ELT Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the ELT program. By June of 2019, 75% of all students participating in ELT will earn additional credits as a result of ELT, thus increasing credit accumulation by 5% for each grade level. Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support the ELT Program. Note: If the program is funded by 21st Century Community Center Learning Funds, it must be offered in conjunction with a high quality, high capacity community partner. 21st Century Title I 1003(a) X Tax Levy Title III Title I SWP PTA Funded Title I TA SIG Grant P/F Set-aside School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 6 – ELT Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 65  Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By February of 2019, 70% of all students participating in ELT will earn additional credits as a result of ELT, thus increasing credit accumulation by 5% for each grade level Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. New Visions Student Sorter Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 66  Section 7: Community School Description Directions: The Community School strategy is directly aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. Community Schools bring schools and community partners together and integrate academics, health, youth development, and family engagement to provide students with the tools and opportunities they need to succeed. The Core Services in Community Schools are Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness. Part 1 – The Community School Program Goal(s) How is the Community School strategy integrated into academic instruction at your school, and what impact has it had on student academic outcomes? As a result of strategic efforts to more effectively support students and families with mental health services, referrals and family workshops, DY Prep will increase overall attendance from 84.1% to 85.8%. Indicate the summative goal(s) of the Community School program for the 2018-19 school year. Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. As a result of strategic efforts to more effectively support students and families with mental health services, referrals and family workshops, DY Prep will increase overall attendance from 84.1% to 85.8%. . Please answer the following question as it relates to meeting your Community School Program Annual Goal(s): How will achieving your Community School Goal(s)--in ELT, Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness--support your academic goals for students? Credit Accumulation for students on every grade level will increase Graduation rate for ELLs will increase Regents Completion Rate for 9th Graders will increase Part 2 – Community School Program Description Part 2a. Identify the CBO partnerships that you will develop in ELT, Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness, their target student population(s), and scope of the services provided. As well as supporting schools’ supportive environment and attendance work, CBOs should be helping to support your school’s instructional focus. CBO Partnership Target Population Scope of Service Counseling in Schools Students exhibiting signs of Chronic Absenteeism DreamYard Project All students New Settlement 11th and 12th Grade Students Success Mentoring, Weekly Counseling sessions, ELT offerings, Internships, Home visits, Family linkages Arts Programming to Students, Additional access to technology College counseling to students and families 2018-19 CEP-RISE 67 n/a n/a n/a Part 2b. Describe how the school will partner with the Lead CBO to do the following: 1. Community Schools are expected to partner with a community-based partner organization (CBO) and together with members of the School Leadership Team, hire a Community School Director. The Director will lead implementation of the asset and needs assessment process, and other critically important coordinating activities. Indicate how you will leverage this aspect of the work. Community Schools are expected to personalize the needs of all students, through strategic programming and services, as determined by the asset and needs assessment, and must also offer Expanded Learning Time (ELT) and mental health programming. In completing this section, ensure that you think about how: (1) the right services are provided to the right students and families at the right time; and (2) how you will seamlessly coordinate services with instructional programming happening throughout and outside of the school day. Indicate how you will implement this work, and describe other programming you anticipate to be in place to strengthen this initiative. Community Schools are expected to emerge as Partnership Schools, which are places where parents and families feel welcome, actively participate in the conversation and decision-making around the renewal of their schools, and have many opportunities to advocate for their children. Monthly meetings and Community School Forums engaging families and community stakeholders will be a critical part of this family engagement strategy. Describe how you will implement this aspect of the work. Community School Principals are expected to meet on a weekly basis with their Community School Director, select Assistant Principals, key staff, and other CBOs, to analyze trends in data and case manage individual students. Data tools – including the New Visions Data Sorter - and training will be available for schools to use. Indicate how you will implement this aspect of the work. 2. 3. 4. Counseling in Schools, as DreamYard’s CBO Partner as Community School provides the school with a full-time Community Director. Additionally, Counseling in Schools provides an Internship Coordinator, Attendance Liaison and mentors/social workers to support the Community School Program at DY Prep. The main focus of their work is to support the school in increasing attendance and reducing chronic absenteeism, particularly for hard to reach students and families. The Community Director will work closely with the principal, parent coordinator, Support Services Team and SIT Team Leaders to identify gaps of support for families. After identifying these gaps, the Community Director will ensure that whatever services Counseling in Schools has agreed to provide will be executed with fidelity and in line with DreamyYard Prep’s vision of Life-Readiness. One area that the school has already identified as a need is a skilled clinician to support the Parent Coordinator in conducting home-visits to the target population of students with low attendance. DY Prep’s Parent Coordinator currently conducts home visits. However, the school struggles with adequate follow-up to the visits because of lack of resources. In the 2018-19 School Year, the Community Director will ensure the quality of the home visits, but also will monitor the linkages provided to the family after the home visit. An intervention plan will be shared with the Support Services Team and the Principal after each home visit. This plan will be monitored by the Attendance Liaison in collaboration with the Community Director and the Support Services Team at DY Prep. In July and August of 2018, The Community Schools Director will meet with the school’s principal, social worker, cultural coordinator and parent coordinator to begin developing intervention plans for at-risk students, as identified from data gathered in the 2017-18 School Year. Students that will be targeted are students that were chronically absent in the 2017-18 School Year or whose overall attendance showed a significant decrease from 2016-17 to 2017-18. The school plans to start the 2017-18 School Year with intervention plans in place for targeted students. This way, plans are not being developed in September, but implemented and monitored for impact. The Community Schools 2018-19 CEP-RISE 68  Director will work with the parent coordinator over the summer to conduct home visits for students on intervention plans. These intervention plans will be shared with staff, students and families during the first month of school. These plans will include: ● a point person for each student ● student goals around attendance, academics, and behavior ● input from students, families and teachers on how the student learns best ● weekly incentives for meeting goals ● linkages for the student’s family as identified during home visits ● daily check-ins with the student ● weekly progress monitoring ● frequent family meetings The Community Director will work closely with Parent Coordinator, social worker and SIT Team Leaders to support students with chronic absenteeism. The Community Schools Director will also be a key participant in weekly Attendance Team meetings, We are the School Committee, Support Services meetings, and SIT team meetings. The Community Schools Director will be a central hub to connect families to mental health, housing and other resources. The Internship Coordinator provided by Counseling in Schools will continue to oversee an Internship Program for on-track seniors to gain real-world experiences. Additionally, she will work with the 9th, 10th and 11th Grade teams to support implementation of a Career Readiness Program offered to DY Prep in concert with Here to Here. The Internship Coordinator will also work closely with our College Counselor to support students in connecting their career interests to their college choices. In addition to the ELT Program outlined in Section 6, Counseling in Schools will support DY Prep with programming directly aligned to supporting social emotional development of students and families. When the ELT program ends at 3:55pm, Counseling in Schools will work in collaboration with DY Prep staff, DreamYard Project Teaching Artists and Step Up mentors to provide an extended after-school program. This program will occur Monday through Thursday from 4pm to 5:30pm and on Saturdays from 9am to 1pm. The after-school program will include AIS services outlined in Section 8 of this document, as well as Group and Family Counseling, SAT preparation nd other activities that are identified in an interest survey that will be given to students and families at the start of the 2017-18 School Year. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 69  In collaboration with the parent coordinator, the Community Schools Director will hold monthly workshops with families around topics identified in the interest survey, as well as from data gathered from home visits. She will also support the college counselor and principal in the implementation of our series of workshops for parents around academic preparedness. . In addition to these workshops, the Parent Coordinator and Community Director will hold monthly forums where parents can express concerns and provide new ideas to the school on how to better serve their children. Parents will also be encouraged to join the We are the School Committee to participate directly in school decision-making. For parents not on the We are the School Committee, a portion of these monthly forums will be dedicated to sharing out key information on issues impacting the DY Prep Community and plans of action to address these issues. A weekly standing meeting with the Community Director is part of the Principal’s Calendar. In addition to this meeting, the Community Director is a key participant in all meetings where stakeholders are analyzing student data. In particular,the Community Director will be asked to participate in SIT team, Attendance Team or Support Services Team meetings focused on analyzing academic and behavioral progress of students on Intervention Plans.. The Community Schools Director, Internship Coordinator, Attendance Liaison and mentors will all be given training on how to use the school’s online grading and behavior tracking system in addition to ongoing training using the New Visions Data Sorter. Part 3 – Community School Partnerships Oversight Part 3a. Key Staff and Partners 1. Name and describe the scope of involvement of all community partners working in the school (include partners supporting ELT, counseling, enrichment, etc.) 2. Name the members of your Community School Team and how meetings will be organized and structured to engage all stakeholders and be focused on results. 3. Explain data strategies including the use of the data sorter, and steps that the school will take to ensure that the appropriate interventions are provided to the right students The Community Schools Director in collaboration with the principal, assistant principal and Director of School Renewal will oversee the implementation of the Community School program and will be responsible for monitoring the progress of the program. Because the Community School program will be a true collaboration amongst all stakeholders, the school social worker, guidance team, culture team, We are the School Committee, teachers, students and families will all be involved in program implementation. DreamYard Project, Here-to-Here, New Settlement will all coordinate a joint ELT program as described in Section 6. The Community School Program will be evaluated by the impact it has to raise credit accumulation, decrease chronic absenteeism and raise overall attendance rates at DY Prep. Bi-weekly meetings focused on data analysis of these key areas will occur. If the data is not trending in a positive direction, adjustments to the program will be made. All DY Prep stakeholders will be given multiple opportunities for feedback on the program throughout the year. This feedback will be taken into consideration in addition to the data analysis to determine the effectiveness of the program. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 70  Part 3b. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the Community School program. Resources needed: ● Counseling in Schools will provide the bulk of ELT programming on Mondays and Wednesdays when teachers are meeting or having Parent Engagement time ● Counseling in Schools will support the after-school program from 4:00pm to 5:30 through providing mental health services and high-interest activities for students and families ● Internship Coordinator ● Attendance Liaison ● Community Schools Director ● Sub-contracting for STEM courses and SAT Prep ● Financial resources to support attendance incentives for students and families ● Instructional materials for ELT and After-school programs ● Support for College Trips Part 3c. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates.  June 2018 Meet with the Community Schools Director to reflect on the 2017-18 School Year and determine programming/services for the 2018-19 School Year.  Determine the budget for the 2018-19 School Year. July/August 2018 ● Community Schools Director meets with parent coordinator, principal, cultural coordinator and social worker to determine students in need of home visits ● Intervention plans for targeted students are made ● Internship Coordinator and Attendance Liaison come in the last week of August to prepare for their work in the 2017-18 School Year ● ELT and After-school program is scheduled ● Sub-contracted areas are hired/determined ● Attendance data for 2017-18 is analyzed and target population is set for the 2017-18 School Year ● Potential internships are identified ● Counseling in Schools meets with DreamYard Project, Step Up and New Settlement to coordinate services ● Group meeting of targeted students and families is held 2018-19 CEP-RISE 71  September 2018 ● Internship Coordinator begins to match students with internships ● Counseling from CIS social workers begins ● ELT and After-School Program begins ● Intervention Plans given to students and families ● Orientation meeting introducing the Community School Program is held for all families ● Goals and targets for students on Intervention Plans are set ● Interest survey given to students and families November 2018 ● First Life-Ready Conference happens ● Impact of Intervention Plans for First Marking Period is discussed with families ● Adjustment of Intervention Plans happens according to data December 2018 ● Community Program holiday event ● Second Marking Period Intervention Plan check-point January 2019 ● Team evaluates ELT and After-school offerings for impact on student achievement ● Adjustments are made based on data analysis February 2019 ● Recognition ceremony for students that have met their Intervention Plan Goals ● New target population for Semester 2 is determined ● ELT and After-school for Semester 2 begins ● Internships for Semester 2 begins ● New Intervention Plans and goals are set and shared with families and students March 2019 ● Life-Ready Conferences 2018-19 CEP-RISE 72  ● Impact of Intervention Plans for First Marking Period is discussed with families ● Adjustment of Intervention Plans happens according to data June 2019 ● Evaluation of Community School Impact ● Goals for the 2019-20 School Year are set Part 3d. Mental Health Work Plan Separate from this R-CEP, schools will complete a Mental Health Work Plan that will become an addendum to this document. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 73  Section 8: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Small group and one-to-one During the day, ELT Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Students reading below grade level Mathematics Students below proficiency (Level 3) on most recent Math assessment Science Students that have failed the Living Environment Regents at least once Interactive readings online adjusted to Lexile Level through Rewards program. Snap and Read provided to Students in need of read aloud or leveled readings. Approximately 100 students in 9th and 10th Grade Reward Program for ESL students: 60 student Imagine Math program to support students Small group and one-to-one During the day 150 students total in 10 th , 11 th and 12 th grades Repeated readings, writing assignments 20 students in 10 th , 11 th and 12 th grades Small group ELT/ after-schoo.l 2018-19 CEP-RISE 74 Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) 1. Students that have failed the Global Regents at least once 2. Students that have failed the US Regents at least once 1. Students with mandated counseling 2. Students exhibiting signs of chronic absenteeism.X 1. Repeated readings, writing assignments 1. Small group 1. During the day 2. Small group 2. After-school 2. Repeated readings, writing assignments 1. small group or individual counseling 1. small group or individual counseling 2. small group or individual counseling 2. small group or individual counseling 1. Before school, during school or after-school 2. During school or after-school 2018-19 CEP-RISE 75  Section 9: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) We currently have 59 students in Temporary Housing. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Our school social worker meets with families of Students in Temporary Housing to support them in their quest for housing. Counseling is offered to families of Students in Temporary Housing We give our students referrals for outside tutoring or other academic services Students are given book bags, coats and other school supplies Social Workers works with the liaison for STH in Shelters to make sure that students are safe and attending school. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). n/a 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 76  n/a 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. n/a 2018-19 CEP-RISE 77  Section 10: Title I Program Information Directions:  All schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. ● Targeted interview process ● Working with Office of Teacher Recruitment to target high-quality recruits ● Attending a Hiring Fair just for Renewal Schools ● Targeted professional development; on-site and off-site ● Department and SIT team scheduling of students ● ICT planning meetings Teacher mentors from staff to new teachers 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the strategies and activities for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, staff, and paraprofessionals that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). ● Support from DSR around Rigorous Instruction and Multiple Entry Points for All Learners ● Rewards and Think Math ● STEM PD for Science and Math Teachers ● Literacy PD from Teachers College ● Data Wise Strategic Inquiry PD 2018-19 CEP-RISE 78  Q-Tel Training ● Training from OYSD around social-emotional practices ● Counseling in Schools working with teachers around social-emotional support ● Department Heads attend Data Wise training Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. n/a 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). n/a Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/information, early intervention services, etc.). n/a 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Assessments will be determined by Department Heads in after-school Department Head meetings. Teachers will receive Professional Development in the use of data-driven instruction throughout the year as part of the school’s PD plan. This will be facilitated by outside consultants. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds enables, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (R-CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the 2018-19 CEP-RISE 79  intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Title I Part A (Basic) Title I School Improvement 1003(a) Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funds Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 234,158.00 16, 979.00 0 0 11,200.00 0 2,432,281.00 x x x Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent 2018-19 CEP-RISE 80  and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I School Improvement 1003(a): To support implementation of school improvement activities identified through the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) reviews or a school review with district oversight and included in the DCIP/R-CEP.  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: To support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs.  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan.  Title I Priority and Focus School Parent Engagement Set-aside: Additional set-aside is to enable greater and  more meaningful parent participation in the education of their children. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process, including Title I 1003(g) SIG funds: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 81  Section 11: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current R-CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. 09X329, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students Dreamyard Prep High School will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 2018-19 CEP-RISE 82  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; 2018-19 CEP-RISE 83  ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) 09X329, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between 2018-19 CEP-RISE 84  the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; 2018-19 CEP-RISE 85  ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; 2018-19 CEP-RISE 86  II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; 2018-19 CEP-RISE 87  ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 88  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP-RISE 89  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: The supplemental direct instruction program implemented at Dreamyard Prep is before school from 8:00 to 8:30 Tuesday and Thursdayin from October 2018 to May 2019 which select ENLs—primarily newly admitted immigrant students are invited to attend a weekly class the consists of half hours of instruction to accumulate credit and develop literacy skills that will supplement their classroom learning and assist them in passing standardized exams and reaching graduation with the rest of their cohort. As an ENL Department, we identify newly-immigrated and target ENL students who would benefit from the extra instructional time and the opportunity to earn an extra elective credit and invite those students in each of our leveled, self-contained ENL classes who have been selected via a letter of introduction and a permission slip/contract. This slip must be signed by both the student and the parent to demonstrate willingness to adhere to school and program policies and to provide consent for after-hours study. This forms are send home in the parent preferred language. The resource program started October 1st 2018. through May 30, 2019. Students are placed in entering, emerging or transitional level literacy classes, or in a global regents preparation class, depending on their NYSESLAT modality scores, transcripts, and Regents scores. They will meet two times a week Tuesday and Thursday and on Wednesday from 3:30 pm-5:30 pm. The students will have a total of 65 sections to meet with an ENL teacher. The resource program will continue through the end of the school year in May. The program provides English-only instruction to approximately 30 regularly-attending Dreamyard ENL students from grades 9-12 at all levels of language proficiency (the majority are recently-arrived beginners). The ENL Department will also add a Entering, Emerging and transitional level afer school, and Regents Prep which will meet once weekly for an hour (tentatively, Thursdays from 4:00 -5:00). Staring in November 2018 through June 2019. This program will have 30 sections. Readings will be selected with regard to the Common Core-appropriate grade bands texts. The progran will provide supplementary reading instruction, strategy development and English language acquisition to approximately 10-15 ENLs selected by the Dreamyard ENL department. Teachers involved in the resource program include all of the ENL teachers at Dreamyard Preparatory School. Each of the three teachers holds a NYS ENL Certification. One of the teachers also holds and additional certification in Secondary Education in Spanish as a Foreign Language. Materials needed for the program include the following: reading materials for the leveled literacy classes and the regents align prep books; dictionaries for the students to use for definitions, computers for writing and editing their essays. In addition, to using them for the Regents prep website to study for the Global and US regents; 30 Spanish English dictionaries; art supplies for the culminating activities at the end of the units (such as markers, glitter, glue, stock paper. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 90  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information We will keep record of the attendance, student work and program notifications will be send in parents preferred language. Additional funding will come from Tittle one funds. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: We will do a four continuing professional development workshops throughout the year for the resource program. One in October, December another one February and the last one in May. Research shows that an inspiring and informed teacher is the most important related factor influencing students achievements, so it is critical to pay close attention on how we train and support both new and experienced educators. These professional development workshops will help us to improve our instruction for the ELLS. We will meet every Wednesday @ 1pm each month from September 12th/2018 thought June 12th/2019 for one hour that will total 42 hours of PD for the year. We will maintain record with the agendas and attendance sheets. Each ENL teacher will take turns facilitating the presentations. All the ENL Teachers hold ENL certifications. Topics that will be covered include the following: #1 "How to better support our ENLs". #2 "Best Strategies to do with newley arrive students". #3. "Refine and Reflect: How Does Data Drive Our Instructions For ENLs". The PDs will be open to the ENL teachers participating in the ENL teachers in the Title III program as well as the administrator in charge and the last one "how to best support your students in the classrooms" In addition, the three ENL teachers will accompany their content area teachers to at least one ENL PD a year In October. January and May. In addition the ENL Department Head will assist a few meeting through the year and than she will come to school to facilitate to the rest of the staff. One was how to analyzed data that was October 24th/2018. These PD will impact the progress of the ENLs because it will allow teacher to analyzed where students need help and for those new teacher they will be able to understand the Ells and their level to provide a better instruction. In addition, it will facilitate instructions for them because teachers will be able to see how to help them and where they need the most help. ALL the PD will be no extra cost. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered 2018-19 CEP-RISE 91  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Begin description here: Parent engagement of newly immigrated and returning ELLs at DreamYard Preparatory School is also encompassed by the resource program. The ENL Department will have a monthly meeting every last Tuesday of month from 4:00am to 5:30am with parents starting Tuesday October 30th/2017 through June 25th/2019. The purpose of the meeting is to build community amounts our Ells parents and establish a support system with in the school building for parents. In addition, we will provide specific skills and strategies to help parents and students adjust to varying culture demands that integrated into a new country/school system. We will provide them with a yearly calendar at the beginning of the year or upon enrolment with all activities and themes of the year. The workshop will be conducting by one of our ENL certify teacher in the school. We will provide the materials, and food. We also include literacy and computer skills, including accessing our online grade book ,Skedula, in order to be able to participate more efficiently in their child's education, understand their transcripts and other records and help them meet the requirements for graduation and lifelong success. Admission to the class is rolling, and the ENL Department welcome new parents each week. As of October 18th/2017 through June 6th/2018 we will offer after school English and computer classes for parents from 4:30 to 6:30pm on Tuesdays. We will have 38 section of two hours of English and computer Instruction and ENL classes for parents We will have two big celebration at the end of the semester in winter will be in February and in Spring will be in June/2019 where we will awards students and parents with the progress of the semester. We will have monthly meetings with different themes thought out the year also to welcome any new parent that arrive during the year but also to inform parents of the students progress in class. We will invite all of Title III parents as well as of all ELLs parents by mailing phone a letter both in English and in their home language. We will also make phone call and send voice massage home to make sure everyone get an opportunity to participate. We always have translator services for parent and teacher conference available for parents in they need it. We will keep class calendar, workshop agenda, parents invitation in all the languages that we have in the school as well as attendance sheet for each class and each workshop sections. All of this activities are funded by Title III funds. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Per session for Regents Prep Per session for Book Club Per session for Resource Program Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) $7419.60  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum $1236.60 PD using the Rewards Program. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 92  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL $2473.20 Leveled Texts for Reading Groups Additional Dictionaries Art Supplies Food for Parent Meetings Fees for Parent Trips $1236.60 2018-19 CEP-RISE 93  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 09 School Name Dreamayard Preparatory High School Borough Bronx School Number 329 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Alicia Wargo Coach Afifa Khanam ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Idanesa Then/ENL Teacher/Subject Area Naomi Pharr/ENL Teacher/Subject Area Grisel Reyes/ENL Related-Service Provider Anita Grant Superintendent Michael Alcoff Assistant Principal Anthony Santiago Coach n/a School Counselor Melanie Vasquez Parent Maria Gonzalez Parent Coordinator Nydia Jimenez Field Support Center Staff Member Olga Mejia-Glenn Other (Name and Title) Steven Cruz/Special Ed Chair C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 3 1 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 1 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 284 2018-19 CEP-RISE 94 Total number of ELLs 81 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 28.52%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 2 4 3 K Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 0 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Currently, DreamYard does not formally assess ELLs early literacy skills using a prescribed assessment tool. Rather, teachers use a series of strategic assignments they've developed for their classes in order to gauge students' entry points, strengths and weaknesses based on the criteria of the class as well as the state and Common Core Standards. As an ENL department, we are in the process of developing a literacy assessment that we can give to students annually to in order to consistently track literacy during the duration of ELLs high school career. We use NYSESLAT to see their level of English and place them in classes according to their level and need and that also help us to guide instruction form them. We also use Interim Assessment to guide us to plan for skill and content. Our school recently purchased ION to as a literacy support for our school. ION was chosen because they have multiple supports for various populations. ION has native language support in Spanish which supports the L1 of 90% of our ELL population. Moreover, ION offers a feature in which students can choose to have book read aloud. The various scaffolds built 2018-19 CEP-RISE 95  into ION will allow all our ELLS to access literature at their zone of proximal development and allow them to develop a stronger base in literary. Since they can access text at their level and receive immediate feedback, ION will help them to instantly know what their strengths and weaknesses are as it relates to their literacy. Also, there are tools on ION that teachers can use to track students' literacy development over time. We are currently registering our ELLs on ION and using this tool as a pilot to measure literacy. If we learn that ION is an appropriate tool to measure students literacy over time, we will continue to use ION as one of the many resources that we use to measure ELL literacy. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? ELT classes for all ENL students by ability level. ENL teachers have an extra ENL class by level to support students 3 times a week for an hour each day. Students are group by levels and sometimes content. Weekly department meetings for ENL teachers. ENL teachers meet weekly to discuss strategies and support systems that work with the ENL population. Once every two month All staff PD teacher meet as a whole group to talk about strategies and share best teacher practices among each other. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? After students sit for January, June, August Regents we evaluate Regents data and isolate topics and skills that students did not demonstrate mastery on. ENL and/or content teachers work together to develop strategies to re-teach materials and help students reach mastery. ENL and content teachers also evaluate Interim assessments 4 times a year. After IA teachers analyze results and isolate areas that students did not master content and develop strategies to re-teach materials to help improve in their classes. We use data wise to analyze data from Each IA and Regents to measure the growth and plan for instructions in each class. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? We have bi-monthly department head meetings which the ENL Dept Head and model ENL teacher attend. We also use Data Wise as a system to support teachers in using data to inform instructional interventions. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] At DreamYard, the data informs our placement of students in leveled ESL classes as well as their placement in remedial and/or co-taught core classes. As we are a 9-12 school, we do not use the Response to Intervention framework. However, we have Student Intervention Teams for each grade level. We have an ESL teacher on each grade team. The grade teams meet once a week for an hour to discuss students who need additional interventions to access material in their classes. The SIT team is comprised of all content teachers for the grade, a ENL instructor, a SPED instructor, and a member of support services. If we identify a student who needs additional supports to access the materials in class, we decide as a team how to support the student and then implement those interventions across all content classes. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The data patterns that are revealed from the NYSITELL and NYSESLAT are that the majority of our ELL population is students whose L1 is Spanish (91% of the overall ELL population). Our students whose L1 is Spanish are scoring EN or EM on the NYSESLAT. The have shown growth over the year/s that they have been in NYC schools, but they are taking the full three years to develop their CALPs enough to score in the higher ranges (TR,EX,CM) of the language proficiency exams. The remainder of our ELL population who have an L1 other than Spanish (Bengali/Soninke/ Chinese) are acquiring CALPs at a faster rate. They are able to score on (TR, EX, or CM) on the NYSESLAT within 1-3 years. It is important to note that the aforementioned students generally tested higher on their initial entrance exam, and came into our school with higher levels of literacy in their L! than our overall population. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 96  Our data shows that our newcomer population (1-3 years of service) whose L1 is Spanish, increase their level of language proficiency at a slower rate than students whose L! is a language other than Spanish. However there are some students whose L1 is Spanish that do not follow the trend and progress in language faster than the overall population of newcomer ELL whose L1 is Spanish. The students whose L1 is Spanish and have been able to develop their L2 faster (15%) than the overall population, all came to Dreamyard with higher levels of literacy in their L! and have been able to transfer their L1 skills to help them develop their L2 and a faster rate than their peers. This trend is consistent with theory of language acquisition that state that if a student has a stronger L1 they will be able to transfer their literacy at a faster rate than a student whose L1 literacy is not as developed. 2017 NYSESLAT shows that 45 students that took the test in 2017 score between transitioning and Expanding and 27 students score between entering and Emerging. Four students tested out two of them score commanding and the two other score 75 or higher in the English exam. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? There are bi-monthly Department Head meetings where the ENL Department Head and ENL model teacher can share out findings with other teachers and staff members. The principal and assistant principal are part of these meetings and can adjust programming accordingly. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. ELL instruction is delivered in several different structures. ELLs are placed in self-contained or free standing classes that incorporate data-driven ENL methodologies, co-teaching/push-in model classes the utilize collaborative and/or cooperative instruction and learning to support students within their zone of proximal development. Depending on the number of ELL support minutes that an individual student is mandated to receive, he or she may be placed in a leveled self-contained ENL class and in additional co-taught core classes. The program models that are used at DreamYard are a block model for co-taught content classes and an ungraded model for self-contained ENL classes. Entering and Emerging ELLs move from their self-contained ENL class to their blocked co-taught content area classes with the same group of classmates to receive instruction with ELL supports. However, all ELLs of a particular proficiency level are grouped in an ungraded self-contained ENL class in order to receive appropriate instruction with appropriate balance of rigor and scaffolding. Stan alone model is where they see the English Teacher and the ENL teacher together at the same time. Integrated model is done by a content area teacher and ENL teacher in the classroom. Students are grouped by levels Entering and Emerging and they have a two period English class with an ENL teacher. Other are mix with by level and grade. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A -ENL program c. DL program. If applicable. N/A - ENL program 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? 2018-19 CEP-RISE 97  a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? The organization of the staff ensures that all students meet their mandated number of minutes through collaborative teacher partnerships in which an ENL teacher is paired with one or more members of a content area department (history, science or math) and teachers one hour-long ESL block class with them per day. ALL ELLs meet their mandated minutes through a combination of their daily self-contained ENL class and their blocked content classes, with beginners receiving co-taught content instruction in most or all subjects, intermediates receiving co-taught content instruction in one or two subjects and advanced ELLs receiving either one section of co-taught content instruction or self-contained ENL a) Explicit ENL minutes are delivered via self-contained ENL classes either replacing or, in the case of some advanced and/or credit deficient ELLs, in addition to a mainstream ELA class. These self-contained classes heavily utilize empirical data-based instructional methodology and planning, including the use of multiple entry points, tiered vocabulary instruction, culturally responsive teaching, CALLA reading strategies and DreamYard’s school-wide, Universal Design-based annotation approach. Additionally, depending on the proficiency level and assessed performance and skills of each individual class, instructional supports in students’ home languages, as well as supplemental texts, visuals and technology may be provided at the ENL teacher’s discretion or upon discussion among the ENL department as a whole. The ENL Department head goes over each schedule and ensures that they have enough minutes according to their proficiency level stated in the NYSESLAT 2017 scores. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Content area classes for ELLs are delivered through the co-teach/push in model and instruction is primarily in English. Teaching teams meet once per week for between 30 minutes through an hour and a half in order to plan and modify lessons and assessments, evaluate and grade assignment and discuss target students. Home language supports are provided at the discretion of the collaborating ENL and content area teachers; students may receive texts, worksheets, packets, notes or other written materials or verbal instructions/information in their native language (in addition to an English copy). If the instructional pair decides that students’ proficiency levels and skills necessitate their use. ENL teachers may also use small-group instruction to lead ELLs in a parallel, high support lesson during content area instruction. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? ENL teachers and the ENL Department chair ensure that students are evaluated in their home language by providing home language versions of Interim Assessments. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a) DreamYard’s instructional plan for SIFE includes intensive one-on-one support from one or more teachers on the ENL team in their last period class call Extended learning time. We specifically group them by levels and need. SIFE students are first individually and explicitly debriefed in English and, as necessary, in their home language, on school policy and classroom procedures and expectations. Students and, when available, parents, meet with guidance counselors to discuss school experience, transcripts, alternative education options and program/curriculum outlook for expected graduation date. A diagnostic exam (including a reading and writing sample in the students’ home language and/or the results in the NYSITELL), in conjunction with the results of the guidance conference, are considered by the ENL department to develop a support plan for SIFE students on an individual basis. ENL teachers provide all SIFE ELLs with multi-disciplinary graphic organizers and study strategies and scaffolds, supplemental class materials and directives in the home language, and offer office hours before, after and/or during school hours when they are available to provide additional help on school work or logistical/administrative tasks. Finally, all SIFE ELLs are formally invited to participate in ENL support after school for 1-2 hours 2018-19 CEP-RISE 98  per week. The tutoring builds community after school and provides ELLs with additional literacy, instructional time and general academic and social support. Moreover, we are a renewal school and are required to offer an extra hour of support after school. During this additional learning time, we have programed all SIFE students for classes that specifically focus on building their literacy. b.) DreamYard’s plan for newcomers includes a guidance conference in which transcripts from home countries and anecdotal evidence of school experience are discussed. In addition to taking the LAB-R and brief home language diagnostic and placement in a proficiency-appropriate ESL class, ELLs with zero to three years of service are usually programmed into the greatest possible number of co-taught ESL content area classes in order to maximize accessibility to their English immersion experience. They receive one-on-one support from one or more ESL teachers in their self-contained and/or co-taught content area classes and are placed in an advisory class with an ESL teacher to provide support in assimilating into the DreamYard community. Newcomers who are placed at entering and Emerging status receive intensive foundational language instruction in their self-contained ESL classes in order to first develop BICs, allowing them to function and communicate within the school community, and then to develop CALP with the aim of approaching grade-level Common Core Standards and Regents readiness. Newcomers who are placed at a transitioning and higher levels status are debriefed on school policy and expectations by guidance and/or an ESL team member and placed appropriately according to proficiency and mandated minutes. All newcomers are formally invited to participate in the CASA after school program to supplement their English language learning and community integration. c.) ELLs receiving service for four to six years are subject to the same programming, evaluation and instructional approaches described above, with the goal of gaining one proficiency level in each of the four modalities on the NYSESLAT; for example, an ELL with four years of service would be considered “on track” if he or she were to improve from beginner to intermediate in the reading and writing modalities and from intermediate to advanced in the speaking and listening modalities, and/or if his or her score indicated an overall gain from beginner to intermediate status from one academic year’s NYSESLAT administration to the next. Target lists of students who are not “on track” are collaboratively composed in ESL department meetings and instructional interventions, often including d.) Long-term ELLs are determined via the RYOS report and targeted for NYSESLAT and English skills support during an agreed-upon free period during the school day, or, if none is available and it does not interfere with Regents prep, credit recovery, etc, after school, in order to review the exam format and requirements, prior numerical scores in the four modalities and analyze for strengths and weaknesses, do practice questions compose mock responses and identify and hone the skills necessary to earn a proficient score on the NYSESLAT. e.) Former ELLs are usually placed in general education classes, but may be programmed for co-taught content area classes for course availability purposes. However, they receive their extended time modifications on all state and school exams and are placed in testing locations that are scheduled for time and a half with proctors who are ESL teachers. They also have dual language dictionaries at their disposal. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Instruction strategies used with ELL-SWDs include sentence frames, graphic organizers, quick writes, close reading strategies, co-taught classes to support language acquisition when using grade level materials. These strategies and materials provide access to interdisciplinary academic content by providing the language support the students need to assess the material. We also use Google translate and provide translated texts to all students. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? 2018-19 CEP-RISE 99  The current program is by and large considered to be effective by the DreamYard staff, parents and ELLs themselves, due to the flexibility and wide range of tools and methods employed to ensure ELLs’ English acquisition, academic success and community integration. In 2017, 15 ELLs scored “commanding”, 23 scores Emerging, 6 scores Entering, 26 scores Expanding and 24 transitioning. ELLs gained one proficiency level and 1 ELL gained two proficiency levels on the NYSESLAT exam. Additionally, credit accumulation across grades and sub populations has been on a general incline at DreamYard, indicating that ELLs are earning credit in grade level classes at the same rate as mainstream and native English speaking students. Because DreamYard teachers are organized into a variety of groups and teams that focus on the strengths and challenges of different subcategories of students, and because those teams are heterogeneous in their input sources (they include staff and support personnel from different content areas, SPED, ESL, guidance and administration), ELLs and ELL-SWDs are targeted by and receive support and modifications from multiple angles in each of their learning environments. Because the administration conducts several professional development meetings for rolling out scaffolding, close reading and multiple entry point strategies, and because ESL team members are actively included and actively participate in co-planning, SIT teams, SGI and supplemental course offerings, ELLs have the benefit of appropriate and supportive instruction in all of their classes, whether they are co-taught by an ESL teacher or not, while still meeting and usually exceeding the mandated number of ESL minutes for their proficiency level each week. Additionally, ESL teachers, content area teacher and support staff alike are sources of advocacy for DreamYard’s ELLs and foster personal relationships that create a comfortable and safe learning environment that is appreciated by the student body and the parents and guardians, as indicated by the strong majority of positive responses on the 2017 School Learning Environment Survey. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Targeted interventions for ELLs in the subject areas begin with an analysis of individual scores on NYSESLAT modalities to determine strengths and weaknesses in language proficiency. Class work, informal observations, Interim Assessment and unit assessment data and feedback from all teachers of each ELL are also considered when constructing an intervention plan. After this review, ESL teachers, content-area teachers, SPED teachers, Student Intervention grade teams (SIT teams: groups of 6-8 teachers working within one grade level to develop comprehensive intervention plans for students whose promotion is in question/danger) and, on occasion, parents may request reconsideration of a student’s schedule in order to have him or her more appropriately placed in an ESL co-taught class or a SPED ICT class. Additional results of this review may include placement in a supplemental after-school Regents preparation or credit recovery series, an invitation to the after program, or the addition of an ESL Skills [remedial] class to the student’s course load if his or her schedule permits. Less often, DYP students who qualify for Small Group Instruction (SGI) are required to attend once-weekly meetings with a content-area teacher (sometimes co-taught with an ESL teacher) in their targeted subject area, but this intervention is not specific to ELLs and may not be available to entering ELLs who cannot access a significant amount of the content without an ESL teacher. Regents prep, credit recovery and SGI are available in each of the content areas, and students are mandated to attend based on numerical grades, credit accumulation, and anecdotal performance input from teachers and SIT teams. After school is an invitation-only program focusing on cross-curricular literacy skills and strategies, which also offers a supplemented Global History Regents prep section taught by an ESL teacher. Regents prep and credit recovery are offered on a rolling basis each semester. SIFE and newcomer ELLs who are credit deficient and/or are determined to be in need of intervention in one or more content areas are invited to Regents prep/credit recovery with a content-are teacher and/or an ESL teacher two days per week for a total of three hours after school or on Saturdays for four hours each for eight weeks. ELL-only ELA prep sections are organized by grade and proficiency level, with ninth and tenth grade Entering and low-Emerging grouped in one section and eleventh and twelfth grade high-transitioning and Expanding ELLs in another. ELLs whose proficiency levels do not match these grade categories are placed on a case-by-case basis after careful consideration by the ESL department. Additionally, Global History Regents prep is offered by an ESL teacher as part of the after school program. Math and science Regents prep and credit recovery are offered by content-area teachers with planning modifications made by ESL teachers upon request. Additionally, ESL teachers are available for before-, during-, and after school office hours to assist ELLs with any challenges they come across with independent work and study. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 100  Former ELLs, long-term ELLs, advanced ELLs who are placed in mainstream English classes are already considered to be in need of intervention and, if they are credit deficient or have not passed the English Regents, are scheduled for ELL-only ELA Regents prep/credit recovery. They are the most eligible ELL candidates for SGI, as they have often developed enough proficiency to benefit from the content meetings even when they are not led by an ESL teacher. Depending on their Regents and transcript status, if their after school schedule permits, they may also be invited to attend the CASA program for additional literacy support. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? For the upcoming school year, new programs and improvements include the implementation of a school-wide reading strategy and marker plan, remedial ESL Writing and Skills classes replacing remedial history writing classes, and the development and implementation of a student work sample review protocol for the ESL department, which aims to help ESL teachers effectively use their assessments to inform instruction and align it more closely to the Common Core Standards. The school-wide reading strategy is based on an empirically-researched reading intervention plan created and implemented at a school with similar demographics to DreamYard’s student body and achievement record. The plan was presented at DreamYard’s first staff meeting of the 2017-2018 school year via a close reading of an article detailing the steps and goals of the program. SIT teams and content-area departments discussed modifications to the program for DreamYard’s specific student population and are in the process of developing standard display and instructional materials (posters indicating the strategies and markers to be used, for example “Marker: Students will formulate an opinion based on the text and support it with specific text-based evidence, Strategy: Annotate for evidence by underlining relevant facts, circling key words and explaining connections in the margins”; graphic organizers, rubrics and procedural checklists to be incorporated into planning and lessons). This plan is meant to promote close-reading, annotation and self-evaluation as second-nature literacy practices for all DYP students. The ESL department has made changes to some of the language of the materials to increase accessibility to ELLs (future modifications will include related instructional materials available in students’ home languages). ESL Writing and Skills classes have been formed at the intermediate and advanced level to support and prepare ELLs and former ELLs for the increasing literacy demands as they are promoted to the upper grades, as well as the requirements of the Regents Exam and the Common Core. To ease the transition, ELLs who are determined by guidance and the ESL department (based on prior grades and credit accumulation, Regents and NYSESLAT scores and teacher feedback) to be in need of remediation are placed in one of these classes according to their proficiency. They then receive 2-3 hours of explicit literacy skills instruction each week in addition to their self-contained ESL and/or mainstream ELA classes. These classes are part of their regular schedules during school hours and employ CALLA strategies as well as school-wide initiatives to increase reading comprehension, exercise critical thinking skills and develop argumentation and composition mechanics in a high-rigor but low-stakes learning environment. The review of student work as a tool in determining the effectiveness of both instruction and assessment is a primary focus of developing practice for the 2017-2018 school year. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? We don't have a bilingual program. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs are afforded equal access to all school programs as a result of the programming policies upheld at DreamYard, as well as the advocacy of ENL teachers and guidance personnel who are well-versed in ENL compliance and the Chancellor’s Regulations. All ELLs received 0 period (before school) classes 3 times a week to ensure that student supplemental program the same or equivalent content instruction as their mainstream counterparts, as ensured by the collaboration of license content-area teachers with ENL teachers in co-taught classes, with the addition of ENL and native-language support where necessary and effective. After school and supplement programs including Regents Prep, credit recovery, night school 3 times a week from 4pm to 5pm. Saturday Academy, from October to June extracurricular/DreamYard Community clubs are available to all ELLs provided that they are eligible for participation in the appropriate and available section (determined by their proficiency level and credit accumulation) for academic programs, and good standing status with teachers as discussed on SIT teams for extracurricular activities. All of this program have a content area teacher an ENL teacher to support students. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 101  12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Instructional materials used to support ELLs across proficiency levels and subgroups include a standard set of Common Core aligned literacy based graphic organizers developed and published by DePaul University (available in both English and Spanish, the primary home language at DreamYard), texts chosen with an emphasis on culturally-responsive criteria (“A Tree Grows in Brooklyn” by Betty Smith, selected for the theme of the American Dream which has an implicit connection with the themes of immigration and assimilation that are prominent in the lives of many ELLS; “This is How You Lose Her,” written by Dominican author Junot Diaz who is well-known in our primarily Dominican community and garners a high level of interest and engagement with ELLs), accompanying nonfiction texts in both English and home languages to build background knowledge, frontload and contextualize lessons in both self-contained and co-taught classes that introduce new concepts, and versions of texts selected by content area teachers that have been modified via translation into home languages, altered formatting, addition of a graphic organizer format or checklist, or supplemented with home language vocabulary keys and summaries. Technology used includes a dedicated laptop carts with 25 Macbook Pros/Google Cromes that teachers can use upon making a reservation with the technology teacher. Teachers also use online essay mapping software that provides graphic organizers, cited evidence search tools, and add-ons like synonym buttons and proofreading tools for a 21st century approach to supplementary writing scaffolds, and the integration and regular use of student @dreamyard.com email addresses and Google Drive accounts for assignments and student-teacher communications into academic like at our school. In about 50% of the classes, teachers use google classroom. Assignments are loaded into the teachers' classroom account and students can complete their assignments on the account. In art class and ENL class, student also have started working on online individual blogs. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? As DreamYard only offers an ENL program at this time, native language support is offered and adjusted according to the needs of each classes and sometimes the needs of individual or small groups of ELLs. It is the policy of the ENL department to regard native language support as part of a Gradual Release model of language acquisition and instruction, such that newcomers, beginners, SIFE and struggling ELLs may receive up to the allotted 25% of their support in the form of materials and directives translated into their home language at the beginning of a school year or course of study. This ensures that content knowledge is accessible and the student remains engaged and confident in both the teacher’s ability to tailor instruction and in his or her own ability to perform at the expected level of rigor. However, as these ELLs become familiar with classroom procedures, expand Tier 1 and Tier 2 English vocabulary and learn comprehension and analysis strategies during the progression of the course, it is expected that native language support will diminish from full text translations to supplemental vocabulary lists and summaries and finally to minimal infrequent translations upon request. Congruently, while written and verbal responses in the native language will be accepted toward the beginning of the course, beginner ELLs will be expected and encouraged on a time line appropriate to their language learning, assessment performance and developing proficiency, to compose and volunteer responses in English, eventually with minimal reliance on the home language to convey ideas and evidence. To encourage a community atmosphere of diversity, respect and mutual appreciation, home language is an important part of cultural activities and experiences designed to supplement content material, in order to provide the students with a welcoming place to demonstrate cultural pride, communicate in the way that is most comfortable to them and teach others about their home language without detracting from English acquisition during class time. Socialization in the native language during free time, assisting the teacher by translating words and phrases for peers and taking lecture notes or making un-graded annotations in the native language are also acceptable, as they do not interfere with language learning and maintain native language skills and vocabulary as English is acquired. Moreover, ENL teachers work alongside with content teacher to ensure that home language is being used in the class room in a manner that values home language while simultaneously stressing the importance of acquiring higher levels of proficiency in the language domains of Reading, Writing, Listening and Speaking. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. ELLs’ ages and grade levels inform choices about services, support and resources with regard to credit accumulation, Regents scores, the four-year graduation goal and achieving proficiency on the NYSESLAT. Beginners who arrive at DreamYard from the home country in ninth grade are assigned a course load that will allow them to achieve or exceed the mandated 540 ENL minutes while earning the number and breadth of credits appropriate to all ninth graders in New York for a graduation date with their cohort year if they remain on track. Beginners who arrive at DreamYard 2018-19 CEP-RISE 102  having already earned enough high school credits to be programmed as an upperclassmen (eleventh or twelfth grade), may be programmed for two self-contained ENL classes simultaneously in order to satisfy the mandated minutes and offer accelerated English language learning to earn a satisfactory score on the Comprehensive English Regents, gain at least one proficiency level on the NYSESLAT and keep up with rigorous academic material in content-area classes in order to graduate with the cohort into which they matriculated. Similarly, advanced ELLs in upper grades who have already taken and passed the self-contained Advanced ENL class may be programmed for a mainstream ELA class in order to hone their language skills alongside native English speakers. In addition, ENL teachers use their discretion to determine where on the continuum between explicit and intensive support and the provision of scaffolds independently employed by the student are appropriate at the upper grade levels and with older ELLs, especially for those with whom there is a risk of having to consider alternative programming (YABC, GED pursuit) if credit and skills deficiencies are not rectified within the allotted timeframe. The ENL department cooperatively makes decisions about budget, supplies and technology on a case-by-case basis to determine where resources can be focused in order to best help ELLs achieve success; there is no prescribed ranking of priority ELL subgroups at this time. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? N/A 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Newly enrolled ELLs are assisted before the beginning of the school year through New Student Orientation and outreach by DreamYard’s pupil accounting secretary, parent coordinator and guidance department. One or more of these sources initiates the initial interview at the time of enrollment and provides relevant logistical information about scheduling, transportation, policies and procedures, and answers questions regarding the same. The New Student Orientation allows students to walkthrough the halls and classrooms at DreamYard, meet some of their new teachers and classmates and become familiar with the learning environment and community of which they are now a part. At the same time, parents are informed via the initial interview and ELL Parent Orientation of the outline of services in our ESL program so that they can provide support and reassurance to their children before the first day of school. ELLs who arrive during the course of the academic year meet with their guidance counselor and the teacher of their self-contained ESL class after enrollment to acquire this information, ask questions and express concerns. If their parents are unable to participate in an individual orientation at the time of enrollment, another ELL Parent Orientation is organized after school hours to provide the information and assist in filling out the necessary paperwork so that their child can transition as smoothly as possible. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? The only language offered in the school is Spanish and AP Spanish 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Not applicable as DreamYard does not have a Dual Language Program. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? 2018-19 CEP-RISE 103  1.) Professional development plans for the ENL department are made collaboratively at the department meetings. At this time DELLSS offe rings are periodically discussed and ENL teachers may volunteer to attend a PD and report his/her learning to the department or possibly the entire staff. Alternatively, the FSC support representative or, on occasion, the principal may request that one or more ENL teacher attend a particular PD for the purpose of learning and reporting back to the staff. Each ENL teacher attends between one and three off-site ELL-specific PDs per semester, either individually or in combination. At least two ENL teachers attend the borough NYSESLAT training PD prior to the test’s administration and debrief about procedures and changes to the exam at the following department meeting. Additionally, the DreamYard administration and/or the DreamYard Project periodically provide on- 2.) Professional development around the Common Core Learning Standards is provided after school and on site by DreamYard’s administration and the FSC. Opportunities for DreamYard’s ENL teachers to pursue off-site PD on ELL-specific Common Core topics are also available. It is expected that teachers will document the PD and house copies of any materials provided in the files in the dedicated ENL classroom for future reference. In addition the EDAT reports and the RFSF to plan PD about instructional strategies. Mrs. Then-Maldonado the ENL Department Head is charge of Monthly meeting stating October and end in June. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. In order to help staff assist ELLs as they transition from middle to high school, we have an ENL teacher on the 9 th grade team. The ENL teacher helps staff plan the for the freshman orientation. The 9 th grade team works with Ms. Pharr to integrate ELL strategies into their instruction and collaborate on interventions that may help ELLs that are having trouble adjusting socially or academically to the high school setting. Throughout the school year ENL teachers conduct PD's for the entire staff to help them understand how to implement best instructional practices for ELLs. Thus far, an ENL teacher, Ms. Pharr and a Science teacher, Ms. Paulino presented the reading strategy CSR to the entire staff. We will continue to offer PDs throughout the year to support staff in working with ELLs. In order to meet the 15% PD hours ELL training for all staff and special education pedagogues are provided at DreamYard through a combination of teacher led PD and on-site PDs conducted by the administration or a network support person on ELL-specific topics such as Common Core Aligned Writing for ELLs and Reading and Rigor for ELLs. We use the 80 minute PD sessions during the work day to give PD. As an alternative to or in combination with these offerings, staff may seek their own ELL-focused PD offsite and submit it to the administration for approval before attending. Important information is documented, materials are put on file and both are made available to the rest of the staff for future reference. In order to meet the 50% PD hour training for ENL staff, ESL staff attend specialized training with a network support specialist. ENL teachers also attend PD with the Office of ELLs.In addition, ENL teachers also meet for an entire school day once every other month to align curriculum across the ENL classes. The ENL Department Head participates in DELLSS and BFSFC PD and she is the turnkeys the information to staff. She always keep agendas and attendance in an ENL files. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Parents of ELLs are also invited to the ELL Orientation meeting scheduled after school at the beginning of each semester and on an as-needed basis during the year. Invitations are mailed home and given to students to take home, and refreshments, paperwork assistance and a Q & A are provided to encourage attendance. 20 parents attended the September 19, 2017 parent orientation. Parents of ELLs are also encouraged to attend monthly meetings by call list composed by the ENL department. In addition, we encourage parents to come 2018-19 CEP-RISE 104  based on students who are prioritized as needing additional support at home in order to succeed behaviorally, academically or both. Parents who are not able to attend parent monthly meetings invited by the dean and/or the ESL teacher(s) to attend an individual conference at an agreed upon time during or after school hours. At this time, a plan will often be developed for how to further effectively communicate between school and home to keep the student in question on track. If a parent cannot report to DreamYard at all, ENL teachers make and log calls home to conduct parent discussions and provide contact information so that parents can reach them at their necessity. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. This year we have the CBO Counseling in Schools in as a part of our community. We have brainstormed ways that the CBO will work with us to reach out to parents of ELLs, but specific plans have not been finalized with meeting dates and times. Counseling in School will help support us re-introduce the Parent CASA language program. The are also helping us organize informational workshops for parents around topic such as Skedula, High School Credit Accumulation, Regents-What are they and how do help prepare my child, etc. Also, after meeting with parents we will take their feedback and create workshops based on topics they are interested in further exploring. ELL parents have an ELL an ENL class every Tuesday 4 to 6pm from October 3rd to June 2018 Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 2018-19 CEP-RISE 105 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Alicia Wargo, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 106  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Dreamyard Preparatory HS School DBN: BX329 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Alicia Wargo Title Principal Anthony Santiago Assistant Principal Nidia Jimenez Parent Coordinator Idanesa J Then-Maldonado ENL/Bilingual Teacher Maria Gonzalez/PA President Parent Naomi Pharr/ENL Teacher/Subject Area Grisel Reyes/ENL Teacher/Subject Area Afifa Khanam Coach Coach Melanie Vasquez School Counselor Olga Mejia-Glenn Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Nakia Perkinson Other School Counselor Steven Cruz Other Special Education Te Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 09/27/2017 09/27/2017 09/27/2017 09/27/2017 09/27/2017 09/27/2017 09/27/2017 09//27/2017 09/27/2017 09/27/2017 09/27/2017 09/27/2017 2018-19 CEP-RISE 107  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 09X329 School Name: Dreamyard Preparatory High School Superintendent: Carron Staple The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. 1. Parents are given a home language form to fill out when the student is registered at the school for the first time. 2. Parents have an entry conversation with a guidance counselor, ESL coordinator, social worker or pupil personnel secretary. A parent's home language or preferred language of communication is discussed and logged at this time. 3. Student LAB-R results are analyzed and discussed in the ESL department meetings 2018-19 CEP-RISE 108  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Language 1. 65% of our families speak Spanish at home. 2. A small percentage, around 5% speak French at home 3. The rest of our students: around 30%, speak English at home 4. This was reported to our school community at a staff meeting and at a parent association meeting. 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. 1. Translation services for Spanish-speaking parents are provided by our Bilingual Parent Coordinator, School Aide, Guidance Counselor, or Pupil Personnel Secretary. 2. Our Bilingual Phys-Ed Teacher provides translation services for our French-speaking parents. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 109  3. For parent-teacher conferences, translation services are provided by an outside vendor. 4. We use an outside vendor for one of our parents, who is deaf. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? Thoroughout the year the school have 3 parent teacher conferences (11/19, 11/20, 3/10, 3/11, 5/10). At the parent conferences, parents interact with teachers and support staff. Thus far, we had one family night, an ENL parent orientation, open house night (10/19). This meeting was both formal and informal in nature. We reviewed official ENL documents with the parents, had them complete mandated paperwork and watch the entitlement video, but we also set time aside to meet with each parent about their child. All the ENL teachers (Then, Watkins and Pharr) were in attendance for the meeting with the parents. In addition, most of the staff communicate with family via email and phone calls. Call are primarlily made during our parent engagement time from 3:00-3:35 on Wednesdays, however if a situation comes up in which parent contact is required calls are made as needed. The majority of our ENL students speak Spanish. If a staff member is unable to communicate with a parent because of a language barrier, There are multiple teachers on staff that assist with translation (Then, Watkins, Salas, Pierre-Louis, Blanco). Also, Ms. Jimenez, our parent coordinar helps 2018-19 CEP-RISE 110  with translation and making phone calls. If there is an ENL student who is a LTA or needs additional family outreach, Ms. Jimenez does home visits to directly communicate with parents. The students in need of a home visit are identified by either the attendance team or SIT (Student Intervention Team) . This year we have the additional support of Counseling in Schools. Counseling in Schools provides week 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? The school use parent, teacher conference, family nights and in house surveys to gather information and get feedback from parents. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 111 
