2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): School Name: 10X340 P.S. 340 Principal: ALEXEI NICHOLS 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Number (DBN): 10x340 718-220-1866 Fax: Lalvarez12@schools.nyc.gov Email Address: School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: PS 340 321000010340 Pre-K-5 25 West 195 th St 718-220-1830 Phone Number: LissetteAlvarez School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Alexei Nichols Mary Dillon Janina Barriga Mary Dillon Faviola Sierra N/A N\A N\A District Information Geographical District: 10 MaribelHulla Superintendent: One Fordham Plaza Bronx New York Superintendent’s Office Address: Mhulla@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-741-5852 Phone Number: 718-741-7098 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 CEP 3  FSC: Bronx Executive Director’s Office Address: Jose Ruiz Executive Director: One Fordham Plaza Jruiz2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-828-7776 Phone Number: 718-828-3113 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Alexei Nichols Mary Dillon Janina Barriga Faviola Sierra N/A Theresa Lunetta Sinead Moffatt Annette Nieves *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Teacher Teacher/ Teacher/ 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Lindsay Kiernan Maribel Saavedra Vanessa Diaz Lilian Fernandez Veronica Ramirez Teacher/ Teacher/ Member/ Parent/ Parent/ Parent/ Parent/ Parent/ Parent/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? 1.The mission of P.S. 340 is to educate the whole child, help him or her achieve high standards, develop his/her self-esteem, sense of community, social responsibility, values, aesthetic awareness, mental and physical health, citizenship and to instil a life-long love of literacy and learning. 2018-19 CEP 9  . 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. We are a school that believes in building a Growth Mindset culture which allows students, parents, and our staff to believe in themselves and what they are capable of doing for the betterment of themselves and the school community. We are a school that believes in building teacher capacity by tapping into teacher expertise in order to be able to allow for a more distributive leadership structure. We have had a Well Developed Quality Review and Well Developed school for the past 5 years. PS 340 collaborates with many partners as we believe in long term partnerships that support the whole child and offer facilities that enhance our school’s offerings. These include, but are not limited to Dancing Classrooms, APEX at Lehman College, Manhattan College, Teachers College, Asphalt Green, Cook Shop, Marquis studios (offers drumming, puppetry, architecture and film making), Theatre Moves, and NYC Food Bank to name a few. Demographics: 85% Hispanic, 9% Black, 3% Asian, 2% White and 1 % Other. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. 2. PS 340 has approximately 620 students from Pre-K through 5 th grade. 28% of our students are English Language Learners, 28% of our students have IEP’s, and 85% of our students receive free lunch. In addition, data indicate that more than 30% of our families are in shelters and other temporary living situations. We have assessed that students struggle to apply mathematical reasoning and problem solving skills and need more practice in representing their thinking and explaining their work in both Math and ELA. In addition they need the academic language in order to explain and represent their thinking. In order to address these needs, we are committed to designing instruction in the classroom that is differentiated and targeted. In addition we offer support programs before and after school, as well as Saturdays at PS 340 to address these needs. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. 3. The Element of the Framework that We believe we made the greatest progress this past year was Effective School Leadership. Listed below are examples of effective school leadership: ● Professional growth of teachers and staff was evident in application of a cohesive approach of administering the F&P assessments ● Created a School-wide PLC to create a vertical feedback system ● Protocols for turnkey of Teacher's College Reading and Writing Professional development trainings ● Model classroom structures to demonstrate and share best practices 2018-19 CEP 10  ● Creation of the Initiatives Support Team and instructional Cabinet to oversee all school initiatives and message to the entire school community Area of focus for the 2018-19 school year is Collaborative Teachers: In order to improve in this area: -Teachers will collaborate through learning walks, inquiry teams and inter-visitations to explore discussion protocols, such as Socratic Seminar, Tea party and Read aloud accountable Talk bands -Teachers will collaborate in developing a structure to focus on vocabulary development and Math problem solving, all of which will connect back to our instructional focus of feedback on learning -Teacher will look at student work collaboratively through the qualities of good writing and our vertical feedback system approach -The formation of the Teacher Leadership team help teachers to work on a problem of practice based on data in order to improve school programs, curriculum, outreach and outcomes. 2018-19 CEP 11  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 10X340 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 646 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual YES Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 80 79 32 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 29 25 32 32 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 86.0% % Attendance Rate 85.3% % Reduced Lunch 30.7% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.5% 86.8% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 1.9% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 4.08 0% 11% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 30.6% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 74% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A NO N/A NO NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A NO N/A YES NO High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 70 70 32 91.8% 0.9% 25.9% 9.3% 1.2% 0.8% 2 4% 6.1 25.7% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 12  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Our school conducted a comprehensive needs assessment aligned to the framework for great schools by focusing on rigorous instruction. We analyzed quantitative and qualitative data sources such as the June 2018 Instructional Report, F&P reading data (fall , winter and spring 2017-2018) the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide ,2017-2018 Fall and Spring PPO feedback, teacher surveys, students work analysis, and Advance data. Areas of Strength 1) teacher teams was indicated as an areas of strength in the PPO. "Teacher teams systematically analyze key elements of teacher work including classroom practice , assessment data and student work for students they share or on who they are focused, resulting in shared improvements in teacher practice and mastery of goals for groups of students ." Distributed leadership practices are embedded so that there is effective teacher leadership and teachers play an integral role in key decisions that affect student learning across the school. 2) In-depth and meaningful PLC's were facilitated this year by key staff members (as per 2017-2018 school quality guide and in-house teacher surveys survey data) 3) Successful implementation of formative feedback systems teacher use to give feedback to students in the writing workshop 4) Strategic guided reading practices resulted in increased reading levels across all grades (increase in levels 3&4 and decrease in levels 1's) Areas of Need 2018-19 CEP 13  1) Multi step word problems solving strategies through the use of UPEC and models and the use of Engage Modules for math instruction 2) Questioning and Conversation Techniques to help students engage in deep conversations (socratic seminar, Tea Party, Number Talks etc) 3) Quality peer to peer feedback through the use of 6 traits and qualities of good writing used in the feedback system 4) Productive Math 'talk', Number talks (support students conceptual math understanding) 5) Students across the grades struggle with phonics and phonemic awareness knowledge. As a result the school will implement the Fundations program K-2) 6) Sumative and formative data from Go Math assessments, Engage Modules and the State tests was analyzed. We found that students struggled in Number and Operations, more specifically Place Value, fractions, and Measurement and Data. In the lower grades, Measurement and areas of number sense was found to be a high need topic for students. 7) Incorporation of rigorous Math tasks ( emphasizing the Mathematical practice Standards) and application problems to build conceptual understanding Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 70% of teachers will receive a rating of effective on Domain 3 component d of Danielson by creating/refining a predictable, recognizable, vertical and visible feedback in writing and reading that reinforces a shared language used across the school in order to guide and assess student learning through rigorous standards based instruction. 2018-19 CEP 14  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All teacher teams will engage in professional learning (during weekly grade planning sessions, vertical teams and PLC Mondays) that focuses on teachers revising a feedback system based on the language of the TC rubrics in reading and writing that reinforces skills and concepts (comprehension and phonics) vertically. students will use this feedback to self assess and self adjust in order to create goals build more student ownership over their learning enabling them to speak to their next steps. Teachers will utilize mastery objectives to modify the Teachers College Readers and Writers units of study. Teachers will also modify the Engage and Go math objectives to create mastery objectives. Parents will be invited to writing and Math workshop sessions and celebrations to familiarize them with the workshop process and new units/curricula. This will support them at home with strategies as students become more proficient readers and writers. All Students with a particular focus on students with disabilities and ELL's All Students with a particular focus on Students with disabilities, ELLs and the lowest 1/3 Teacher Team meetings September 2018- May 2019 All teachers Administration, Literacy and Math Coach, Lead Teachers, ESL coordinator September 2018– May 2019 1 teacher per grade, Administration, Math Coach, AP's and out of class support staff Teacher teams will analyze ELA /Math data and use item analysis data to determine areas of focus for Engage Math lessons and ELA lessons in order to differentiate lessons based on student need All Students with a particular focus on October 2018– May 2019 Grade level teams ELA and, Math Consultants Math Coach, and Administrators October 2018 – May 2019 Administrators, Coaches & Lead Teachers Students with disabilities, ELLs and the lowest 1/3 All Students with a particular focus on disabilities, ELLs and the lowest 1/3 Teacher teams will analyze student work using the learning progressions, rubrics in order to craft feedback and adjust lessons to meet the needs of all students (especially Students with disabilities and ENL learners . Teachers will also analyze Math tasks and assess areas of strength and gaps. 2018-19 CEP 15  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. The Parent Coordinator, key grade leaders and out of classroom staff will conduct workshops during the Parent Engagement block to demonstrate and share what rigorous and best practices look like and share strategies for assisting their children at home Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human Resources : Teachers, Lead Teachers, Administration, Literacy Coach, Math Coach, ESL teacher, SPED Lead, Teachers College instructors Instructional Resources: Sample model Curricular units, F&P Assessments, Common Core writing tasks, Number talks , Math Tasks and Math games Scheduling : curriculum planning, common planning and feedback sessions for teachers, PD Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A X C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 50% of teachers will have implemented specific measurable and visible feedback in Writing and reading lessons lessons By February 2019, 50% of classroom observations will reflect a 1 level growth of performance as measured by Danielson Framework for teaching rubric Domain 3 component D.. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Advance Data Danielson Rubric score on Domain 3 Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 16  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Our school conducted a comprehensive needs assessment aligned to the framework for great schools by focusing on Supportive Environment. We analyzed quantitative and qualitative data sources such as a review of our latest school Quality Guide and PPO- the data revealed the following: Strengths:  We have strong systems and structures in place to support teacher teams and some structures to support student academic and social emotional learning Through our 4R's curriculum, SEL practices and our growth Mindset lessons and philosophy  Parents and teachers responded on surveys that students feel safe and supported while at school  Teachers feel that school administrators support their professional growth and feel that their is trust and respect among teachers and between teachers and the Principal and AP's. Priority Needs:  Teachers need to develop a repertoire of strategies to address the social emotional needs of students exhibiting challenging behaviors, impulse control and lack of self-regulation skills. Students need descriptors and strategies to gauge their place in the continuum of learning.  Classroom observations show a needs to help students become more meta-cognitive about how they learn best and need more help learning how to self -regulate and apply de-escalation techniques when they feel frustrated or angry. To aid students in acquiring these skills we have created a climate committee for the 2018-19 school year that will focus on creating school-wide behavior systems that will communicate to students a common language of clear expectations for the expected behavioral norms and will help students to use a common language and set of strategies for problem solving, collaboration and cooperation. We will also continue to implement our 4R's program through Morningside center for Social Responsibility, Child Mind and our New partnership with Turn Around for Children. It is our goal to have all stakeholders describe our school as a community of learners where all individuals have the opportunity to learn and to grow in a safe and nurturing environment; where academic and personal excellence is valued, expectations are high and every child’s performance is assisted in order to achieve high academic and social emotional standards.. 2018-19 CEP 17  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 there will be a 15% decrease in RTI behavior referrals and teacher removals assessed by the reduction of SWiSS form referrals and OORs reports due to the effective communication and implementation of our Social Emotional/Character Education Initiative. 2018-19 CEP 18  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). RTI Teachers, SEL support personnel and Coaches from Child Mind, Turn around for Children members of the climate committee will lead PD's during monthly meetings and assemblies to create systems and structures to monitor and modify social emotional and academic behavior through the use of the 4R's curriculum, RULER,morning circle and behavior tracking sheets. The SEL coach and RTI leader will visit classrooms (General Education, Special Education and ENL classes) to help implement effective behavior modification systems and help teachers develop plans. ICT vertical common planning teams will meet monthly to engage in a critical study of effective ICT team pedagogy, UDL strategies and social emotional and academic behaviors. The team will visit each others classrooms, watch videos read articles and share best practices. Teachers will engage in coaching and training Cycles with Child Mind and Turn Around for Children to implement a coherent took kit of strategies to support At Risk students experiencing trauma Classroom Teachers, SPED Lead Teacher , RTI Teachers, Coaches from the Child Mind and Turn Around for Children(4 R's project) All Students September 2018 June 2019 SPED and ENL students Parents ALL students in the ICT setting September 2018-June 2019 All ICT teachers, IEP Teacher, AP and Ed Assistants Grade 3 and 4 Teachers and Paraprofessionals November 2018-June 2019 Teachers and Educational Assistants will participate in ongoing PD sessions, and face-to-face training/coaching Principal, Ap, Mentors, Teachers Social Worker and Guidance Counselor Expansion of the School Climate Committee to include: Monthly character assemblies, Monthly Climate meetings with teachers and students. As well as , the addition of Student advisory and student clubs centered on Peer mediation and SEL practices and provide resources and on hand support to classroom teachers around SEL strategies All Students and Staff September 2018-June 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement 2018-19 CEP 19  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Grade level leaders and the The SEL Coach and RTI teachers will conduct bi-monthly workshops for parents on SEL strategies to use at home as well as Monthly newsletter will be sent home on the character trait for the month so that they can support their child's SEL development at home. Saturday Parent workshops on Social Emotional Learning Strategies in conjunction with Parent Coordinator workshops will be provided to follow-up on strategies provided at school Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human Resources : Teachers, RTI teachers, 4R's coaches, Lead Teachers, Administration, ESL teacher, SPED Lead & RTI teachers Instructional Resources: Responsive classroom, 4R's curriculum, Character Education lessons, Swiss behavior forms, Scheduling : RTI meetings, SEL committee meetings, common planning and feedback sessions for teachers, PD Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019 There will be a 5% decrease in RTI referral forms, Teacher removals and OORS Reports. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. RTI referral forms Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 20  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Our school conducted a comprehensive needs assessment aligned to the framework for great schools. by focusing on Collaborative teachers. We analyzed quantitative and qualitative data sources such as The June 2018Instructional Report, F&P reading data (fall , winter and spring 2017-2018) the 2017-18 School Quality Guide ,2016-2017 Fall and Spring PPO feedback, teacher surveys, Students work analysis, and Advance data. Strengths:  Teacher survey data Showed that 90% of the teachers felt that the PLC's offered this year met their needs, and allowed them to effectively collaborate with their colleagues and helped them improve their practice. School Quality Guide data showed that 98% of teachers believe they are able to design appropriate instruction to meet the individual needs of their diverse students population and that they had opportunities to work productively with colleagues on professional development activities  Priority Needs;  The teacher teams were effective however, in order to improve teacher teams and PLC 's for the 2018-19 school year PPO feedback and teacher surveys indicated an interest in more teacher led inquiry cycles on the following topics: Social Emotional Learning, conceptual mathematical understanding, reading skills and strategies, adult learning and differentiated instruction. As is referenced in the PPO feedback, as a next step, "provide opportunities for teacher teams to systematically engage in collaborative inquiry with targeted PD to enhance teacher capacity in data-driven improvement cycles". F&P & GMRT data, and data reviewed by teacher teams showed that 50% of our students need more strategy support in early reading behaviors, Phonological awareness and vocabulary development and comprehension strategies.  2018-19 CEP 21  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, All teachers will engage in monthly learning teams, inter school/ intra school collaborations, learning walks, and intervisitation to observe productive talk conversations/protocols and teachers moves that facilitate students discussions centered on (qualities of good writing, reading strategies and Mathematical problem solving, ). This work will result in at least 70% of the students showing progress in pre and post unit reading, writing and Math assessments. 2018-19 CEP 22  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? k -5 th grade teachers will engage in lab sites and inter-visitation cycles to observe best practices in writing feedback and conversations protocols All students and teachers Teaches and administration will conduct bi-monthly learning walks to assess student writing and peer collaborative conversations and /feedback in order to assess performance on writing tasks All students K-5 November 2018-May 2019 October 2018-May 2019 On site Math and Literacy Coaches, Administration Principal, Ap's ,teachers coaches Teachers will analyze Data from students Math assessments and Mathematical problem solving tasks to assess students understanding and application of effective problem solving strategies All students and teachers January 2018 June 2019 Assistant Principals, Principal, Coaches 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. The school will support home school collaboration through the book buddies and surprise reader initiative. This initiative invites caregivers into the classroom 4x a year to read to the classroom and share areas of expertise. The book buddy program offers cross grade collaboration and assists lower grade and upper grade students with reading fluency and helps them develop a love for reading. Key Personnel: All classroom Pk-5 teachers, students and parents Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human Resources : Literacy and Math Coach, Outside Consultant teachers, , Lead Teachers Lab site teachers, Administration 2018-19 CEP 23  Instructional Resources: discussion criteria rubric, Engage NY discussion protocols, Kagan strategies for Cooperative learning. Scheduling : common planning and feedback sessions for teachers, PD, inter-visitation schedule Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. In February 2019 teachers will observe students progress in students writing product outcomes based on TC checklists and rubric scores. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. P.S. 340 on demand pre-post assessment Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 24  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Our school conducted a comprehensive needs assessment aligned to the framework for great schools by focusing on Effective School Leadership. We analyzed quantitative and qualitative data sources such as the June 2017 Instructional Report, F&P reading data (fall , winter and spring 2017-2018) the 2017-18 School Quality Guide ,2017-2018 Fall and Spring PPO feedback, teacher surveys, Students work analysis, and Advance data. Strengths:  As per data from the Quality guide, teachers feel that the principal sets high standards for student learning and sets clear expectations for teachers about implementing what they have learned  Teacher surveys results showed that teaches believe the PD they participate in at the school assist them in improving their practice  The school Quality Guide indicated that 98% of teachers and parents believe that it is clear how all of the programs connect to the schools instructional vision and that the principal clearly articulated that vision Priority Needs:  PPO feeback suggests that we "continue to leverage the strong school culture, in-depth professional development practices and engaged community towards school-wide Mathematical improvements both in content and in practices. The initiatives in developing formative feedback in ELA can be successfully replicated in other content areas. Continue to deepen the work to support learner-centered instruction by increasing the level of student generated discussion prompts and questioning."  5.1 Monitor and revise-“set up systems and structures to assess learning and monitor and revise curricula and support plans based on data (F& P, end units assessments, pre-post diagnostics, formative data etc.) Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, students will show a 10 % increase in scores of level 3 & 4 on the TC CCLS aligned writing rubric for end writing cycle products and an increase number of students receiving level twos on the constructive responses on the ELA and Math state test. 2018-19 CEP 25  2018-19 CEP 26  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teacher, Administration, Math Coach and Math consultants will engage in the planning of CCLS aligned Mathematical tasks. They will assessing student understanding of the tasks in grade teams in order to shift teaching practices to meet student needs. K-5 Teachers October 2018-May 2019 Admin and coaches will set up structures for looking at student writing pieces through the qualities of good writing lens and the 340 feedback system labels to assess if students are applying the expected writing traits to their writing. K-5 Teachers January 2018-May 2019 Administration, Coaches and Lead teachers will create PLC's and grade meetings dedicated towards looking at running records specifically focusing on comprehension questions that go 'Beyond the text' or 'About the Text' in order to create an action plan to address gaps in understanding K-5 Teachers January-May 2019 Assistant Principals, Principals, teacher and Math Coach and Math Consultant Assistant Principals and Principals, Math Coach and Math Consultant Assistant Principals, Teachers and coaches 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Data and town hall meetings with parents and the Principal, Home school communication of progress reports and PID meetings with the teachers and parents. Key Personnel: Parent Coordinator, PTA President, Teacher leaders, Principal, AP's Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human Resources : RTI teachers, Literacy Coach, Outside Consultant teachers, , Lab site teachers Instructional Resources: F& P Assessment tool, Miscue analysis resource, Marie Clay observation protocol documents 2018-19 CEP 27  Scheduling : Common planning and feedback sessions, , PLC Monday schedule Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind X X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. by February 2019 students will increase their final rubric/ checklist score on their writing products by 5%. The Administration and grade teams will review students writing products and conduct data meetings to assess if students are making progress towards achieving the grade level end year benchmark. In addition, work protocol outcomes at the end of every cycle/Unit and mid-year on-demand writing baseline given at the end of January will be reviewed to assess impact and increase on level of performance based on TC writing rubrics. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Teachers College On Demand writing assessments, Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 28  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Our school conducted a comprehensive needs assessment aligned to the framework for great schools by focusing on Strong Family and Community Ties. We analyzed quantitative and qualitative data sources such as the 2016-17 School Quality Guide, 2017-2018 PPO feedback, teacher surveys,parent feedback from parent engagement activities, survey data collected by the Parent Coordinator and information gathered during SLT and PTA meetings. Areas of Strengths: -High attendance and interest in Take Dad to School day events -High attendance at writing celebrations and Career Day -Marquis enrichment final celebrations yielded very high attendance rates Priority Needs - Hands on practical strategies for assisting children with Math , ELA and the Content area -Connections to local health care providers -Workshops on understanding and helping their children at home with the New Engage Math curriculum - Assistance with navigating technology and other sources of communication -Understanding the Individual Education Plan -Workshops presented by Parent Coordinator and the Guidance Counselor to parents of students living in temporary housing related to life skills, study skills being a partner in the education process -On site social worker and part time mental health provider to provide on site services for families and students 2018-19 CEP 29  - Parenting classes led by Mental Health Association of New York (circle of security, parenting challenging children and empowerment group for Male parents and caregivers) Data from ATS (Students in Temporary Housing Report) indicate that more than 30% of our families are shelters and other temporary living situations. As a result, unique engagement and support programs are required and offered at 340. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, PS 340 will have increased parent participation in school academically focused events and workshops which will result in at least 60% of parents attending at least 2 academic events tracked by attendance sheets. 2018-19 CEP 30  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). The school will offer parent workshops throughout the year. Hands on practical strategies for assisting children with Math, ELA, and content areas, how to reach out to local health providers, Common Core Learning Standards, Social Emotional Health& Parenting Classes). The following strategies will be addressed within these workshops: Parents/guardians of all students with attention to ENL students and students with disabilities October 2018-on going until June 2019 Parent leaders, Parent Coordinator, Principal, and AP's  De-escalation techniques (especially for parents of students with IEP's) as a healthy way to communicate wants and needs  Close reading strategies and reading prompts that assist students in applying effective reading behaviors that help them problem solve on text  unpacking and showing multiple representation of Math word problems with visuals to support our subgroups. Workshops will be delivered by teachers , the Parent Coordinator outside agencies and the Principal during the Tuesday Parent Engagement Time in addition to Saturdays, evenings and morning sessions.. The school will offer parental involvement programs to promote literacy development at home thus ensuring that teachers and parents work as partners in educating children . In order to provide parents with timely information the following mechanisms to communicate information will be used: curriculum meetings, workshops, parent bulletin boards, access to student data through school net parent link. parent calendar, parent Newsletter, flyers and a new messenger electronic system that send emails and text messages to remind parents of upcoming events. Parents will be invited to participate during publishing parties and celebrations at the end of each writing unit. They will also be invited to the "Take you Dad to School Day" , "Day at School With Mom's, "Career Day", STEM Night, multicultural school-wide celebration in Spring 2018, Principal, Guidance Counselor Parents/guardians of all students with attention to ENL students and students with disabilities October 2018-on going until Jun 2019 Parents, students, teachers, siblings Teachers and Administration October 2018-on going until June 2019 2018-19 CEP 31 Celebration of Student Progress Night, Students Led conferences and Monthly Surprise classroom parent readers. Opportunities for parents to volunteer at school and other agencies will be offered. Parents and agency partners. Parent Coordinator October 2018on going until June 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Through the September Town Hall meeting, STEM Night, Back to School Night, bi Monthly Coffee with the Principal meetings, Read aloud Fridays, Buddy Reading and Celebration of student Progress Night in May. Key Personnel: All Teachers, Parents (PC and PTA president ) Principal , Coaches and AP's Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human Resources : Parent Coordinator, SBO’s, teacher presenters, Community Agency staff, Instructional Resources: hands on manipulatives, hand-outs and giveaways for incentives Scheduling : Tuesday Parent Engagement time, Saturday am, morning and evening workshops Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, there will be a 5% increase in parent participation as evidenced by attendance sheets and mid parent Survey. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 3. Parent Attendance sheets at school academic events Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 32  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Writing samples (on demands), F&P Reading levels, conferences notes, benchmark assessments, analysis of student work, State test scores iReadyBeg, Mid and end year standards based assesment Formal/informal assessments (iReadyBaseline,midyear and end year online standards based assessment, exit slips, conferences, State test scores, progress reports informal and/or formal assessment, Amplify Science assessments Social Studies Pre .post unit diagnostic assessments At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, Attendance issues; informal and formal recommendations; Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Accelerated Intervention/Reading Recovery Guided Reading Tier One Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Small groups: one to one instruction When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) School Day/Before and After School Small group targeted skill instruction Book Clubs Small Groups Small Group Writing Consultant Groups Small Group Targeted skill instruction based on Engage NY formativeassessments Science cluster teachers provide extra science instruction for lower and upper grade as needed Visual thinking strategy methods, PassportDiagnostics Guidance Counselor provides group and individual counseling sessions throughout Small groups School Day/ Before and After school Push-in and pull-out groups During the day Push-in and pull-out groups During the day Push-in and pull-out groups During the day 2018-19 CEP 33  School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) parental request; crisis management the day. In addition, she runs an advisory group/ Student Council group. Social Worker provides individual and group counseling to mandated and At-risk students. The Student Intervention Team meets bi-weekly to address student referrals and create an action plan for students as needed. 2018-19 CEP 34  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 30% 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Bridging the Gap Social Worker who provides daily therapeutic group sessions for students. The social worker will teach and model the following skills: 1. de-escalation techniques 2. peer mediation 3. effective communication/development of social skills 4. problem solving scenarios 5. outreach and resources for parents Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 35  Clothing, school supplies, trip funding, and more 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. no applicable 2018-19 CEP 36  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Collaboration with local colleges such as Manhattan College and Lehman College allows us to recruit student teachers after they have completed their in-service training at PS 340 and have met their NY State Certification Requirements. In addition to this, we have a rigorous interview process that all candidates must satisfy which includes: the commitment to participating in PS 340 professional development, on-site professional communities of practice and a strong commitment to participating and contributing to the betterment of the community at large. As evident by our BEDS report, 100% of our teachers are highly qualified and we have had 92% teacher retention rate over the past 15 years. Once teachers are hired they are assigned a mentor to provide weekly model lessons, debrief feedback sessions, lesson planning clinics, and scaffolding strategies to implement within their own classrooms. In order to keep teachers well developed, PLC's are aligned to school initiatives and provided based upon feedback from mentors, coaches, and the staff. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). The entire staff at PS 340 has received professional development on topics such as, the ELA and Math CCLS shifts, the CCLS expectations, the Danielson Framework for Teaching, engage NY resources the ELA and GoMath curriculum, Engage NY modules, Number Talks, Mathematical problem solving through the use of Exemplars, ESL 101, 12 and 103 (effective strategies for working with ELL's.) etc . 2018-19 CEP 37  Staff is involved in Monday PLC’s on the following topics: Social Emotional Learning, Differentiation in ELA, Differentiation in Math, Rubrics for student self-assessment, Mastering objectives, and higher order questioning and discussion techniques, Math talk and problem solving, feedback on learning, development and planning sessions around the implementation of the literacy curriculum including close reading, etc. Educational Assistants have been included in Monday PLC’s centered on Social emotional learning, effective communication techniques/communication skills and behavior modifications . The differentiation of professional development is based upon data gathered from frequent classroom observations using the Danielson Framework for Teaching and is then tailored to meet individual teacher needs. State test data and formative/summative data is analyzed to show gaps in performance and then model lessons and lab sites are conducted in order to provide teachers with strategies to address areas of need. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). Our current Pre-K children have an opportunity to visit other model Prek Programs in the district as well as other model Kindergarten classes in in order to observe and become familiar with the routines of the classroom. Parents are invited to a Kindergarten orientation where they receive materials and resources outlining current expectations of the new Kindergarten curricula. In addition, parents are provided resources to help prepare the children for September. The ESL coordinator assesses Pre-k students entering Kindergarten over the summer to assess their language needs and in order to forge a relationship with incoming parents. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. 2018-19 CEP 38  Over the summer members of the staff were selected by the UFT chapter chairperson and the principal to join the Measures of Student Learning Team. Team members decided on local and state measure of assessment for grades K-5. Once the team came to consensus the larger school community were consulted and a final decision was made that the First grade NY Performance assessment would be the measure for our student MOSL progress. Grade meetings were held to discuss how to administer the assessments and to discuss materials needed for implementation. In addition, PD committee was formed to get feedback from staff on the effectiveness of the current year PD and get feedback for future PD topics staff would like to engage in. PD will continue to be provided to teachers on ON demand ELA and Math assessments, effective conferring practices, and how to access test data and use it effectively to inform their instruction. (i.e. item skills analysis reports that will assist teaches in planning strategic differentiated instructional groups as well as assist them in embedding necessary skills an concepts into their instructional units as deemed necessary). 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) Section 6 /Section7 Section 5 Section 5 Section 4 Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 564,734 94,209 24,910 0 4,397,442 X X X X 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual 2018-19 CEP 39  identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 40  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. PS 340, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. PS 340 will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● Providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology ● Providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children ● Fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress ● Providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand 2018-19 CEP 41  ● Providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● Actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● Engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● Ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● Support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● Maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● Conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● Provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● Host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 2018-19 CEP 42  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); ● Schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● Translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● Conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● Holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● Hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● Encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● Supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● Establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● Encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● Developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● Providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) PS 340 in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. 2018-19 CEP 43  Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● Using academic learning time efficiently; ● Respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● Implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● Offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● Providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● Conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● Convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● Arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● Respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● Providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● Envolving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● Providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● Ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; 2018-19 CEP 44  Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● Ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● Notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● Arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● Planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● Creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● Assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● Sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● Supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● Ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● Advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● Monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● Ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; 2018-19 CEP 45  ● Check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● Read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● Set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● Promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● Encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● Volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● Participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● Communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● Respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● Become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● Participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● Take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● Share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● Attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● Complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● Follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● Show respect for myself, other people and property; ● Try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● Always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 46  2018-19 CEP 47  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP 48  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: Morning Saturday Program/After School Program- The Title III allocation will be used to implement a Saturday Program, a morning, and an After School Program for English Language Learners at P.S. 340. Instruction in the Title III program will be conducted in English and in the native language. In addition to our current ELLs, former ELLs who tested out on the NYSESLAT (in the past two years) will be invited, since they still need support with their academic English and with content area achievement. All ELL subgroups are going to be served according to their specific needs. One group that is definitely going to be served is the new arrivals (Entering Students) to provide them with immediate academic support in English and in their native language when applicable. The rational for the program is to support our English Language learners with developing of academic language as well as language practice opportunities in reading and speaking so that they can move through the language continuum and reach the benchmarks for the grade. Bilingual and ENL teachers will support students without a content area teacher because these teachers also have a common branch license. Our NYSESLAT data shows that we need to work on writing with our students. We will differentiate for individual needs but the overall goal will be to support the writing across the grades. As part of our school philosophy, it is expected for all programs to use flexible grouping as well as simultaneous response in order to increase engagement and differentiation. Program & Grade # of Students Served Time Saturday Academy 3rd, 4th, 5th 30 9am-10am Integrated ENL and ELA 10 am -11 am Integrated ENL and Math Saturdays (October to March) After School Program I 3rd, 4th, 5th 30 2:35pm-3:35 pm Thurs. & Fri. (Oct. to March) After School Program I 4th, 5th (New Arrivals) 10 2:35pm-3:35 pm Thurs. & Fri. (Oct. to March) After School Program II k, 1st, 2nd 30 2:35pm-3:35 pm Thurs. & Fri. (April to May) Morning Program I 1st and 2nd 20 7:00 a.m.-8:00 a.m. (Oct.to March) Saturday Title III Instructional Program- The instructional program that will be offered during the Saturday Program will be on supporting students in ELA so that they can hold on the 2018-19 CEP 49  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information whole story. We will do this by supporting the language development to support students in progressing through the language continuum. When we looked at trends in the ELA data for our ELLs is that they are looking at parts of what they are reading in isolation. We are going to support them in holding on texts so that they can synthesise information. This is going to be done also in math to support solving word problems. One trend we noticed in math is that students are having difficulty solving multi-step problems. Again, they are not looking at the problem as a whole, they are only paying attention to parts and missing other parts. We will use Measuring Up to the Common Core booklets to supplement our core curricula in math and ELA. We will target the bottom third in math and language arts. In addition, we will use the NYSESLAT data to provide appropriate scaffolds in the and focus on a few of the four different modalities depending on the NYSESLAT data. Our Bilingual/ENL certified teachers will use a variety of ENL methodologies to support student learning. Some of the strategies they will use are collaborative strategic reading strategies to maximize the use of language, use of graphic organizers, metacognitive strategies, and vocabulary instruction geared to ELLs. In addition, we will use Kate Kinsella's work or Margarita Calderon to provide the vocabulary instruction. In addition, we will determine appropriate scaffolds for making content comprehensible to our ELLs. This program will be provided Saturdays from 9-11am and it will be offered from October to March. Approximately 30 students, mostly grades 3, 4, and 5 will be serviced through this program in 3 separate classrooms. During math time, the students are going to work on unpacking the language of word problems. They will work on understanding the big picture of what they are being asked to do in a multi-step problem. Three ENL/Bilingual certified teachers will provide direct instruction in English to our English Language Learners with native language support when necessary. These teachers are going to be Ms. Rivas and Ms. Rendon. After School Title III Instructional Program- In addition to the Saturday Program, an after school program will be implemented using non-fiction reading articles as a vehicle for English Language development. We will have two cycles. The first cycle will be with third, fourth, and fifth graders. In addition, we will offer a second cycle to serve first and second graders. We will collaborate in order to plan Common Core aligned instruction for English Language Learners. We will also use data to drive instruction that addresses the needs of our students. For example, according to the 2018 NYSESLAT data, students in the 4th grade need support especially in the speaking and reading modalities. In addition, our Fountas and Pinnel data shows that many of our students in 3rd to 4th grade are able to decode print effectively but they need additional support in order to comprehend the text. As a result in fourth grade, we will use Collaborative Strategic Reading to support language development in order to address their linguistic needs. We are planning to design lessons that address the modalities the students need according to the NYSESLAT 2018 data and the ELL Data Analysis Tool. We will use these tools to provide support to students who show the greatest risk. In addition, we will use teaching strategies like the Language Experience Approach to promote language use, especially in prior mentioned modalities. In our after school program, we also will support students by using resources that will help students to integrate all language modalities like National Geographic Windows on Literacy concept books and Rigby Leveled books to support students at their independent reading levels and their Zone of Proximal Development with appropriate teacher support. These two instructional cycles will help students meet the academic demands for their grade. On the first cycle there will be a group of ten students in the 3rd grade to an ENL teacher and ten 4th and 5th graders to another ENL teacher on Wednesdays and Thursdays after school. In the 2nd cycle, we will have three groups of 10 bilingual students for each of the three bilingual teachers. In addition, we will have 10 students from each of the grades 3-5 on Saturday Academy per ENL teacher. Morning Title III Program- This morning program will provide guided reading and phonemic awareness intervention for students who are struggling in reading according to our 2018-19 CEP 50  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information latest Fountas and Pinnel data for first and 2nd graders. Ms. Rendon will provide this intensive reading instruction support. She is a certified reading recovery teacher, bilingual certified teacher, and our former Universal Literacy Coach. In addition, Ms. Rivas will provide these services to first graders. They will provide this instruction Tuesdays and Wednesdays from 7:00 a.m. to 8:00 a.m. The newcomers group will use Imagine Learning which a supplemental innovative online program to support students with their language and literacy development in the target language. This software is supplemental and distinct from those used for daily instruction. There will be 12 students from 4th and 5thgrade to one certified ENL teacher. The ELL Coordinator will keep the parent notices in the parents' preferred language and other records like attendance. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Our six bilingual/ENL certified teachers will work with our ELL Coordinator Ana Henriquez, who is also Bilingual and ENL Certified, in a series of workshops to identify needs by looking at data, model, and discuss instructional techniques that benefit English Language Learners in order to create or adapt lessons that differentiate for English Language Learners. The goal is always to provide rigorous instruction coupled with scaffolds necessary to have ELL students achieve at high levels. Professional texts being used for the workshops are as follows, Literacy Instruction for English Language Learners by Nancy Cloud and 99 Ideas and Activities for Teaching English Language Learners with the Sheltered Instruction Observation Protocol Model by Vogt and Echevarria. In addition, we will also use Teaching Advanced Literacy Skills: A Guide for Leaders in Linguistically Diverse Schools by Emily Phillips Galloway, Nonie Lesaux, and Sky Marietta as well as Culturally Responsive Teaching and The Brain: Promoting Authentic Engagement and Rigor Among Culturally and Linguistically Diverse Students by Zaretta Hammond. Emphasis will be placed on cognitively comprehensible instruction for children who are acquiring proficiency in English during our Saturday Academy, our morning program, and our two After School Programs and how to make our teaching culturally responsive and rigorous while providing appropriate entry points. We are going to provide the workshops during three Fridays in November, December 2018 and January 2019. This component will come from the ten percent of our allocation that can be used for professional development. The ELL Coordinator will maintain a copy of the agendas and signing sheet of participants. 2018-19 CEP 51  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: According to a survey we conducted, parents are interested in receiving ENL classes, learning how to do arts and crafts with their children, and receiving support to help their children at home. First, we do not need to provide ENL instruction to parents with Title III money because our parent coordinator is already planning to provide that service with other funds. A series of five workshops will be provided for parents of ELLs from November 2018 to March 2019. These workshops will be planned and provided by a Bilingual Certified teacher Lourdes Rendon to help parents support their children at home with homework, understanding the Common Core demands, and using resources around our community in order to help our students excel academically. In addition, since previous surveys also communicated that parents wanted activities related to the arts(arts and craft and dance), Marquis Studios and Theater Moves organizations will provide a series of three workshops each to help parents experience different art activities to enjoy and share with their family, specially our students. We have found that these experiences support students in developing academic language by engaging in meaningful conversation with their family about the arts. During these workshops parent and students participate together and are guided on how to use this to support language development by using both the home language and the target language. One big emphasis is in language transfer to support parents' understanding that academic concepts and vocabulary developed in the native language will be able to transfer and support the growth of the target language. We will continue to use the parents’ feedback in order to plan content at a time that is pertinent so that more parents of English Language Learners get involved in our school. In order to meet the language needs of the parents, our parent coordinator will make sure that documents are sent home in the family language of preference with the support of the Language Access services available at the DOE. In addition, these events will be advertised at the PTA meetings and they will be included in our monthly school calendars we send home. The ELL coordinator will maintain agendas and attendance sheets. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ N/A Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem 2018-19 CEP 52 Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title.  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ N/A Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 2018-19 CEP 53  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 10 School Name P.S. 340 Borough Bronx School Number 340 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Alexei Nichols Coach Lourdes Rendon ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Angelia Molina/ENL teacher Teacher/Subject Area Yannelis Sanchez/Bil./ENL Teacher/Subject Area Katy Mendez/ENL Related-Service Provider Lynn Miller Superintendent type here Assistant Principal Ana Henriquez Coach Collen Orth School Counselor Rhonda Hughes Parent Mrs. Rivera Parent Coordinator Maria Acosta Field Support Center Staff Member type here Other (Name and Title) Aundree Noriega AP C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 5 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 2 1 8 2 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 4 0 D. Student Demographics 2018-19 CEP 54  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 646 Total number of ELLs 200 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 30.96% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): Spanish If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown Program TBE Lang. Span. School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1999-2019 K 1 1 1 2 1 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Tot # TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 1 0 1 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 0 0 3 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? 1. Several assessment tools are used to assess the early literacy skills of our ELLs that provide quantitative data. We use some parts of the ECLAS-2 , Fountas and Pinnell in English & Spanish, Estrellita tracking, and the MOSL to gather data to drive our instruction. In addition, teachers’ observations gathered from small group instruction, guided reading, and individual conferences also inform our instructional decisions. In addition, we are also using Estrellita's word study program. Estrellita is a popular supplemental, phonics-based, accelerated beginning Spanish reading program for bilingual classrooms. We are using it fully primarily in kinder and as an RTI resource in first and second grade. Our school uses some components of the ECLAS and ELSOL, Fountas and Pinnell to assess the ELLs’ literacy development in English and Spanish. We also use the ECLAS, ELSOL to measure the ELLs’ letter identification, phonemic awareness and word recognition. The ELLs in the ENL program are administered the ECLAS to assess their early literacy skills. The ELLs in our 2018-19 CEP 55  transitional bilingual program are assessed using either the EL SOL or ECLAS depending on the language of literacy instruction. The Fountas and Pinnell are used to assess the ELLs’ reading behaviors in English and Spanish. The ELLs in Kindergarten are assessed mid-year using the ECLAS and/or ELSOL (the part about Concepts about Print) to determine whether or not they are learning letters and corresponding sounds. In addition, the students are assessed using Fountas and Pinnel in English and Spanish and/or Estrellita. Towards the end of the school year, they are again assessed using the ECLAS, ELSOL, Estrellita, Fundations, and Fountas and Pinnell in English and Spanish. The ELLs in first grade are assessed using Fountas and Pinnell in English and Spanish three times a year. Some of them might be assessed more often if they are struggling with learning to read. It is expected that students leaving the first grade achieve at least an instructional Fountas and Pinnell level J to be considered on grade level. The ELLs in second and third grades are assessed using the Fountas and Pinnell three times a year. Some of them might be assessed using ELSOL only if they are new entrants. Furthermore, in second grade we also use Gates MacGinitie data to assess different literacy skills. All the other ELLs entering our school are assessed using Fountas and Pinnell to determine their reading abilities to establish a baseline reading level at the beginning of the year. The goal is to determine whether or not the ELL is on grade level in English and/or Spanish reading so that appropriate instruction can be provided. At the end of the school year, all the ELLs are assessed using Fountas and Pinnell. In English, their reading levels will vary depending on their time of entering into the TBE or ENL program. We also take in consideration the students' comprehension (literal versus beyond literal) and then supporting students by providing a lot of opportunities for accountable talk. Overall, the ELLs are at the beginning literacy level when they first enter the school in kindergarten and first grade. As they progress to the second and third grade, they start developing stronger reading skills. The ELLs in the TBE program progress faster in their native language than in English, which is their second language. Furthermore, many of the entering ELLs in first grade are at the intermediate literacy level in the NYSESLAT. Most ELLs enter first grade with letter recognition and phonemic awareness. They also enter with early reading behaviors such as one to one matching, directionality and the ability to use pictures to make predictions. In second grade the ELLs in the TBE program have been meeting AMAO 1. We, as a school, need to use these results to guide individual as well as group instruction, especially in our Core Instruction (Tier I). The administration is looking closely at this issue and sent several teachers to the OELL RTI training and they already decided on four more Bilingual and ESL teachers to go in a more intensive training to address this issue and turn key to the whole staff. The data seem to confirm the current research that a solid L1 leads to a stronger L2 and that reading skills can be transferred from the first language to the second language. Our school builds our ELLs’ native language proficiency as much as we can so that the acquired literacy skills of the native language can be transferred to the acquisition of the second language, i.e., English. Take the second grade bilingual class as an example. In the second grade bilingual class, several formative and summative assessments are used to get a clear picture of where the ELLs are in terms of their native language reading proficiency so that relevant data can be used to drive the instruction to further promote their reading proficiency. In addition to that, the current teachers qualitative data from observations and previous teachers’ feedback inform decisions for lesson planning to address a concept, a strategy or a skill to the whole class as well as partnership work, seating placements, small group instruction and individual conferences. For example, the Fountas and Pinnel levels in Spanish are used to form groups in guided reading to help students to be fluent readers in their native language. As soon as these ELLs become fluent readers (Fountas and Pinnell level J) in their native language, guided reading in English with that group can be conducted so that they can transfer what they know about reading to the English language. Vocabulary and grammar are constantly instructed through the use of the ESL methodologies to help them to continue to grow as readers of the second language and to transfer what they already know to the second language. Data on the ELLs’ literacy skills constantly emerge and serve as guides to determine reading groups in appropriate languages in the second grade bilingual class. Currently, the second grade bilingual class has five guided reading groups. The bilingual classroom teacher uses data to plan instruction, support students in small groups and change student groups as they advance to the next reading level. As of now there are two groups that are reading at grade level in the native language and transferring what they know in a guided reading group in English facilitated by the teacher. There is also another teacher who is providing RTI (Tier II instruction) to one of the groups. The reading groups are formed with the help of standardized and daily classroom observations. In addition to guided reading, data guide the seating arrangement during English shared reading in the second grade bilingual class as well as the social studies curriculum. In the past several years, the teachers in the bilingual program are using a curriculum developed closely with Dr. Nancy Cloud from Rhode Island College to differentiate instruction according to stages 2018-19 CEP 56  of language acquisition. We are aligning our instruction to Common Core Learning Standards. Shared reading is also used to help ELLs as a whole class to develop literacy strategies and skills in English. The seating arrangement during shared reading is critical because the ELLs discuss texts and practice reading strategies as partners. The bilingual teacher is also informed by data as to when and where to intervene to support the readers of the second language. Lastly, based on the assessment data that show the higher speaking proficiency levels than the reading and writing proficiency levels in their native language, the second grade bilingual teacher has decided to provide more support to strengthen their their reading and writing skills in the social studies curriculum, which has been created by the Bilingual Team at our school to support English Language Learners. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? We have three dates in which these mentioned assessments are provided. We provide provide major assessments in the fall, winter, and spring. We also do beginning and end of unit assessments in order to use all the mentioned information to guide grouping and instruction. We also use our reading teachers to support teachers in giving these assessments. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? We make sure we are using formal and informal assessments throughout the year. At the beginning of the year, we look carefully at result of the NYS performance assessments like the ELA, Math, NYSITEL, and NYSESLAT. We use the results to provide us, teachers and administrators, detailed information to plan instruction, staff development, as well as academic intervention instruction and RTI. In addition to NYS and NYC formal assessments, we assess our students regularly using Fountas and Pinnell and instructional unit assessments aligned with our curriculum in ELA and math subject areas. According to the NYSITEL, and the NYSESLAT, we have identified different areas of needs for individual grades. In first grade, the areas of need are writing and speaking. We need to support students with producing the language orally and in writing. In second grade, we had more than ten students who scored low in writing in the NYSESLAT. This means that we need to provide additional support by using more sentence stems, Language Experience Charts, and do guided practice with the students. In 4th and 5th grade, the students are performing well in reading and writing with less than ten students performing low in the writing and the reading according to the NYSESLAT. However, we need to continue to support them with the ELA because many of our ELLs need support accessing complex texts found in the ELA. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? We have trained reading recovery teachers as well as our math coach who provide Tier II and Tier III interventions to groups of students and individual students according to the data being gathered. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] We use data to guide and improve the quality of core instruction and to make sure that our students have quality opportunities to learn and that they are thriving academically. In Tier I or Core Instruction, the school provides staff development like bringing Nancy Cloud to support teachers in the delivering of effective instructional practices for English Language Learners. Moreover, this summer, three of our teacher attended the DELL RTI professional development resources. Now in the fall, our principal is sending at least three more teachers to professional development provided by the Department of ELLs to strengthen Core Instruction. These teachers are going to be trained and then they will turn key to the rest of the school. If a student or group of students is having difficulty, we either provide additional support for the teacher Core Instruction with new research-based ideas to improve the delivery of effective instruction or we provide Tier 2 or Tier 3 intervention depending on the number of students showing difficulty by analyzing the data. We also look at other factors to be addressed like family dynamics, motivation, or health issues to provide appropriate support. Paste response to question here: 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. 2018-19 CEP 57  We use the NYSESLAT, ELA, NYS Math test, as well as end of year on demand assessments to evaluate and inform our ELL programs. This information informs what areas we are targeting, informs additional RTI support, Title III instruction, as well as staffing decisions. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? We have vertical and horizontal teams that meet twice a month. In these meetings, ENL teachers, bilingual teachers, and administrators share these findings with all teachers of ELLs. In our building we believe that language used is language learned and that we are all academic language teachers. In addition, in these meetings we also discuss strategies to use data to inform instruction and to differentiate supports. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Our ELL population is provided with the mandated services mostly through homogeneous and heterogeneous grouping based on their grades. We are very fortunate that we have enough ENL and bilingual teachers that are staying and providing tremendous instruction. This has a tremendous impact on how we are now supporting ELLs. We have now more Integrated ENL because of flexibility of our schedule by having more ENL teachers. We also have additional intervention support to the Tier I instruction by the ENL teachers in different classrooms in addition to the mandated services provided. As for the ENL Stand-Alone and Integrated programs, the grouping is mainly based on the students’ English proficiency levels, grades, and mandates. b. TBE program. If applicable. We will use the NYSESLAT data together with the new regulations under the new CR Part 154 to determine how instruction for ELLs is delivered in our TBE program. In our TBE program, we have license bilingual teachers who provide instruction according to CR Part 154.2. We also have a trained bilingual teacher who is a reading specialist who supports bilingual students by providing guided reading support in the native language. In addition, we also provide a minimun of one period a day of HLA as well as providing math and science in Spanish (HL) for Entering and Emerging for Transitioning and Emerging ELLs. c. DL program. If applicable. As per parents' requests, as of now, we do not offer a DL at our school. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? In order to ensure that all students receive the mandated instructional minutes from Part 154, all bilingual teachers incorporate ENL, ELA, and NLA into their instructional day. ENL, ELA and NLA instructional minutes are integrated throughout the content area instruction over the course of the day, which is one unit (180 mins) as pwe CR. Part 154. The Entering and Emerging ELLs receive 360 minutes of ENL per week and 60-90 minutes of NLA per day. And the Transitioning and the Expanding ELLs receive 180 minutes of ENL and 180 minutes of ELA per day, and one unit (180 minutes)of NLA. The ENL instruction in the stand-alone and integrated ENL program is delivered following the new Common Core Learning Standards. As required by the new CR Part 154.2, the Entering and the Emerging ELLs receive 360 minutes of ENL per week, and the Transitioning ELLs receive 180 minutes of ENL per week. The ELA instruction is delivered following the Common Core 2018-19 CEP 58  Learning Standards for each grade. As required by CR Part 154, the advanced ELLs in the TBE and ENL programs receive one unit of instruction per week, i.e., 180 minutes of English Language Arts instruction. The ELLs are receiving the required instruction in the content areas: Math, Science, and Social Studies. As required by CR Part 154, the ELLs receive one unit of instruction, i.e., 180 minutes, in each of the content areas per week. Most of our ENL teachers who are dually certified. There is one teacher that is solely ENL and she uses different co-teaching approaches when pushing in to do the ENL integrated component. There is also another ENL teacher who is dually certified that we prefer that she pushes in to collaborate with the classroom teacher and uses the co-teaching modality to maximize instruction. We provide integrated ENL in ELA and Math. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. In order to ensure that contents are comprehensible, teachers use the following methods: Our literacy program for ELLs adheres to the Children First Initiative’s uniform curriculum. All of the ELL programs use a balanced approach to literacy: read aloud, shared reading, guided reading, independent reading, and various writing cycles. All ELL programs are also aligned CCLS for all curriculum areas and New York State ENL Standards. In the transitional bilingual program, all the ELLs learn the same content areas as their general education peers. The materials are made comprehensible to them through the ENL strategies. For example, in the second grade bilingual class, the bilingual teacher uses the social studies curriculum created by the Bilingual Team at our school with help from Dr. Nancy Cloud to support our ELLs. Based on the assessment data that show the higher speaking and listening proficiency levels than the reading and writing proficiency levels in their native language, the second grade bilingual teacher has decided to provide more support to strengthen their oral language to facilitate their reading and writing skills in the social studies curriculum. Now that we are using The Reading and Writing Project from Teachers College, the bilingual teachers use some of the titles in Spanish using teaching strategies that support academic language development. We also understand and put into practice that ELLs benefit from preview-view-review format in mathematics and are taught explicit vocabulary in their native language first in order to promote the transfer of mathematical skills to their second language. To support the learning of ELLs in the ENL program, a variety of instructional materials are used. The ENL component in our ELL programs is literature-based. Children’s literature is used to facilitate acquisition of four language skills. Graphic organizers, interviewing techniques, recording data, structuring information in easily accessible visual formats, audio-visual aids, SMART Board, picto-glossaries and other techniques are used to facilitate learning. Technology is also integrated into the instruction to facilitate language and content acquisition. The computer programs used to facilitate learning and language acquisition are Microsoft Word, PowerPoint, and the Smart Notebook. In addition, to address ELLs’ linguistic needs in learning the conventions of the English language, World of Language published by Silver Burdett Ginn, and handbooks for writing and learning published by Houghton Mifflin are used. We also have National Geographic by Hampton-Brown to support new arrivals. In addition to the ENL instruction in the ENL programs, these ELLs also receive content area instruction from their classroom teachers and science teachers with the ENL methodologies. Every effort is made to make the contents comprehensible to the ELLs. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? A variety of assessment tools are in place to evaluate our ELLs in their native language, Spanish. Based on the Home Language Identification Survey, the new admits are administered LABR if they are eligible for testing. The newly identified ELLs are then administered Spanish LAB to determine their language dominance to ensure proper placement in one of the two educational programs for the ELLs. In Kindergarten and First Grade, El Sol, the Spanish version of ECLAS, is used to assess the basic literacy skills such as letter recognition, sound correspondence, sight words and so on. At the end of the school year kindergarten students are also assessed using Fountas and Pinnell in English and in Spanish. In all the other grades all ELLs in the bilingual classes are evaluated at three different benchmarks throughout the year (beginning, middle, end) in Spanish. These evaluations consist of running records with reading comprehension passages. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? a. SIFE 2018-19 CEP 59  b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a. Students with interrupted formal education require our special attention. Currently our school does not have any SIFE students. If SIFE students do enroll in our school in later days, we will use a similar model we currently employ with newly arrived ELLs. In addition to the small-group instruction during the school day to address their social and academic needs, these students will also receive extended instructional time. The extended instructional time can be offered through after-school classes or tutoring, Saturday programs, and/or summer programs. In all these programs, scaffolding strategies such as contextualization, modeling, and schema building will be used for significant ENL and academic development. b. For our newly arrived ELLs who have not had any exposure to the English language and whose home language is not Spanish, we instruct them in a small group in English. These students also receive extended instructional time through after-school classes or tutoring, Saturday programs, and/or summer programs. As mentioned above, scaffolding strategies will be employed to facilitate ELLs’ ENL and academic development. In our school, we have a great selection of literature in Spanish and ENL is always taught with native language support. In general, our kindergarten, grade one, and grade two ELLs fit into the category of less than three years in US schools. The CR Part 154 instructional unit requirements for the ELLs are met. The Entering and the Emerging ELLs receive 2 units of ENL instruction per day, i.e., 360 minutes per week, and the Transitioning and the Expanding ELLs receive 1 unit of ENL instruction and 1 unit of ELA instruction per day, i.e., 180 minutes per week. All instruction is aligned with the New York State Learning Standards in ENL, literacy and other curriculum areas for each grade. Furthermore, there is additional support for the ELLs. There is a reduced pupil teacher ratio for AIS. There are guided reading groups. There is also after-school extended day and tutoring. There are also push-in coaches and teachers. c.We provide extensive support in reading and writing. We also provide scaffolding strategies to assist them with the acquisition of CALP (Cognitive Academic Language Proficiency). We also build on student’s schema to enhance their conceptual knowledge and provide opportunities for students to extend their learning through extracurricular activities, AIS, Extended Day, push-in and early morning and after-school programs. d. Research has shown that most newly arrived ELLs need about 4-7 years of instruction before they are fully prepared to perform on a par with other native speakers of English. In general, the long-term ELLs who have been in our school for six years or more are proficient in listening and speaking in English. They have special needs in their cognitive academic language proficiency. An extensive support for their reading and writing proficiency is required. Our plan is based on Walqui’s model (2003). The long-term ELLs are provided with scaffolding strategies to assist them in developing their linguistic and academic competence. For example, modeling is used extensively to walk ELLs through an academic task, to do it with them together, and to provide them with clear examples of how it can be done. The other scaffolding strategies such as bridging, contextualization, and schema building are also utilized to facilitate ELLs’ acquisition of higher linguistic and academic proficiency. In addition, the long-term ELLs also receive extended instructional time through after-school classes or tutoring, Saturday programs, and/or summer programs. e. We continue to provide support because we understand that according to research it takes 4 to 7 years to learn academic language and to become fully proficient. In the Integrated model, students get group and/or individual support as needed according to data and assessment. These students are also invited to participate in after-school and Saturday programs for ELLs. In addition, AIS and RTI in the three Tiers is planned for small group instruction according to students’ needs. These students also get mandated 90 minutes of ENL services and accommodations for testing for the following 2 years after testing. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Teachers of ELL-SWDs use strategies that reinforce language development. Our teachers use the same literacy curriculum (Ready Gen) for general education classes and enrich instruction using resources from researches like Diane Haager and parts of English Development programs like On Our Way to English by Rigby. In our school, we also make sure we have an established routine for teaching vocabulary that is research based like Beck’s work. Furthermore, we use a lot of oral rehearsal to support students in using language in order to learn it by providing a lot of scaffolds. We use a lot of sentence stems to support oral production. Graphic organizers and understanding different learning styles become entry points for all students. Mathematics, science, and social studies are taught according to the workshop model, which is a familiar means of presentation for students. Language and content are naturally scaffold when presented within this clear structure. Student 2018-19 CEP 60  work time includes small groups and partnerships to foster conversation among peers. Content in these subjects is presented visually on chalkboards, charts, and SMART Boards. Individual student copies of textbooks and workbooks are also provided (class sets). The teacher provides additional support with visuals, sentence stems, sentence starters, and introduces vocabulary. The GoMath curriculum has a ‘spiraling’ structure that revisits concepts. This supports ELLS-SWDs who may not grasp material as readily as their classmates. Partnership work is also an integral component to the program. Science and social studies lessons focus attention on content-area vocabulary through integration of literacy skills and content. Material is often presented through a shared reading format. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Our school uses curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to meet the diverse needs of ELL-SWDs within the least restrictive environment. They receive the ENL instruction in the same classes with the general education English Language Learners. All the school programs and field trips are also conducted with their general education peers. Additional staff has been assigned to teach both science and mathematics, increasing instructional time in both areas. Hands-on science lessons are designed for exploratory work in small-groups and partnerships. Mathematics lessons contain visual, auditory, and kinesthetic components. A recent lesson had students assigned with five-digit numbers on boards who had to organize themselves into place-value order. All lessons have the goal of creating a risk-free environment to foster student learning. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. We provide targeted intervention programs during the day as well as outside the school day. An extensive school-wide intervention program for is implemented during the Extended Day block. ELLs receive small group instruction from highly qualified teachers. All instructors are NYS Certified as teachers of English to Speakers of other languages or bilingual common branches or have at least three satisfactory years of teaching experience with English Language Learners. In addition, small group intensive tutorials will be instituted with a particular focus on reading and writing during the day. This intensive AIS (academic intervention services) provides studens with differentiated support in a flexible small group setting. Classroom teachers in grades three to six will get the support from threee additional teachers four times a week. This provides students with quality instruction in a lower teacher to student setting. This year we also have more of a Push- In model in addition to self contanin classes where students get additional support in their own classes, minimazing loosing valuable instructional time. They are getting additional support with what their classroom teacher is presenting and their classmates are accountable for. The students reaching proficiency on the NYSESLAT are given transitional support during the school day and through after-school classes or tutoring, Saturday programs, and/or summer programs. ELLs that have taken or are about to take the NYS exams are targeted for morning or/and Saturdays enrichment program. There are guided reading groups conducted throughout the school day. Push-in coaches and teachers provide additional support as needed. To provide additional testing support, students are also given test modification such as extended time (time and 1/2) on the standardized tests. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? We will carefully look at this year data to see what changes need to be made. This data analysis will guide us on what we need to take on, deepen, or change. We have done well teaching the Integrated ENL, specially after getting Nancy Cloud's support and feedback. As a Bilingual/ENL team, we can improve our practice by reflecting on our teaching and we can support other teachers in our school. The area we are going to focus in so we can plan well together with our Literacy Coach and the ELL Cordinator is the Stand-Alone ENL. Resources are going to chosen and strategies are going to be instituted to make sure there is rigorous and that there is a lot of opportunities for interaction. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? We are not discontinuing the TBE program. 2018-19 CEP 61  11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. Our literacy program for ELLs adheres to the Children First Initiative’s uniform curriculum. All of our ELL programs use a balanced approach to literacy. All ELL programs are also aligned to the CCLS and the New York State ENL Standards. To support the learning of ELLs in ENL, a variety of instructional materials are used. The ENL component in our ELL programs is the literature-based. Children’s literature is used to facilitate acquisition of 4 language skills. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. All materials ordered are age appropriate and meet the identified needs of our ELLs. Materials are geared to address the needs of our students based on age and grade level. For example, high interest, low level texts, and books with picture support are ordered as needed. In addition, several members of our staff have been working with the DELLSS to look for high quality books in Spanish in grades k-5 that go with Ready Gen units of study we are using in literacy. We are implementing this new program but making sure we continue effective language development practices in the classroom. The use of technology such as SMART board, IPads, Flip Cameras PowerPoint and WebBlender is integrated into the ENL instruction. In addition, to address ELLs’ linguistic needs in learning the conventions of the English language, World of Language published by Silver Burdett Ginn, and handbooks for writing and learning published by Houghton Mifflin are used. The school has also purchased several online literacy enrichment online resources students can use at home. The students have access to Award Reading Online in English and Spanish, Brain Pop, Brain Pop Jr., and Brain Pop ESL, and ImagineLearning. The series On Your Way to English by the Rigby Company is used for guided reading, while the series Colección PM, also by Rigby, is used for guided reading in English and Spanish. Cancionero de canción a cuentos is another series we use to support native language literacy development. Our school is also using Estrellita to foster phonemic awareness in our bilingual kindergarten class. We also use the Award Reading program to amplify language, and provide additional visuals in literacy support. Go Math is used in English and in Spanish. The social studies big book series People and Places by MacMillan and McGraw and the series Science by Scott Foresman are used to teach ENL in the content area. Additionally, we also use the social studies series We Live Together by McMillan and McGraw Hill and Heineman’s collection Neighborhood Walks. We also buy trade books that are appropriate and relate to content instruction in both English and Spanish. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? There are variations in the role of the native language in the TBE and ENL programs. In a TBE program, the native language is an integral part of instruction. Considering second language acquisition research and our ELL population, we have put into practice the theory that strong L1 will facilitate the acquisition of L2. In our kindergarten transitional bilingual class, the ratio of native language and English instruction is 60% and 40%. As ELLs’ proficiency levels in English progress, a higher percentage of English use is applied in instruction. For example, the beginning ELLs are instructed in their native language for 60% of the day, the intermediate ELLs , 50%, and advanced ELLs, 25%. In other words, the beginning ELLs receive 40% of instruction in English per day, the intermediate ELLs, 50%, and the advanced ELLs, 75%. The same principle applies in our first grade transitional bilingual class. In our second grade transitional bilingual class, a higher percentage of English is used in instruction since our second grade ELLs become more proficient in English. The guidelines are similar to what is discussed in the previous paragraph. The school year might begin with 60% and 40% in Spanish and English. As the year progresses, the ratio will go to 50% and 50%, and eventually 25% in Spanish and 75% in English. The six instructional periods are evenly divided by the two languages: three periods with the ENL methodologies and the other three in the native language in math and reading. As the year progresses, the ratio of Spanish to English will be 40% to 60%, which will gradually aim at 25% to 75%. Students receive explicit native language instruction (Spanish) in reading and mathematics. Native Language Instruction follows the same reading and writing calendar as appropriate by grade level. The literate environment in the classroom, i.e. charts and word walls, supports their literacy work. For children at risk an AIS staff person services the children in small literacy groups. In the ENL program, the native language is more of a support role. Whenever the use of the native language facilitates learning, it is used through a Spanish dictionary and peer interaction. In the case of new arrivals, students are encourage to write and read in their native language until they are able to use the target language. All ELLs are allowed to use native language for support. Teachers are aware of cognates and point them out to facilitate content and language development. 2018-19 CEP 62  14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. We ensure that all our ELLs receive their required services by matching qualified teachers with students according to their appropriate age and grade levels. One way we do this is by organizing the classes so that there is at least one certified ENL or Bilingual teacher per grade. This ensures that students who are mandated to receive English development support do so at their age and grade level. In addition, there are ENL certified teachers who push in or pull out to support additional students. These students are grouped by grade and age. In a few cases, we have students from two consecutive grades serviced together to provide intensive English Language development according to their language proficiency. Furthermore, we have highly trained staff. For example, we have four reading specialists in the school and two of them are also bilingual teachers who can support students at all grade levels. One of these two bilingualbiligual teachers is also ENL certified in addition to being a Reading Recovery teacher. In addition, we have F status personnel who are staff developers and work with small groups according to the students' needs. We also have a great collection of beautiful literature at all levels and interest in both English and Spanish. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? We do not share the building with another school. All materials ordered for our school are age appropriate and meet the identified needs of our ELLs. Materials are geared to address the needs of our students based on age and grade level. For example, high interest, low level texts, and books with picture support are ordered as needed. We are implementing this new program but making sure we continue effective language development practices in the classroom. The use of technology such as SMART board, IPads, Flip Cameras PowerPoint and WebBlender is integrated into the ENL instruction. In addition, to address ELLs’ linguistic needs in learning the conventions of the English language, World of Language published by Silver Burdett Ginn, and handbooks for writing and learning published by Houghton Mifflin are used. The school has also purchased several online literacy enrichment online resources students can use at home. The students have access to Award Reading Online in English and Spanish, Brain Pop, Brain Pop Jr., and Brain Pop ENL, and ImagineLearning. The series On Your Way to English by the Rigby Company is used for guided reading, while the series Colección PM, also by Rigby, is used for guided reading in English and Spanish. Cancionero de canción a cuentos is another series we use to support native language literacy development. Our school is also using Estrellita to foster phonemic awareness in our bilingual kindergarten class. We also use the Award Reading program to amplify language, and provide additional visuals in literacy support. Go Math is used in English and in Spanish. The social studies big book series People and Places by MacMillan and McGraw and the series Science by Scott Foresman are used to teach ENL in the content area. Additionally, we also use the social studies series We Live Together by McMillan and McGraw Hill and Heineman’s collection Neighborhood Walks. We also buy trade books that are appropriate and relate to content instruction in both English and Spanish. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). During the registration process we conduct a tour of the building to all new incoming students and parents in order to “lower the affective filter” of our incoming students. We invite teachers to meet informally to have informal conversations to get to know the students (informal assessments are given at this time). In addition parents are invited to attend orientation workshops to familiarize them with the materials, resources, and ELL programs offered by the school. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? N/A 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? We do not offer a Dual Language Program at this time. 2018-19 CEP 63  Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Our professional development planning for 2018-2019 is including using more specific academic language in our mastery objectives as well as going deeper in crafting language objectives for our ENL and bilingual teachers. This will be a continuation from a PLC given by Jill schimmel and Aaron Lucas on language objectives. In addition we will also conduct study groups around Teaching Advanced Literacy Skills: A Guide for Leaders in Linguistically Diverse Schools by Nonie K. Lesaux, Emely Phillips Galloway, and Sky H. Marietta. We will also use Cultural Responsive Teaching and the Brain by Hammond. 1. Mastery Objectives To improve student performance, bilingual and ENL teachers will craft language objectives with the purpose of clarity of objective in order to provide ELL students with appropriate and strategic feedback that will lead to self- adjustment. 2. Small group /differentiation: Bilingual and ENL teachers will use assessment data to group students in order to ensure that all ELL students have access to the curriculum and are provided with the necessary supports to be successful. 3. Questioning /Rubric for Self-adjustment Bilingual and ENL teachers will craft cluster questions – from right there questions to identifying relationships, classifying and verifying questions - to promote higher order thinking and to ensure that all ELL students are engaged. Students will use our rubric for self-adjustment to self-assess and regulate their learning. 4. Going deeper in the writing units with PD sessions from Teachers College as well as an in-house staff developer. 5. Diagnostic assessments Bilingual and ENL teachers will create pre and post- unit diagnostics to assess student knowledge. Teachers will adjust curriculum based on assessed student needs. To deepen the achievement of these initiatives we are planning two major moves: grow our ESL team, if budget permits, and have monthly Bilingual/ENL PLC’s across subject areas -with additional scheduled monthly sessions for vertical teams on Mondays as well as the weekly bilingual/ENL meeting. In the gatherings we will address and discuss ELLs and Common Core Standards more specifically to content knowledge. We have already scheduled the meetings from September to February. Non-ELL personnel would attend various of these PLCs to meet requirements as per the new CR Part 154.2. To put in practice distributed leadership as well as to train the bilingual and ENL to look at student work in a coherent, consistent, and organized way, a work protocol has been added to the PLCs to train lead teachers first and later on others. By doing that, we expect work protocols to happen simultaneously in different grades as well as vertically for our bilingual strand as well as through the stages of language acquisition. We would, then, collect and look over the data concurrently and develop systemic initiatives to self-adjust our practice. In addition, we would systematize and add coherence to the way we look, assess, and talk about work products in bilingual and ENL classes. 6. Changes in CR Part 154 will be addressed, strategies to support English Language Learners, and the use of the Bilingual Language Progressions. In mathematics, our school uses Go Math which has a Spanish version of all their books and resources. These resources are used in our K-2 classrooms as well as a resource for other students in the upper grades. All math word walls include pictures or examples for easier reference and acquisition. Sentence stems are used to facilitate mathematical conversations and assist students in explaining the mathematical process used. Goals we are working on for next year are professional developments around ELL’s and mathematics; leaving up artifacts with examples from previous lessons so students will have a point of reference; incorporating some Engage NY/Eureka to help with application of skills taught. Engage NY at the end of this year, began releasing their units in a Spanish version. Hopefully by the fall all units are available as a supplemental resource. Based on data from grades 3 to 5, we found students were struggling in Number and Operations, more specifically fractions and in Measurement and Data. To address these needs, a six week AIS cycle was set up for grades 3 to 5 to directly target 2018-19 CEP 64  fractions and measurement in smaller groups. Twice a week the class was broken into three homogeneous groups to target the above mentioned skills. In these smaller groups teachers were able to address students’ needs by using multi-sensory approaches, language objectives and dual language resources to assist students. The Bilingual/ENL Team at our school is providing on-site training to all staff members on effective ENL strategies. Over the course of the year, all our staff will receive on-going training as per the new CR Part 154. The training records are kept by the literacy coach. In addition, our Bilingual Coordinator will have training for the ENL and Bilingual teachers in order to complide with the mandates. Teachers will also be scheduled to attend professional development offered by the Department of ELLs. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. In order to facilitate the transition of our ELLs from elementary to middle school, articulation is discussed between the guidance and fifth and sixth grade classroom teachers, ENL teacher, and students. In addition, middle school workshops are held for parents in English and Spanish. Data on the exam history (ELA, Math NYSESLAT) are reviewed. It is our goal to help students find the right placement for their middle school studies and ELL services in the middle schools. The needed ELL services at the time of the middle school application are pre-printed on the middle school application. Once choices are listed, matches are made to choices. Every effort is made to inform the parents of our ELLs about the middle school options that are available to their children. Our ELL Coordinator, the Literacy Coach, as well as the The Bilingual/ENL Team at our school will be providing on-site training to all staff members on effective ENL strategies. The training records are kept by the literacy coach. PLCs and Bilingual/ENL team PD meetings are already in our school calendar making sure we have at least 15% hours for all our staff and at least 50% of total hours for our bilingual/ENL teachers of ELL-specific professional development. In addition, our Bilingual Coordinator will have training for the ENL and Bilingual teachers in order to complide with the mandates. Teachers will also be scheduled to attend professional development offered by the Department of ELLs. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? The school administration uses Tuesdays afternoons to have teachers of ELLs schedule meetings to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, academic standing, as well as language needs in all content areas. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Parents are members of the PTA and they serve on the School Leadership Team. They participate in school-led workshops, volunteer in classrooms, and assist with school initiatives. Parents including the parents of ELLs are involved in school events/activities. The majority of the workshops/orientations are bilingual (Spanish/English). In the instances when a workshop may only be presented in one language, it is shortly after offered in the other dominant school language. For parents that speak limited English and their second language is not Spanish, if there is not an individual in the building that speaks their language, the Parent Coordinator sits with them one-on-one and contacts the Language Interpretation Unit for over-the-phone translation. 2018-19 CEP 65  Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. We believe that we are all teachers of ELLs. In addition, most of our students are learning academic language. Therefore, for the past four years, we have been working closely with Nancy Cloud to strengthen English language development instruction in all classes. Dr. Cloud provided feedback to units of study developed in the bilingual classes to support teachers in scaffolding appropriate support for all students depending on their language proficiency levels. She also visited bilingual classrooms and provided feedback to improve instruction for ELLs. Another year, she visited monolingual classrooms and provided tailored staff-development in response to her observations in order to support teachers and administrators. Later on, she modeled lessons in several classroom s for all teachers in our school. This year we are continuing to use and improve the strategies we have learned about what works for English Language Learners. In brief, we prioritize the needs of ELLs and understand that English Language development instruction is beneficial for all our students. 2018-19 CEP 66 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Alexei Nichols, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 67  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: P.S. 340 School DBN: 10X340 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Alexei Nichols Title Principal Ana Henriquez Assistant Principal Maria Acosta Parent Coordinator Angelia Molina ENL/Bilingual Teacher Yuri Rivera Parent Yannelis Sanchez Teacher/Subject Area Katy Mendez Teacher/Subject Area Lourdes Rendon Colleen Orth Coach Coach Rhonda Hughes School Counselor n/a n/a Aundree Noriega Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member n/a Other Assistant Principal/Special Ed. Liaison Lynn Miller Other IEP Teacher n/a Other n/a Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 06/26/18 06/26/18 06/26/18 06/26/18 06/26/18 06/26/18 06/26/18 06/26/18 06/26/18 06/26/18 n/a n/a 06/26/18 06/26/18 n/a 2018-19 CEP 68  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 10X340 School Name: P.S. 340 Superintendent: MaribelHulla The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Maria Ana Acosta Henriquez PC ELL Coordinator Yes No Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. The data we use to asses our schools written and oral translation needs is based on the Parent Guardian Home Language Identification Survey results that all new registrants complete during the initial registration period. The results of this data is entered by the Pupil Accounting Secretary in the Parent Preferred Language Indicator in ATS. This is how the schools knows what languages written notices should go home, in addition to what oral translation are needed. In addition we have a Parent Coordinator that consistently speaks and reaches out to parents. If we are unable to provide oral or written 2018-19 CEP 69  translation in a parents native language we reach out to the DOE Translation and Interpretation Unit. We also have a variety of staff members who speak the native languages identified in ATS. The data from the Home Language Survey and the parent language indicator in ATS shows that there are 15 different languages represented in the school. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral 6 3 2 1 1 1 1 1 428 1 421 2 Albanian Arabic Bengali Bambara Chinese French Haitian Creole Italian English Portuguese Spanish Vietnamese 0.69 0.35 0.23 0.12 0.12 0.12 0.12 0.12 49.37 0.12 48.56 0.23 6 2 2 1 1 1 1 1 425 1 425 2 0.69 0.23 0.23 0.12 0.12 0.12 0.12 0.12 49.02 0.12 49.02 0.23 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. 2018-19 CEP 70  Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families a. registration, application, and selection; September of each year b. standards and performance (e.g., standard text on report cards); September of each year c. conduct, safety, and discipline; on going d. school annual handbook on going e. calendars f. parent-teacher conference announcements on going g. special education and related services; and h. transfers and discharges. Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. We use the translated documents provided by the NYC Department of Education and for languages not available we reach out to a Department of Education Vendor that provides services. We use the translated documents provided by the NYC Department of Education and for languages not available we reach out to a Department of Education Vendor that provides services. We use the translated documents provided by the NYC Department of Education and for languages not available we reach out to a Department of Education Vendor that provides services. We use the translated documents provided by the NYC Department of Education and for languages not available we reach out to a Department of Education Vendor that provides services. We use the translated documents provided by the NYC Department of Education and for languages not available we reach out to a Department of Education Vendor that provides services. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. 2018-19 CEP 71  Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings a. parent-teacher conferences a. Fall, Winter, Spring b. parent-teacher meeting on Tuesdays b. Every Tuesday c. orientations d. parent association meeting e. principal's meetings with parents' groups and individual parent meetings f. curriculum/open house meetings c. When needed after registration (on-going) d. Monthly e. On going f. On going How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? Interpretation using our staff and we also use interpretation services from various DOE vendors. Interpretation using our staff and we also use interpretation services from various DOE vendors. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. We use a text based communication system that shares messages between the principal and the parents in different languages. We also have a system in place where we have assigned staff members that includes the parent coordinator, outside classroom personnel, and educational assistants to make phone calls home in case of an emergency. For parents who speak other languages, we use the over the phone interpretation services provided by the Department of Education. Our parents like the over the phone interpretation services. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. During whole school staff meetings and SLT meetings, the parent coordinator and the ELL coordinator will inform all the staff members and other stake holders of the Chancellor's Regulation A-663 every school year so that everyone at the school is aware of the parents and the students right to get translation and interpretation services. Besides the understanding that communicating with our parents is one of our most important values in order to support our student learning, we will use resources available from our school as well as other funds allocated to support language translation and interpretation services. We know that parents have a right to know everything that is going on from 2018-19 CEP 72  registration to everyday life functioning of the school and language barrier should not be an issue because we have resources to support parents in how to be involved in their children education. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) First, the school will provide each parent whose primary language is a covered language with a copy of the Bill of Parent Rights and Responsibilities. In addition, our school posts signs indicating the availability of interpretation services. Moreover, our school makes sure that safety plans are sent home in the parents' primary languages. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? In order to provide parents with meaningful opportunities to participate and access to programs and services critical to their child's education all letters, posters and fliers are sent home or posted in inside and outside the school in multiple languages based on the identified language groups in Section A. We also provide parents with surveys that let us know how we are doing and what they feel we should improve. 2018-19 CEP 73 
