2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP-CS) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 12X341 School Name: ACCION ACADEMY Principal: VICTOR FRIAS 2018-19 CEP-CS 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: ACCIONAcademy 321200010341 6-8 977 Fox Street, Bronx, NY 10459 718-378-1649 Phone Number: School Number (DBN): 12X341 718-378-4704 Fax: Dr. Victor Frias vfrias@schools.nyc.gov Email Address: School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Dr. Victor Frias Ivan Borras Madeline Tavarez Ivan Borras N/A N/A N/A N/A District Information Geographical District: 12 Jacqueline Rosado Superintendent: 1970 West Farms Road, Bronx, NY 10460 Superintendent’s Office Address: jrosado3@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: (718)328-2310 Phone Number: (718)542-7736 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 CEP 3  FSC: Bronx Jose Ruiz Executive Director: 1230 Zerega Avenue, Bronx, NY 10462 / One Fordham Plaza, Bronx, NY 10458 Executive Director’s Office Address: Jruiz2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: Phone Number: Fax: 718-828-7776 (718)741-8895 (718)828-6280 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Dr. Victor Frias Ivan Borras Madeline Tavarez Antonia Torres AimeeLiranzo NA NA NA Rosa Hernandez Sonia Rosado *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable/ Parent Member/Treasurer UFTTeacher 2018-19 CEP 5 Signature (Blue Ink) Name RosavelDiaz Esther Anhwgre-Riberiro NA NA NA NA NA NA NA Position and Constituent Group Represented Member-parent-Secretary UFTTeacher Member/ NA NA NA NA NA NA NA 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Section 4: CEP Overview School Characteristics: 2018-19 CEP 9  MISSION: ACCION Academy, a multicultural and diverse learning community, is committed to helping develop the linguistic and academic skills of all our students in a supportive and collaborative learning environment. Through goal setting, we are able to identify and work towards high standards of performance, and reflect on our progress. Our mission is aligned with the district as we “Raise Readers Together by turning probabilities of success into possibilities for success!” VISION: Our vision is to create an educational community set in an environment of shared responsibility for academic improvement, social-emotional growth, and college/career readiness among students, parents, and teachers. We align our vision with the district as we “ensure that every child is known, nurtured and inspired and all stakeholders engage in reflective practice and grow as learners. Theory of Action: 2018-2019 “If teachers create a constructivist model of learning designed to analyze data, engage all students in thinking about texts; discussions and writing practices; and assess with each student their progress and next steps in ELA and Math, then every student will be able to think critically and deepen their understanding of content, skills, and strategies taught across grade levels. Instructional Focus: Teachers will develop shared pedagogical expectations through common planning, design inquiry cycles for effective use of assessment to better inform their pedagogical practice and make data driven decisions regarding the development of units of study and lesson plans to facilitate flexible small group differentiated instruction as well as structured conference. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. ACCION Academy is a small comprehensive middle school entering its 12th year. Our current enrollment for 18-19 is 401 students in grades 6-8. The school population comprises 20% Black, 77% Hispanic, 2% White, and 1% Asian students. The student body includes 18% English language learners and 38% special education students. Boys account for 52% of the students enrolled and girls account for 48%. The average attendance rate for the school year 2017-2018 school year was 88.0% 2018-19 CEP 10  Collaborations & Partnerships: Although we are a small school, we have great ambition and a sense of determination to develop a school fit for the challenges of the 21st century. We currently use an 8 period schedule (45 minutes each) for 6 Period, with targeted enrichment and academic intervention opportunities embedded within the academic day. Reading and Writing Workshops are blended with Imagine Learning and I-ready platforms to support differentiated instruction. To enrich our learning environment, we provide our students with diverse opportunities to expand their social-emotional, artistic, athletic, and civic abilities through our partnerships with our CBO Eastside Settlement House and the after school the SONYC Program. Additionally, we expose our students to a number of activities related to college (i.e., college trips and career fairs) and career readiness. To further support teacher development and the building of adult capacity to effectively engage ACCION Academy students in our educational competencies of focus, we have partnered with: Bronx Borough Community College, Lehman College, Hostos Community College and Mercy College. Additional partnerships include The Bronx Filed Support Office, The National Training Network, Generation Ready, Sharzer and Associates, N.Y.C. Department of Health, Montefiore Clinic, Cary Leeds Center for Tennis and Learning, Bronx Zoo, Botanical Gardens, Museum of American History, Museum of New York City, Museum of Natural History, and Practice Makes Perfect . At ACCION Academy, our professional development structure is based on the belief that adults learn best though collaboration, inquiry, and problem based experiential learning. Educators are encouraged to engage in meaningful conversations about students within their charge to identify and share instructional best practices. With a focus on the educational competencies of targeted skills based learning, opportunities to engage in accountable talk, student choice in demonstrating learned content within CCLS aligned tasks, and providing opportunities to engage in self-reflection and goal setting, ACCION Academy provides students with foundational supports on which they are able to grow academically and socially-emotionally. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Special Student Populations/Needs For the 18-19 about 38% of our students have IEP’s. Student needs are as follows, learning disables, emotional disturbance and other medical needs. Identified students will also receive speech and occupational therapy. To support them as well as facilitating least restrictive environment we facilitate ICT and SETSS settings. 2018-19 CEP 11  With respect to English language learners, we are currently at 35 %. Areas of need entail, fostering comprehension strategies, oral language development (fluency and phonological awareness) as well as listening and speaking skills. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Framework Element MOST GROWTH: Framework Element The key area of Focus: This year’s framework element where we will be focusing our attention is Rigorous Instruction, Collaborative Teachers and Effective Leadership. A strong emphasis will be placed on domains 1 and 3 to continue fostering questioning strategies that facilitate discussion, collaborative teacher planning as well as use of inquiry to analyze impact of data on focus groups including Pushable I and Pushable II students . 2018-19 CEP 12  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 12X341 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 151 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 25 25 5 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 15 16 11 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 91.0% % Attendance Rate 88.7% % Reduced Lunch 15.2% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.0% 72.8% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 2.0% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 2.25 0% 14% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 27.0% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES N/A N/A YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A N/A NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 20 20 88.2% 2.0% 29.1% 24.5% 0.7% 0.0% 2 14% 4.8 7.7% 47% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No YES N/A N/A N/A YES NO N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 13  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The pass rate for courses passed in English, Math Social Studies and Science was 94%. This was 3% above the city wide average of 91%, and 8% school district according to our Quality Snapshot. 27% of grades 6-8 met standards in ELA and 8% in Math on the 2017-2018 State assessments. Student Performance by Grade In ELA, our current performance level 3 and 4 is at 27.1 percent for 2017-2018. In math, our current performance level 3 and 4 is at 8. percent for 2017-2018. Based on the most current data, there is an upward trend in ELA, as students progress up the grades. However, in math students struggle academically across the grades. With respect to ENL students we have the following: Our English Language Learners Proficiency levels are as follows for incoming 6th, 7th and 8th grade: 35 students are Entering 19 students are Emerging 2018-19 CEP 14  24 students are Transitioning 44 students are Expanding 21 students are Commanding With our current ELL population, this equates to roughly 30% of our population. An area of growth for our ENL students is writing. As a result, a strong focus will be placed on writing to better support students achievement. According to the 2018 Framework for Great Schools Report, we scored an overall 81% in the area of Rigorous Instruction, 88% Collaborative Teachers and 85% in Effective Leadership. As a result, these areas have been identified as the priority needs for the 2018-2019 school year. Additionally, we will continue to strengthen the following areas based on mid-point HEIDI data: 2-27-19  Component 1e Designing coherent instruction 2.41  Component 3b: questions and discussion techniques – teacher effectiveness rate is 2.29  Component 3c: engaging students in learning – teacher effectiveness rate is 2.41  Component 3d: using assessment in instruction – teacher effective rate is 2.10 To support these areas of growth, we will be focusing on professional development for staff, personalization, and precision. We will create classrooms where students will collaboratively engage in stimulating tasks (using critical thinking skills as anchor to drive motivation), generate and solve thought-provoking questions and challenge peers' responses while tracking and monitoring personal growth and skill development through the writing workshops, make sense of math problems and persevere in solving them. Teachers conduct structured inter-visitations with colleagues with an intentional focus including performance task. Field Support Office PD Sessions-ongoing for 18-19 **We will continue to work with the Field Support Office as we ensure teachers are familiar with co-teaching models in special education classrooms (ICT Model classrooms and teacher collaborative). Common Planning Protocols Teachers have met to discuss action plans for lesson planning, student inquiry, and peer-to-peer inter-visitations. The team has also created a working matrix that has been uploaded to Google Docs where members add real-time next 2018-19 CEP 15  steps to move lessons, differentiation, share best practice and conduct data analysis. The embedded focus on AIS and RTI interventions and differentiation is also used for student individualized learning pathways. The school leaders will continue to monitor the planning time to ensure teams are developing lessons that incorporate a variety of co-teaching models and include strategies and adaptations to advance the performance of all students. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Goal 1-By June 2019, student proficiency in NYS ELA exam across grade bands will increase 5 % by June 2019 and proficiency in NYS Math exam across grade bands will increase 6% by June 2019. 2018-19 CEP 16 Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) All Students 09-15-2018 Assistant Principal 06-15-2019 Math Teachers Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). In conjunction with our partnership with NTN math instruction and Eureka Math-Engage New York, all students will be provided multiple entry points for academic success. Teachers will utilize baseline (i Ready and simulated state assessments) data as well as formative assessment data (quizzes and exams) to facilitate small group instruction as well as whole group instruction, addressing student's zone of proximal development. Analysis will occur during structured data dives on a biweekly basis. Mr. Allen our NTN coach will support teachers throughout the academic year in implementing NTN math strategies. Emphasis will be placed such areas as expressions and equations, ratios and proportions and functions. Teachers will receive training in the following areas: Planning curriculum maps, goal setting as well as scope and sequence adjustments via two NTN coaches. Math Teachers 01-03-2018 Assistant Principal 06-15-2019 Mentor Data gathered from formative assessments and benchmark assessments will be utilized for small group differentiated instruction; this will occur during our Monday & Common Planning periods daily. During professional development time teachers plan across grade levels (Humanities and STEM) and content areas focused on the effective use of inquiry analysis to drive instruction. Math Teachers Department Lead Consultants 09-15-2018 Assistant Principal 06-15-2019 Mentor Department Lead Consultants 2018-19 CEP 17  Interdisciplinary teacher teams will be created to address instructional practice focused on problem-solving, reasoning, explaining, modeling, using tools, and generalizing. Utilize the co-teaching model to offer support for the Push-in/ Pull out structure for small groups and individual one-on- one support to address deficiencies in vocabulary, reading comprehension, number sense, and measurement Quantifiable mid-point benchmark that will be used to measure student progress in meeting annual goals and time frame:  Math Simulation 1 – Week of December 12th, Simulation 2-week of April8, 2019  Biweekly Module Assessments-tracking power standards: RP, EE, F Data Review Meetings 3: March 6th to March 10th Increased rigor in Math instruction for all students by ensuring that scheduling is conducive to structured instructional time and teacher collaboration. ELA 09-15-2018 Assistant Principal Teachers 06-15, 2019 Mentor Department Lead Consultants ATR Principal ELA Increase rigor in reading and writing through on-site and off-site professional development on the Balanced Literacy Approach to teaching. Teachers will implement readers and writers workshop supported by grade level Teacher's College units of study and Ready Curriculum. Teachers will engage students in guided reading, strategy lessons and independent reading with a focus on power standards and specific reading skills and strategies as a means to support learners at different levels. A Generation Ready coach will be provided for support and implementation of targeted intervention, lesson pacing, and curriculum maps. Provide structured time for teachers to plan across grade levels and content areas focused on the effective use of data to drive instruction. Interdisciplinary teacher teams will be created to address instructional practice focused on problem elements of writing, reasoning and explaining, modeling and using tools, seeing structure and creating opportunities to move instruction from teaching to student-to student collaboration, engagement 2018-19 CEP 18  and product driven through an intellectually cognitive teaching environment. In an effort to support all learners the ELA block has been broken down to ensure there is ample time for small group targeted work time. Additional support teachers join the core groups and work with targeted groups (pushable/ slippable). Assessments will be ongoing to monitor progress for specific standards and skills. Quantifiable mid-point benchmark that will be used to measure student [progress in meeting annual goals and time frame:  ELA Simulation 1 – Week of December 5, 2018  ELA Simulation 2- Week of March Teachers will use simulation data to modify scope, sequence and curriculum maps to ensure scaffolding, spiraling, and re-teaching of key literacy skills within curricula, conduct inquiry and identify patterns and trends to resolve multiple entry points for students and grading students work within Professional Learning Communities. The principal will provide the staff with the following PD: A) Provide staff with disaggregated data (N.Y.S. Assessments, internal formative an summative, quarterly diagnostic, i Ready diagnostics and Ready simulations) to assist with planning and making informed decisions around grouping and provisions of multiple points of entry in an effort to motivate, and cognitively engage students. A) Provide staff with professional development in the area of data analysis and use the inquiry model to shift instruction in E.L.A. and Math. Teachers will be taken to a cycle of data gathering and analysis ending with a thorough action plan that teacher completes for their class. B) Provide staff with individualized PD cycles through structured team using student performance results in the data tracker as the anchor to drive pedagogical practice. Based on Advance data and student ongoing data selected teachers receive one to one All Teachers 09-2018 06-2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, STEM & Humanities Department Chairs 2018-19 CEP 19 Principal, Assistant Principal, Department Head, Principal, Assistant Principal support from ATR Principal and AP. A log is kept so that the impact of the support could be monitored. 09-05-18 06-15-19 All Teachers 09-2018 06-2018 03-04-19 06-15-19 Ongoing Revisions based on Superintendent Designee's Field Visit: As a result of this debrief the following shifts were made by Administration team:  Revised master schedule to include common planning for STEM and Humanities Department  Common Planning Teachers were purposefully grouped to ensure support for new and newer teachers. Teachers meet to discuss action plans for lesson planning, student inquiry and peer-to-peer inter-visitations. The team has also created a working matrix that has been uploaded to Google Docs where members add real-time next steps to move lessons, differentiation, share best practice and conduct data analysis. The embedded focus on AIS and RTI interventions and differentiation are vivid throughout the discussions.  Revisions were made to the protocols used by both teams o Humanities meets on Mondays at 11:30 AM o STEM meets on Thursdays at 11:30 AM o Support from Bronx Field Support Center for ICT teachers. The purpose is to expose teachers to different co-Teaching Models to ensure a more student-centered learning environment. Discussions during these sessions included lesson planning, inter-visitations and peer feedback. Teachers also discussed advantages and disadvantages of ICT Team Teaching models and reflected on current models at ACCION. The next sessions include SDI strategies and lesson planning. In an effort to support focus groups tutors from Practice Makes Perfect will be provided to each ELA and Math core class. All Teachers 2018-19 CEP 20  Targeted after school, Saturday Academy and holiday academies will be created for students. Students will be grouped homogeneously to ensure their individual needs are met. Ongoing classroom data will be used to adjust the lessons for the interventions. Most lessons will provide additional support in the units completed during their core instruction. specific teachers 10-2018 5-2019 Specific teachers, AP, ATR Principal and Principal Targeted groups of students (pushable/ slippable) 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight.  Family Instructional Nights in ELA and Math facilitated by lead math and ELA teachers will be held in: September, December 2018, February and April 2019 in an effort to provide parents and families the necessary tools to support their children at home.  Ready reports and progress reports will be sent home to ensure parents are kept abreast on their children's progress Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Engage NY Consultants  Math NTN Consultants will provide PD, Model and teach  READY Simulation (CCLS aligned assessment tool)  Conduct I-Ready Math & ELA Diagnostic Assessments   District 12 Professional Development Specialists – Targeted job embedded professional development support Simulated literacy and math assessments twice a year. for improved literacy and numeracy instruction across the curriculum.  Consultants from NTN and Engage NY provide PD for all our sub-group students (ELL/SWD) in the area of multiple points of entry through structured lesson planning and curriculum map shifts in both ELA/Math. Iready Consultants Imagine Learning Consulting   Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other 2018-19 CEP 21  Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Throughout the academic year the following will be implemented to monitor progress and achievement toward stated goal:  NYC DOE CCLS BOY aligned Baseline/Benchmark/End of Year Assessments  READY Assessments (pencil and paper)      Assess how students make sense of problems and persevere in solving them, how students use reason Formative, Interim, and Summative Assessments I-ready diagnostics I-READY Math and ELa program for differentiated, adaptive technology based mathematics instruction Imagine Learning for ENL/SWD -Targeted grade level isntruction abstractly and quantitatively, model with math, Use appropriate tools strategically, attend to precision, look for and make use of structure, look for and express regularity in repeated reasoning By February 9, 2019, 30% of our scholars in grades 6-8 will meet mid year grade level benchmarks (simulated State exams as well as I-Ready data and periodic assessment data) in English Language Arts as evidenced by performance on a variety of measures including Beginning Of Year Assessments, Ready Diagnostics and Simulations. Midpoint Data Points:  Progress to Annual Typical Growth can be seen by clicking on Diagnostic Growth then picking the subject looking at End-of-Year View Increase in Tier 2 students  1st diagnostic 1% on grade level, now at 2%   Positive growth has occurred in Math 79% growth  Diagnostic Results-End of Year View-can see comparisons between diagnostics  Math Gains include:  6th grade 39% met growth to date  56% improved placement  7th grade 47% met growth to date  55% improved placement  8th Grade 47% met growth to date  53% improved placement Reading Gains  6th Grade 33% met growth to date  34% improved placement  7th Grade 41% met growth to date35% improvement placement  8th grade 32% met growth to date  35% improvement placement Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) 2018-19 CEP 22  i Ready diagnostic, Ready Paper/ Pencil, NY State Exam Simulations, BOY and EOY will be used to measure student progress. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 23  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? ACCION staff will create a more personalized case management approach (Restorative Justice practices) to support students and families and their needs for mental health services. We have partnered with Eastside Community advisers work with students regarding their social and emotional well-being through a case management approach. Finally, our guidance team is always available to support students in need of services including students in temporary housing. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, our Restorative Practice team in collaboration with the School’s Community Based Organization (CBO) will continue to develop the school’s Positive Behavioral Intervention and Supports Framework resulting in a decrease of school wide suspension by 15%. 2018-19 CEP 24 Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) All students 09-15-2018 Teachers, Mentor, AP 06-15-2019 Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). NTC mentor teacher will provide seminars on classroom management and maximize student engagement through the lens of:  Classroom management  Maximizing student engagement  Parental outreach These trainings will lead to one-to-one tiers of interventions, action steps to monitor implementation of training topics and provide supports as necessary. Structured townhall meetings with each grade will be utilized to facilitate a safe and caring learning environment. Restorative Justice practices will be introduced via our guidance team. Growth Mindset approaches will be introduced into the classrooms to foster positive attitudes among students and staff. Monthly Positive Behavior Intervention Assembly Programs celebrating student success stories.  Guidance Counselor will provide seminars for students and teachers in the area of:  Anger management All Students and families 09-2018 06-2019 AP, Parent Coordinator, Teachers 2018-19 CEP 25  Bereavement  Conflict mediation and resolution Following these trainings the guidance counselor lead discussions as it relates to one-to-one tiers of interventions , action steps to monitor implementation of training topics and provide supports as necessary. D12 resources for staff and students, presentations from field support office. Monthly OORS Reports will be reviewed with all parties involved. Adjustments to future seminars will be made based on the findings of the reports. Utilize School Based Support Team to conduct Case management along with schools Guidance Counselor: All Students and families 09-2018 06-2019 Guidance Counselor, AP, Social Worker  Use of community Resources for mental health  Coordinate after school supports with after school CBO (Eastside Community) for parents and families. The school will continue to implement the “ACCION Bucks” practices to reward positive behaviors in school and hold celebrations of student’s success on all grade levels throughout the school year based on attendance, 90% or better in all subjects and most improved (behavior and 75% or higher). Students will be involved in the following activities: Student Leadership Seminars   Peer Mentoring -The administrative team will monitor leadership behavior of students through the peer mentoring process. In addition, the AP will conduct one-on-one seminars for teachers in need of further support. All Students 09-2018 06-2019 Guidance Counselor, AP, Social Worker, Parent Coordinator, AP, Principal 2018-19 CEP 26  -Ongoing Revisions, implementation and Supports based on FOCUS Visit:   The school leader will continue to convene a committee to review framework that can be used to provide Social and emotional health supports to students during the weekly Instructional Leadership meetings. Select one framework and determine how the framework will be incorporated into the school schedule  Create a plan to train all staff in the selected framework Select an implementation date and identify a method to  evaluate the impact of the framework on student behaviors and school culture -Implement ADVISORY PROGRAM: The advisory program is designed to help students develop an ongoing relationship with an adult as a point person at ACCIÓN Academy. The advisor is an adult that the student can identify as an “Ally” in the school community. Teachers have a thirty-minute block on a weekly basis where they meet with their small group of advisees and take part in a fun activity. During this time advisors, can also pull individual students (on a rotating basis) to do a check in regarding school/extra-curricular activities/ life outside of school, etc. -Implement WELLNESS EXPO: School-wide expos have been implemented throughout our middle school to educate our students and staff about various topics including bullying and relational aggression to promote being an “up-stander” rather than a “bystander.” During these school-wide expos, our main goal is to address some of the common topics that are apparent in many educational environments, in order to educate and promote safety and inclusion within our school. Adm.Team 09-08-18 06-28-19 09-08-18 2018-19 CEP 27  -Implement Positive Behavioral Intervention and Support system (PBIS SYSTEM): All Students At ACCIÓN Academy we have implemented a Positive Behavioral Intervention and Support system. This is a school wide approach to encourage a safe and respectful environment. The focus of PBIS is on improving a school’s ability to teach and support positive behavior for all students. Students are awarded ACCIÓN BUCKS when they exhibit positive, respectful, and cooperative behaviors. These bucks are then used to purchase merchandise from the school store. The goals for the PBIS system are to: 1. Reduce and eliminate disruptive behaviors 2. Maintain a safe and positive learning environment for all students 3. Increase communication between school and parents All Students 4. Decrease lateness and absences ***Engaging families and supporting their understanding of Common Core math, reading and writing standards and alignment to high expectations across grade levels: A) Meetings during the year include: PTA, SLT, Annual Title I Meeting, Fall and Spring parent teacher conferences. B) Provide parents with data results, online access support and resources to monitor progress All Students C) Content specific CCLS parent meetings which provide overview of curriculum maps in core subjects. 09-08-18 01-02-19 03-04-19 06-28-19 2018-19 CEP 28  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Provide parents with guest speaker presentations related to safety, bullying and use of online resources to monitor social media platforms. These training will take place during monthly PTA meetings from September 2018 through June 2019. The guidance counselor along with parent coordinator will facilitate meetings. The Assistant Principal will supervise the implementation of activities. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The school will work together with the PTA/ SLT members and set aside funding to support the student incentive ACCION Bucks program. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 1st 2019, there will be a 10% reduction from incidents that occurred during the 2017-2018 academic year. This will be measured by suspensions/referrals as measured by the number of OORS referrals. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Monthly OORS Report and data from last school year. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 29  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths- Review of weekly meeting agendas revealed that lead teachers ensure team members meet on a weekly basis. Instruction is the focus of the meetings and teachers attempt to follow a protocol to review student work. Needs: Accion Academy is a new formed school. Data shows that over 70% of our students scored a Level 1 in NYS Math Exam. While teachers meet weekly and discuss student work, they require a consistent protocol that would allow them to thoroughly examine student work, craft targeted next steps that would impact student learning. Differentiation, targeted specific student support is needed to ensure movement of student outcomes. The process needs to be ongoing and needs to lead to student growth. Plans must be adjusted during collaborative team meetings and next steps made clear and follow through upon. Teachers need to be transparent and provide students with information on how they will be assessed and the steps that will be taken to get there. Teachers need to work on creating engaging and inviting lessons that will foster students led discussions, and provide ongoing checks for understanding in the formative assessments conducted. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, teachers in collaborative inquiry groups will consistently examine student learning data, make adjustments, plan for differentiation, and engage in targeted intervention as measured by I-Ready growth assessments resulting in a 50% increase in student levels of proficiency in ELA and Math. 2018-19 CEP 30  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff)  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). 1. Faculty and Departmental Teacher Team meetings focused on student progress and performance weekly data analysis to make key decisions to enhance school-wide instruction, lesson/unit planning, and academic intervention planning. This includes academic tiers of interventions at least 90 minutes a week that focus on Tiered Vocabulary and number sense structures. 2. Engage in collegial discussions on student work outcomes using protocols and lesson studies from Common Core aligned Unit Tasks within the NTN and Eureka math curriculum, Teacher’s College Literacy Program, Ready ELA/Math curriculum as well as, formative and summative assessments to further inform instructional practice, design coherent lessons focusing on the following critical attributes during periodic cycles :  Learning activities are matched to instructional outcomes  Activities provide opportunity for higher-level thinking  Appropriately challenging materials and resources are provided to students based on formative and interim student progress data Instructional student groups are data based and organized thoughtfully to maximize learning and build on students’ strengths through the College and Career readiness Day Activities.  ****These steps will be monitored through instructional walkthroughs and observations to track the impact on component in domain 3 of the Danielson Framework 3. Provide PD on analysis and review of multiple measures to assess the necessity for programmatic changes to support increased embedded academic intervention services. Through the analysis of data from multiple measures including formative, benchmark, and summative assessments the following instructional initiatives will be implemented and monitored for student progress: All Teachers 09,2018- 06,2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, STEM & Humanities Department Chairs All Teachers 09,2018- 06,2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, STEM & Humanities Department Chairs 01-11-19 All Teachers 09,2018- 06,2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, STEM & Humanities Department Chairs, ELA and Math Consultants 2018-19 CEP 31  *Teachers will complete an Assessment Analysis Protocol where data is analyzed and specific next steps and tasks are crafted for groups of students (focus and sub-groups).  Math Literacy units of study focusing on word problems, explicit math skills based instruction, and math vocabulary in context is reviewed and adjusted based on findings.  Adjustment and adaptations of Teacher’s College Units of Study and Ready standard specific lessons focusing on targeted next steps and student needs.  Implementation and analysis of universal assessment data such as performance diagnostics and READY Simulations in ELA/Math Set to:  Continue to identify instructional implications based on ongoing data  Adjustment of lessons within embedded academic intervention periods  Training of support teachers pushing in during AIS  Identification of best practices to support how ACCION Academy students learn best (individualized differentiation) Principal, Assistant Principal, STEM & Humanities Department Chairs All Teachers 09,2018- 06,2019 2018-19 CEP 32  2018-19 CEP 33  All Teachers September 8, 2018 June 26, 2019 Principal, ATR Principal, AP, Consultants, lead teachers, Content leads Curriculum Maps are a living document on Google Docs and Drop-Box . ******Teachers will collaborate to share ideas and discuss next steps to support, track and see the impact and evidence of the practice in Domain I and Domain III. Teachers will utilize the ADVANCE feedback in the area of 1 e, 3b, 3c, and 3d of the observation components to reflect and monitor growth during the week. 1E. Inter-visitation (in/out the building) See evidence of higher order thinking questions that are differentiated for ENL and SWD Use of Inter-visitation tool to promote feedback Selective scripture-next steps toward mastery 3C. Inter-visitation Curriculum PQ’s Engaging activities to promote student thinking Teacher reflection with measurable next steps. 3D. - Student self-assess and reflect on their work with next steps 2018-19 CEP 34  Differentiated instruction for Students with disabilities and English Language Learners 4E. - Feedback from observations with next steps PD opportunities and sharing pedagogical instruction through purposeful lesson planning aligned to CCLS Structured Reflection Activities During the school year mentees and mentors will be asked to reflect on a series of topics ranging from instruction and classroom management to student/teacher relationship development. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Teachers will utilize 30 minutes a week during common planning to discuss student's progress, celebrate milestones, challenges and next steps of intervention. These activities will be monitored by Principal and Assistant Principal. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Bronx Borough Field Center and District 12 Professional Development Specialists – Targeted job embedded professional development support for increased pedagogical efficacy aligned to Charlotte Danielson Framework for Effective Teaching  D12 NTC teacher mentoring program  All teachers – explicit literacy across the curriculum instruction  Teacher Mentor   Generation Ready Consultant  NTN Math Consultants  Practice Makes Perfect Consultants SKEDULA Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring 2018-19 CEP 35  Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal.  Increased use of data for planning via intentional and flexible grouping. Tasks will focus on targeted areas of student deficiency, opportunities for student choice in work products aligned to students’ present levels of performance (i.e. remedial, reinforcing and enrichment activities) Teachers will use data to modify scope and sequence and curriculum maps to ensure scaffolding, spiraling and re-teaching of key literacy skills within curricula, including. To measure impact, Advance data from February 2019 will be used to monitor progress toward this objective.  Provide staff with professional development with the effective analysis of data and utilization to drive instruction  Provide staff with targeted professional development within structured teacher teams around student performance data  Provide staff with disaggregated data (NYS exam data, internal formative, benchmark, and summative assessment data) to assist with planning and making informed decisions around grouping and provision of multiple entry points for students by product)  D 12 Pre-NTC Mentoring data and mid-year review of progress toward meeting goal benchmarks  Meet with TIF (demonstration and coach teachers to discuss progress toward individualized teacher goals Quantifiable mid-point benchmark that will be used to measure student [progress in meeting annual goals and time frame]: Quantifiable mid-point benchmark that will be used to measure student [progress in meeting annual goals and time frame: ELA Simulation 1 – Week of December 5th ; Instructional Period 2: November 2nd to December 18th (31 School Days) Data Preparation Week 2: December 14th to December 16th Data Review Meetings 2: January 3 to January 9th. ELA Simulation 2 – March 7th – 8th; Instructional Period 3: December 22 to March 4rd , 2019(41 School Days) Data Preparation Week 3: February 27th to March 3rd Data Review Meetings 3: March 6th to March 10th Increased rigor in reading and writing instruction for all students by ensuring that scheduling is conducive to structured instructional time and teacher collaboration 2018-19 CEP 36  Common Planning time provides teachers additional time to plan lesson and action plans to shift practice through an inter-visitation protocols time line: September 2018, November, January 2019, March, May 2019. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. READY Simulations, MOSL, ADVANCE ratings, Mentoring progress, and TC reading and writing and Iready diagnostics results. Ongoing assessments Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 37  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths: Leaders conduct observations and provide timely, actionable feedback to staff. Leaders also follow up with walk through which provide non-evaluative feedback to the work. Programmatic and human and fiscal resources are used to meet the needs of the students and provide teachers with all the tools they need to effectively teach their classrooms. Ongoing feedback information is used to provide professional development opportunities to improve teacher practice. Needs: ACCION Academy needs to work on ensuring the school community creates and shares their (SMART) goals/mission and everyone is completely clear on how to follow through on the work. Additionally, the school leaders need to follow evidence based systems and structures to implement individual and school wide practices based on student data and feedback. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, school leaders will provide professional development to build teachers' capacity in Designing Coherent Instruction and Assessment in Instruction, resulting in a 75% increase in teachers improving one performance level reflected in components 1(E), and 3(D), as measured in Advance. Thus moving from a HEDI scale of developing to effective, and increasing student's performance levels by 5% in NYS 2019 ELA and Math test. 2018-19 CEP 38  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Provide teachers with timely measurable next steps according to ADVANCE rating and domains in need of shifts within one day in the area of (1a, 1e, 3b, 3c, 3d). Admin, Teachers 09,2018- 06, 2019 Principal, AP, Consultants Utilize consultants from NTN Math and Generation Ready to develop school wide structures to push our instructional vision, focus around the theme of Professional Development, Precision and Personalization and coach specific teachers towards making Pedagogical gains in Domain 3. Meet with mentors and new teachers to ensure goals are being met as evident in lesson planning, curriculum maps and student products, formative and summative assessments. Admin, teachers 09, 2018- 06, 2019 Principal, AP, Consultants Teacher mentor with training from New Teacher Center will regularly meet with and provide feedback to both new teachers and those whose Advance data fell below school average of (2.6). Meet with assistant principal to discuss crosswalk instrument results (SCEP goals, PPO feedback, and MPPR indicators and low inference notes discussed during last PPO visit). Collaborate with lead teachers to ensure use of all diagnostics and iReady lessons are conducted with precision in a timely manner (@two weeks, or based on student needs). Set weekly agendas for the instructional leadership team to review current data trends. This practice allows for all stakeholders to support students in their growth. Specific groups of students will be addressed and a plan for different stakeholders will be crafted. Weekly two hour meetings will allow for discussions and next steps based on data. District 12 Teacher Induction Program: Admin 09, 2018- Principal, AP, Consultants 06, 2019 Admin 09, 2018- 06-2019 Principal, AP, Cabinet, Parent Coordinator, Guidance Counselors, CBO Mentees, Mentors 11/20/2018 Assistant Principal Structured Reflection Activities: During the school year mentees and mentor will be asked to reflect on a series of topics ranging 06-28-19 2018-19 CEP 39 from instruction and classroom management, student/teacher relationship development. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. SLT and PTA meetings will be held monthly from September 2018 through June 2019. During these meetings the principal will share out and present to parents and other stakeholders school-wide strategic initiatives that are aligned with the mission and vision of ACCION Academy. The Assistant Principal will discuss assessment results and next steps to reduce the academic gap between all our sub-groups. The principal will also utilize the CBO (Eastside House) to leverage resources and promote more resources in the community and consultants to support parents as they seek vocational and other post secondary options such as GED or re-enrolling in a local community college program. These activities will be monitored by the principal. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Consultants from Generation Ready, I-Ready, and NTN will be hired to conduct multiple trainings throughout the year. School mentors will have program adjustments to allow for regular meetings with mentees for modeling and demonstration purposes. Consultants will meet within teams, review student data (low, medium and high performers and make shifts in in ELA/Math based on student results, and initial MOSL scores in ELA. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A SIG X PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Action Plan: Weekly Analysis of teacher logs from September 2018 through February 2019, classroom walkthrough, formal and informal observations and Bi-weekly mentor meeting feedback discussion. By February 2019, 50% of all teachers will be rated effective or highly effective through an average of their teacher observations reports as evident in (Danielson Framework for Teaching Domains in 1a , 1 e, 3b, 3c, and 3d Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Advance Dashboard data, Agendas, ACCION Central Student Data Tracker, Walkthrough data Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 40  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. According to the school’s Framework for Great Schools Report 2018, The school has maintained a culture of collaboration, accountability and staff is empowered to improve upon their own pedagogical practice and developing authentic partnerships. The outreach to parents rose to 86% and parental involvement to 79%,. ACCION Academy’s parent coordinator works in concert with the parent association to ensure that all parent workshops are designed in Spanish native language to serve our bilingual speaking parents in the community. The principal provides evidence of additional parent workshops on topics such as transitioning to middle school, cyber bullying and texting. Additionally, Khan Academy is used to support enrichment beyond school setting, literacy awareness through The Parent University. ESOL workshop series in an effort to enable parents to provide additional support at home. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, school leaders in collaboration with the school’s Community Based Organization (CBO) will provide workshops and programs aimed at providing families with the knowledge and tools to support their students academically, resulting in a 5% increase in student proficiency on the NYS ELA exam and 6% on the NYS math exam. 2018-19 CEP 41  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Survey parents to assess needs and tentative workshop series. Parents 09-2018 Parent Coordinator 12-2018 Guidance Counselor Hold meetings for all 8th grade students to discuss high school options, and articulation to high school (ELL, SWD) Create workshops about helping parents to reinforce skills of self-monitoring and tracking progress Parents 04-2019 09-2018 12-2018 04-2019 Parent Coordinator, AP, Teacher Train staff to support parents in checking their student's progress through online grading system (Pupil Path (SKEDULA), TC Writing, and I-Ready periodic diagnostics Monitor teacher's outreach to parents through their anecdotes posted in SKEDULA Teachers 09-2018 Parent Coordinator, AP, Teachers 12-2018 01-2019 06-2019 Invite parents to participate in the Career and College Expo Activities (preparing students and parents for college and career readiness. Teachers- 09-2018 Parents 11-2018 Consultants, Team Leaders Parent Coordinator, AP, Guidance Counselor, Principal Invite parents to college tours and provide literacy activities aligned to Common Core Learning Standards and units of study (provide overview of new curriculum -TC Writing and NTN Math). 01-2019 06-2019 2018-19 CEP 42  Test Prep activities for parents so that they may be aware of testing protocols and content expectations. Additional Action Plans Include: During the PTA/SLT monthly meetings: Once a month during we will be discussing upcoming activities, events, workshops goals and student’s expectations:  Uniforms  Attendance/Lateness  Behavior  Parent Involvement  Homework/Alternate methods and strategies   Monthly teacher’s expectations Incentives/privileges/trips Monthly meetings will help us monitor student’s progress and parental involvement as well as develop cohesion Community Services:   Local Business/students are encouraged to reach out to local business in their community Local Church/Food drive involvement/students will be able to learn to become empathetic and lend a helping hand in their community.  Temporary Housing Outreach  Nursing Home and Senior citizen center visits/children will be singing and engaged in activities/arts and crafts with the elderly.  Goals/purpose: students will develop a sense of caring and build a bond with the elderly. Upcoming Local College Involvement: Bronx Community College Hostos Community College 2018-19 CEP 43  Lehman College Mercy College Monroe College Parent Resource Center/Continuing Education GED/ENL Guidance Counselor & Parent Coordinator will provide additional workshops: Elementary to Middle School Transition Health Workshops Series /St. Barnabas Hospital Self-Esteem Transition to High School Bullying/Cyber Bullying Harvest Dinner Financial Management Promoting Healthy Eating and Exercise Nutrition Workshop Zumba Racism & Stereotype Family Workshop. Teen Crisis Families in Temporary Housing Workshop Arts & Crafts with family/ Family Talent Show 2018-19 CEP 44  Ongoing Revisions based on FOCUS Visit:  Reducing Test Anxiety and How to Navigate through Online Resources for child safety  Parent ELA and Math Night-Navigating through online resources  Parent trip to the Repertorio Espanol to see Don Quixote. Provide parents with an opportunity to experience Spanish Literature through the arts as they help their child transition from middle to high school and the rigors of the AP and Spanish Regents Parents 03-19 Parent Coordinator, AP 06-28-19 Consultants 2018-19 CEP 45  3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. CBO-Eastside Community Program Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Title I Funding, CBO (Eastside Community Program), Community and Business Partners Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February of 2019, we will have met at least 35% parental involvement as evident in the sign in sheets. Conduct baseline quantitative and qualitative analysis of activities to measure rate of participation and engagement through surveys. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Assess the total parent participation from 17-18 (January 2018) to 18-19 (January 2019) Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 46  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) ● Lexile levels below and approaching standards within grade level range as per Level Set – I-ReadyELA/ Reading comprehension assessment Degrees of Reading Power (DRP) score below and approaching standards within grade level range as per Degrees of Reading Power (DRP) grade level assessment ● Core course grade 60% and below Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) ● Teacher Scaffolding – Tier 1 ● Teacher Scaffolding – school wide ● I-ReadyELA/ tier 1 ● Writing Workshop – Tier 1 ● Non-cognitive Interventions: Test Taking Skills – Tier 1 ● Non-cognitive Interventions: Organizational Skills – Tier 1 ● Writing Workshop: Community Word Project – Tier 2 ● Writing Workshop: ● I-ready Diagnostics school wide ● Writing Workshop – school wide ● Non-cognitive Interventions: Test Taking Skills – school wide ● Non-cognitive Interventions Organizational Skills – school wide ● Writing Workshop: Community Word Project – grade 7 & 8 ● After school Small Group Tutoring – Tier 3 ● After school Small Group Tutoring – small group ● I-Ready Simulation I and II proficiency score of Level 1 or 2 as per the Fall andSpring Rehearsal ELA assessment ● Annual Goals and suggested academic interventions within the content area as When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) ● Teacher Scaffolding – during the school day ● I-Ready Diagnostics during school day, after school ● Writing Workshop – during the school day ● Non-cognitive Interventions: Test Taking Skills – during the school day ● Non-cognitive Interventions: OrgSkills – during the school day ● Writing Workshop: Community Word Project – during the school day ● Writing Workshop: Tutoring: during the school day ●After school Small Group Tutoring – after school 2018-19 CEP 47  Mathematics Science per students’ Individualized Education Plan (IEP) ● I-ReadyMath score below and approaching standards within grade level range as per thegrade level assessment ● Core course grade 60% and below ● Connected Math Program 3 (CMP3) proficiency score of Level 1 or 2 as per the Fall and/or Spring NYCDOE CMP3 Core Curriculum assessment ●MathSimulation Level 1 or 2 as per the Fall andSpring Rehearsal Math assessment ● Annual Goals and suggested academic interventions within the content area as per students’ Individualized Education Plan (IEP) ● Core course grade 60% and below ● Annual Goals and suggested academic interventions within the content area as per students’ Individualized Education Plan (IEP) ● Spring Rally Rehearsal Science assessment ● Teacher Scaffolding – Tier 1 ● Teacher Scaffolding – school wide ● Non-cognitive Interventions: Test Taking Skills – Tier 1 ● Non-cognitive Interventions: Organizational Skills – Tier 1 ● Math Literacy Workshop – Tier 2 ● I-ReadyMath – Tier 2 ● After school Small Group Tutoring – Tier 3 ● Non-cognitive Interventions: Test Taking Skills – school wide ● Non-cognitive Interventions: Organizational Skills – school wide ● Math Literacy Workshop – school wide ● I-Ready Math/ELA small group After school Small Group Tutoring – small group ● Teacher Scaffolding – during the school day ● Non-cognitive Interventions: Test Taking Skills – during the school day Non-cognitive Intervention Organizational Skills – during the school day ● Math Literacy Workshop – during the school day ● I-Ready Math – during the school day, after school ● After school Small Group Tutoring – after school ● Teacher Scaffolding – Tier 1 ● Teacher Scaffolding – school wide ● Non-cognitive Interventions: Test Taking Skills – Tier 1 ● Non-cognitive Interventions: Organizational Skills – Tier 1 ● Non-cognitive Interventions: Test Taking Skills – school wide ● Non-cognitive Interventions: Organizational Skills – school wide ● Teacher Scaffolding – during the school day ● Non-cognitive Interventions: Test Taking Skills – during the school day ● Non-cognitive Interventions: Organizational Skills – during the school day 2018-19 CEP 48 ● After school Small Group Tutoring – after school ● Teacher Scaffolding – school wide ● Teacher Scaffolding – during the school day ● Non-cognitive Interventions: Test Taking Skills – school wide ● Non-cognitive Interventions: Organizational Skills – school wide ● Non-cognitive Interventions: Test Taking Skills – during the school day ● Non-cognitive Interventions: Organizational Skills – during the school day ● Small group ● During the school day and after- school ● One-to-one Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) ● Lexile levels below and approaching standards within grade level range as per Level Set – ● Core course grade 60% and below ● Annual Goals and suggested academic interventions within the content area as per students’ Individualized Education Plan (IEP) ● Lexile levels below and approaching standards within grade level range as per Level Set – I-Ready ● Parent/Teacher Recommendation ● School Based Support Team Recommendation ● Crisis Team Recommendation ● Attendance Intervention Dropout Prevention (AIDP) Team Recommendation ● Guidance Counselor/School Leader Learning Environment Observation (classroom, cafeteria, etc.) ●Lunch & Learn Small Group Tutoring – Tier 3 ● After school Small Group Tutoring – Tier 3 ● Teacher Scaffolding – Tier 1 ● Non-cognitive Interventions: Test Taking Skills – Tier 1 ● Non-cognitive Interventions: Organizational Skills – Tier 1 Counselor provides one-to-one sessions with identified at risk students to review requirements towards increased academic progress, social-emotional learning and other issues which overall student growth. Also, group guidance lessons provided weekly to identified students through small group advisory sessions focusing on study skills, career exploration and social-emotional learning . 2018-19 CEP 49  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) There are 21 students in temporary housing within our school; this can vary with time when students and parents relocate. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. ACCION Academy will provide Guest Speakers and workshop services from McKinney-Vento At Glance , Workshops: Projected dates in effect for workshops: Once a month/2018-2019, Tuesday Time: 11:00 AM 1. Economic Hardship, workshop will educate our parents on how accurate are commonly held stereotypes and poverty can affect families and what resources do we have to prevent these from affecting our student population. 2. Increasing School Stability for Students , This workshop entails alternate methods as well as motivational techniques that will increase students school interest as well as build self-esteem. 2018-19 CEP 50  3. Stress Management, Parents will fully participate and engage in relaxation , breathing methods and techniques in order to achieve a minimum decent standard quality of life and be able to build coping mechanism. 4. Nutrition and healthy food- Parents will be educated about alternate ways of improving health by healthy eating habits. 5. Continuing Education- Parents will get resources and learn what is available to enhance their education, adult degree and GED services in order to increase their economic status. 6. Educational Trips: Parents will build bond and engage in trips with students. Parents and students will visit museums as well as colleges. 7. Additional Support: Parents wishing to pursue their GED and other technical and vocational training will receive monthly resources to register and ACCION Staff will coordinate registration services for parents. Allocation / Funding- Money will go to parents that do not have the means for school uniforms or trip and transportation money. Funding will also provide students with back to school material. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). NA 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. NA 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. 2018-19 CEP 51 NA 2018-19 CEP 52  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. ● Assistant Principal will work closely with Field Support Center HR point person to ensure that all teachers receive 175 hours of professional development within their 5 years of holding their professional license. ● Principal and Assistant Principal will hold workshops on how to apply for their professional license and complete necessary paperwork. ● All teachers will engage in a minimum of 4 cycles of in school inter-visitation to engage in meaningful pedagogical feedback conversations, and sharing of best practices. ● New teachers meet weekly with school based mentors to discuss professional responsibilities and the use of the Danielson Framework to inform pedagogical practice. ● Participation in the coaching teaching which provides a career ladder for veteran teachers who show specific promise in the areas of pedagogy and teacher leadership. There has been the creation of two positions within the Program (2 model Teachers). Selected teachers receive monthly professional development in the areas of leadership, Danielson Framework, and peer based coaching from the Program representatives namely the Teacher Team Leader assigned to the school.  D12 New Teacher Mentoring Program; select NTC mentors will work with first and second year teachers in the area of lesson planning and engagement. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). 2018-19 CEP 53  ● All teachers will attend professional development offerings focused on CCLS curriculum alignment, and gap analysis provided by Bronx Borough Field Center and District 12 Professional Development Specialists. ● Classroom teachers will be provided with targeted in school professional learning opportunities focused on TC Writing and reading model. ● ELA and Social Studies Teachers will have four individualized consultation days working with a TC Program Specialist focused on data analysis and pedagogical practices using the program. ● Math Teachers will have seven individualized consultation days working with NTN Math Specialist focused on data analysis and pedagogical practices using the programs representative. ● ENL/Special Education teachers will attend three professional development offerings in the areas of content focus provided by the Bronx Borough Field District 12 Professional Development Specialists. ● All teachers will attend monthly professional learning opportunities facilitated by TC and NTN Math Specialists , Bronx Borough Field Center and District 12 Professional Development Specialists , the Principal, Assistant Principal, and/TC coaches to support improved pedagogical practice aligned to the Danielson Framework, CCLS instructional shifts and improved student achievement outcomes. *District 12 Teacher Induction program-Mentors and mentees will have monthly meetings to discuss lesson planning, alignment of CCLS, classroom management and student engagement in an effort to impact student progress. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). NA Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). NA 2018-19 CEP 54  4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. The Principal, Assistant Principal, ACCION Academy MOSL Team along with our content area teacher teams work together to identify the use and appropriate multiple assessment measures for improved instruction. Each member provides the MOSL Team and School Leaders with a varying perspective on the efficacy and impact of identified assessments providing feedback on effective implementation, data analysis, review of student tasks aligned to data outcomes, and implications of said data on the continual alignment of our curricula to the Common Core Learning Standards. During regular Cabinet, MOSL, and Departmental Meetings the administrative team along with teacher leaders reflect on improved teacher effectiveness and student performance outcomes through the use of multiple assessment measures. Professional Development opportunities provided to staff regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction include but is not limited to: ● Effective proctoring and implementation of assessments ● Data disaggregation and analysis specific to the assessment ● Use of data to drive instructional practice and outcomes ● Use of data to create and implement embedded, target academic intervention services 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) X NA NA NA Column B Section Reference(s) Section 5A NA NA NA Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Federal Federal Federal Federal 127,753.00 0 0 0 2018-19 CEP 55  Tax Levy (FSF) Local 1,358,444.00 X NA 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. 2018-19 CEP 56  Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 57  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. ACCION Academy ,, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. [ACCION Academy] will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 2018-19 CEP 58  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 2018-19 CEP 59  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act. ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) ACCION Academy in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for 2018-19 CEP 60  improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act. I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of Limited English Proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; 2018-19 CEP 61  ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the elementary and Secondary Education Act.Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities 2018-19 CEP 62  ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; 2018-19 CEP 63  ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 64  Addendum: Community School Partnerships Directions: The Community School (CS) strategy is directly aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. Community Schools bring schools and community partners together and integrate academics, health, youth development, and family engagement to provide students with the tools and opportunities they need to succeed. The Core Services in Community Schools are Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness. Part 1 – Community School Partnerships Goal(s) How is the CS strategy integrated into academic instruction at your school, and what impact has it had on student academic outcomes? How is the CS strategy integrated into academic instruction at your school, and what impact has it had on student academic outcomes? The CS strategy at ACCION integrates a variety of social-emotional supports for students, including 4 East Side House Student Advisors who are each assigned to a caseload of students. Advisors serve as the primary person or adult for each of their students- helping them navigate any social-emotional or behavioral concerns – as well as maintain and/or improve their attendance rates. Advisors encourage and engage students to increase their academic performance, work on their social emotional development and improve their attendance via creating incentivized contracts/goals with the students. Students display a willingness to perform better in academics when they know they will be rewarded. Moreover, students are less likely to fall off track since their Advisor will consistently check in with them, their teachers and their family members. Student Advisors communicate with parents/caregivers through e-mails, text messages, phone calls and home visits to keep parents/caregivers informed and involved in their child’s progress or need for improvement. Indicate the summative goal(s) of the Community School for the 2018-19 school year. Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. Student Advisors will carry a caseload of students consisting of 25-35 mixed with issues of Chronically Absent, Severely Chronically Absent and at Risk students to work increasing the year to date to 92% for the academic year of 2018-2019 by June 26th 2019. 1. Advisors will meet with students on their caseloads to provide check-in’s, a quick “hey great to see you made it to school today.” 2. Advisors will work with students on caseload to develop goals and create a contract with incentives attached to the contract regarding the increasing student’s attendance. 3. Advisor’s will conduct outreach to Parents/Caregivers of Student’s on their caseloads to build a rapport with them in order to discuss progress and development for their children. CBO will collaboratively work with school personal to keep attendance above the 92% of overall attendance for the academic school year of 2018-19, ending in June on the last day of school. Attendance incentives will consist of certificates, small rewards (chips, spending time with Advisor) and bigger rewards such as trips and gift cards. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Community School Annual Goal(s): 2018-19 CEP 65  How will achieving your Community School Goal(s)--in Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness--support your academic goals for students? ESH Advisors communicate consistently with their student’s teachers and school leadership, in order to best help the students succeed academically, while assisting the student’s social and emotional development. Student Advisors and school staff work closely together to create opportunities for parents and family members to become a more prominent part of the school community- through finding different avenues to communicate with parents/caregivers, whether face to face, home visit, via e-mail or over the phone. CBO Student Advisors also provide extra support in the classrooms through classroom observations and encouraging the students to participate in the lessons, while also offering incentives such as trips and fun activities for students who improve their attendance, behavior or academics. Part 2 – Community School Partnerships Core Services Action Plan Part 2a. Identify the Community-based Organization (CBO) partnerships that you will develop in ELT, Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness, their target student population(s), and scope of the services provided. As well as supporting schools’ supportive environment and attendance work, CBOs should be helping to support your school’s instructional focus. CBO Partnership East Side Settlement Target Population Scope of Service SY18-19 SMART Goal Students with attendance issues. Scope of Service Students needing assistance with developing positive coping skills to improve their social/emotional development. ENL, ICT, Level I, Level II Student Advisors will implement the Primary Person model, the model used by East Side House, while also incorporating aspects of success mentor teachings. Student Advisors will assist with students in need of social service support such as assistance with clothing and other resources. Student Advisors will assist with helping students develop improved attendance habits. CBO will assist with facilitating workshops and events for parents regarding academics and social/emotional needs of their children. Student Advisors will carry a caseload of students consisting of 25-35 mixed with issues of Chronically Absent, Severely Chronically Absent and at Risk students to work on reducing the student’s absences by 3% and preventing students from falling into the next risk group through the academic year of 2018-2019. CBO will collaboratively work with school personal to keep attendance at 91% of overall attendance for the academic school year of 2018-19, ending in June on the last day of school. Attendance incentives will consist of certificates, small rewards and bigger rewards such as trips. CBO along with Parent Coordinator will 2018-19 CEP 66  develop bi-monthly parent events to increase parent involvement by 5% in the school through 2018- 2019 academic school year. CBO will assist with incentives for students to improve their attendance. Behavior, Attendance Part 3 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 3a. Indicate resources your Community Partnership will leverage to achieve your summative SMART goal(s) and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. N/A Part 3b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X Title I SWP Title III X X Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside X 21st Century SIG Grant School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 3c. Describe how the school will partner with the Lead CBO to do the following: 1. Community Schools are expected to partner with a community-based partner organization (CBO) and together with members of the School Leadership Team, hire a Community School Director. The Director will lead implementation of the asset and needs assessment process, and other critically important coordinating activities. Indicate how you will leverage this aspect of the work. Community Schools are expected to personalize the needs of all students, through strategic programming and services, as determined by the asset and needs assessment, and must also offer Expanded Learning Time (ELT) and mental health programming. In completing this section, ensure that you think about how: (1) the right services are provided to the right students and families at the right time; and (2) how you will seamlessly coordinate services with instructional programming happening throughout and outside of the school day. Indicate how you will implement this work, and describe other programming you anticipate to be in place to strengthen this initiative. Community Schools are expected to emerge as Partnership Schools, which are places where parents and families feel welcome, actively participate in the conversation and decision-making around the renewal of their schools, and have many opportunities to advocate for their children. Monthly meetings and Community School Forums engaging families and community stakeholders will be a critical part of this family engagement strategy. Describe how you will implement this aspect of the work. Community School Principals are expected to meet on a weekly basis with their Community School Director, select Assistant Principals, key staff, and other CBOs, to analyze trends in data and case manage individual students. Data tools – including the New Visions Data Sorter - and training will be available for schools to use. Indicate how you will implement this aspect of the work. 2. 3. 4. 2018-19 CEP 67  N/A Part 4 – Community School Partnerships Oversight Part 4a. Key Staff and Partners 1. Name and describe the scope of involvement of all community partners working in the school (include partners supporting ELT, counseling, enrichment, etc.) 2. Name the members of your Community School Team and how meetings will be organized and structured to engage all stakeholders and be focused on results. 3. Explain data strategies including the use of the data sorter, and steps that the school will take to ensure that the appropriate interventions are provided to the right students 1. 1. CBO staff will provide case management for students on caseload. ESH Student Advisors work with students’ on an array of areas such as attendance, social/emotional development and academics. CBO provides workshops and assistance to families and students. The school also collaborates with Rising Ground and Montefiore for Mental Health needs. ESH provides services to the students and families attending the school. SONYC provides STEM programming along with other enriching curriculum. SONYC also has a contract with Foodbank to provide pantry to people in the school building. 2. CST in held in conjunction with the SLT team. This is done because it is difficult to get parents to attend both meetings. Therefore parents are given the opportunity to discuss all aspects of the school and services offered at the school. 3. The Heat Map is used to track attendance trends of students. Through looking over the data interventions are devised to assist the student develop better habits and/or keep encouraging students to do well with their current attendance patterns. Part 4b. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the Community School program. There are some resources needed to incorporate the community school program which include monetary, training for staff regarding the community school model and why CBO’s are placed in the schools, time to conduct the trainings. Resources such as time will also be in high need due to the consolidation between Entrada and Accion. In order for the new school to succeed trainings, time and understanding that the new school may encounter bumps in the road will be vital to the success of the new school. If the resources are provided this will assist with how quickly the school can remedy any and all obstacles faced with which will help prevent these areas in the future. Part 4c. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. Summer planning has already started for the upcoming school year. Developing activity schedules, fine tuning what has worked in the past and also figuring out what the school will need in the future once the consolidation is completed between Entrada Accion. Therefore the start day has already began for the new academic year, 6/29/2018. The end date is the last day of school for the 2018-19 school year. Part 4d. Mental Health Work Plan Separate from this S/CEP, schools will complete a Mental Health Work Plan that will become an addendum to this document. 2018-19 CEP 68  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP 69  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: Begin description here: Rationale: Entrada Academy ELL students will participate in enrichment classes that will be offered during our Saturday Academy program. The enrichment classes will be differentiated based on the needs of our students as defined by their proficiency levels: entering, emerging , transition , and expanding. The focus of this program will be on language development through ELA and Math instruction. None of the ELL students scored proficient on the 2017 NYS ELA exam, and only one student scored on grade level on the 2017 NYS Math exam. Students will be served by both our ENL and content area teachers who will support them in developing their reading, writing, listening, and speaking skills. Sixth graders will receive services from a certified bilingual teacher as follows: one hour each of ENL/Math, and ENL/ELA instruction. Seventh and Eighth graders will receive services in ELA and Math using an ENL and bilingual teacher, and one certified Math and ELA teacher. Our teachers use thought-provoking questions that apply to real life and are culturally relevant to engage students in critical discussion with their peers. These interactions are utilized to cultivate new ideas and develop meaningful questions of their own. Much of the work done during Saturday Academy will be an extension of this focus. Our primary goal is to provide students with ample opportunities to practice their language skills so they can continue to develop their proficiency in English and in all content areas, specifically Math and ELA. Schedule and Duration: Saturday Academy will be run from 9:00 a.m.- 12:00 pm p.m. (3 and a half hours), with breakfast served from 8:30 a.m.-9:00 a.m (30 minutes). Saturday Academy will run from November 2018, through May 2019. Language of Instruction: English with native language support Teachers: 2 ENL/bilingual teachers; 2 content area teachers; 1 supervising administrator. The Content Area teachers will co-teach and plan with an ENL/ bilingual certified teacher. 3 planning hours will be designated for the teachers to map the curriculum before the program begins. Each class will be co-taught by an ENL and content teacher. All student attendance and assessment record will be kept in the school's Title III binder. Materials: NYSESLAT preparation workbooks i-Ready materials will be used to support Math and ELA instruction, Achieve 3000Notebooks, paper, and pencils. Attendance will be kept on file Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered 2018-19 CEP 70  Part C: Professional Development Begin description here: Begin description here: We strive to provide all students, especially our ELL students with instruction designed to meet their needs. While our teachers know that ELL students have specific needs, and they are responsible for instructing ELL students regardless of content area, our teachers need support in designing instruction to support EL students. We have designed a series of workshops to support teachers in learning and implementing strategies to provide effective instruction which will be provided in the spring of 2019. Topic 1: Teaching Language and Literacy Skills to Emergent Bilinguals. Rationale: Teachers will learn about the unique needs ELL students. Teachers will be introduced to literacy strategies designed for ELL students which will support students' development without reducing rigor. Teacher will have opportunity to work with colleagues to modify an activity / lesson of a forth-coming unit. Topic 2: Implementing Scaffolds and Multiple Entry points across Content Areas Rationale: Providing teachers across the curriculum and content areas strategies and skills to implement in their lessons to facilitate access and engagement for ELL students at various levels. All agendas, sign-in sheets will be kept on file. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: . Begin description here: Accion Academy will work with our CBO, East Side House Settlement, to implement an ENL program for our parents. To maximize the impact of an ENL program, parents / guardians will be expected to attend classes each week. By encouraging and providing language acquisition to parents / guardians, they will be able to support at home. Topics: In addition to adult ELL classes, time will also be spent during sessions covering the following topics: - Common Core Learning Standards -Homework Help -Literacy in the Home -Communicating with your Child's Teachers -Improving your Child's Vocabulary Rationale: Parents will be provided with the resources that are used in the classroom to support their students at home. In addition, parents will acquire English and other skills that will empower them to more confidently assist their children with academics, advocate for their child's education, and serve as academic models for their children. Parents will be notified that the ELL classes will begin through the parent calendar distributed once a month, as well as telephone outreach. ELL classes will be offered once a week for 1.5 hours and will be taught by an ENL/Bilingual teacher. In addition, we work collaboratively with IS 217 (shared space school) in offering opportunities for a variety of parent workshops. Parent coordinators will work closely to support our parents and families. 2018-19 CEP 71 Part D: Parental Engagement Activities All agendas, sign-in sheets will be kept on file. Furthermore, translation services will be available to parents during workshop sessions Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) NA  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL NA NA NA NA NA NA Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. NA N/A N/A NA N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 72  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 12 School Name Accion Academy Borough Bronx School Number 341 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Victor Frias Coach Jennifer Ortiz ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Sarah Kim Teacher/Subject Area Melissa Leuthner Teacher/Subject Area Related-Service Provider Superintendent Rafaela Espinal Pacheco Assistant Principal Karen Henry Coach School Counselor Ciena Cueto Parent Sory Lora Parent Coordinator Massiel Rodriguez Field Support Center Staff Member Other (Name and Title) C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 133 2018-19 CEP 73 Total number of ELLs 24 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 18.05%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 2 K 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 4 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 6 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? As formative assessments, we use the NYS Measures of Student Learning (MOSL), Ready diagnostic, i-Ready diagnostic, and running records in the fall and spring to assess the literacy and language growth of our ELLs. The i-Ready program for ELA and Math is web-based, differentiated instruction that provides targeted, leveled supports in literacy and language acquisition for each student. Additionally, the NYC ELL Benchmark Assessments (Spring and Fall) are used to evaluate ELLs' growth performance on reading, writing, listening, and speaking modalities. Furthermore for math, we use Ready diagnostic, Ready Simulation, and National Training Network (NTN) quizzes. Teacher-created unit assessments are used by all content teachers to monitor student progress on unit focus standards aligned to the curriculum map, ensuring that ELLs grow on each unit's key standard(s) through assessment in classroom instruction. Lastly, NYSITELL data is used to evaluate the English language proficiency of new entrants whose home language is a language other than English, based on home language questionnaire. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 2018-19 CEP 74  All content teachers are divided among Humanities and STEM departments. Humanities and Stem department meeting takes place once a week during school hours. Formative assessment data is shared among teachers to be analyzed, assessed, and evaluated to drive our instructional practices. We choose focus standards and skills for our ELLs. Additionally, co-teaching teams meet during common planning time once a week, which provides them time to evaluate and assess data for next steps, and plan differentiated instruction for ELLs. Additionally, teachers enter formative assessment data in Skedula on a weekly basis to make it easy for all stakeholders to know, at a glance how an ELL student is progressing in all classes. We keep also share class data tracker and assessment in Google docs which is accessed by administration and teachers. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? Our school utilizes the most recent results of standardized exams: NYS ELA, NYS Math, and NYSESLAT in order to identify baseline in the beginning of the school year. This allows us to provide ELLs with appropriate ENL instructional program, according to CR Part 154, and move them along the continuum of NYSESLAT proficiencies and raise achievement levels. Every marking period report cards and ELL progress reports are distributed to ELLs, which are used to measure their progress and areas of need in all classes. Unit assessments are also used to check progress of ELLs in content classes. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Through common planning and humanities/stem meetings once a week, the teachers assess and review the summative data to place appropriate interventions in the classrooms. We also implement Academic Intervention Service (AIS) for ELLs. AIS services are based on school-wide assessments and in-class data tracker using checks for understanding checklist. In addition, the content teacher collaborates with the ENL teacher using the summative data to target ENL Stand-alone instruction and Integrated ENL classes to address the needs of ELLs. Furthermore, teacher conferences with students take place at least twice a year to ensure ELL students are setting their own goals based on CCLS standards. Our Accion Academy Google Docs system allows all stakeholders to look at students’ data. Additionally, in PLC meetings, teachers analyze student data and upload their findings into Google Docs. Additionally, in cabinet meetings with administrators, long-term decisions and tweaks are made to ensure courses offered and curriculum meets the needs of all learners including long term ELLs and SWDs with ELLs. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Not applicable 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. NYSITELL, NYSESLAT, EDAT, NYS ELA, I-ready simulations in the Fall and Spring and NYS math data are used to evaluate and inform ENL Stand-Alone and Integrated ENL classes appropriately based on their areas of need. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? We modify the master schedule and use STARS classroom to make sure we make appropriate adjustments to the ELL programs in our school. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students 2018-19 CEP 75  regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. At ACCION Academy, we provide freestanding ENL program for Grades 6-8. Majority of our ELL students are placed in 601, 701, 801, and 678 classes in order to receive integrated ENL instruction. For stand-alone classes, the students are grouped homogeneously based on their NYSESLAT proficiency level. The school operates on a 63 minute block schedule. The class travels together as a group. Depending on the student's proficiency level, they receive mandated minutes of stand-alone ENL in the classroom with an ELL pedagogue. If they are required of integrated ENL program, then the ELL pedagogue co-teaches with the content teacher (ELA, Social Studies, and math). b. TBE program. If applicable. Not applicable c. DL program. If applicable. Not applicable 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Student schedule is formulated based on their English proficiency level on NYSITELL or NYSESLAT. Majority of the ELLs are placed in 601, 701, 801, and 678. According to the class schedule (1hr 3 mins. class= 1 Block) and the mandated number of instructional minutes, each ELL student is pulled-out for 3 blocks (minimum 180 mins.) to receive stand-alone ENL service per week. The ELL pedagogue co-teaches with the content teacher (majority ELA teachers) to provide integrated ENL service for 3 blocks (minimum 180 minutes) as well as integrated ENL in other content classes. The ELL schedule is generated and distributed to the school in the beginning of the school year. a. Entering 6th to 8th grade students receive 1 unit of study in ENL (180 mins.) and 1 unit of study in ENL/ELA (180 mins.) Emerging 6th to 8th grade students receive 1 unit of study in (180 min.) and 1 unit of study in ENL/ELA (180 min). Transitioning 6th to 8th grade students receive minimum # of 90 mins of integrated ENL/ELA and 90 mins of standalone or integrated ENL (with ELA or any other area) of 90 minutes. Expanding 6th to 8th grade students receive minimum number of 180 minutes in integrated ENL/ELA or other content area such as Math and Social Studies. Commanding 6th to 8th grade students receive at least 90 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA or other content area. These instructional minutes are delivered in Freestanding ENL program at our school. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. ACCION Academy's content follow all Common Core Learning Standards, respectively for each class: English Language Arts, Mathematics, Science, and Social Studies, Scope and Sequence for Science, as well as the ELA and Math (Grade 6-8) curriculum maps. We have created a blended curriculum based on the standards and student needs including language objectives. We also aligned student needs with data from both the current and previous year. Teachers work collaboratively in Humanities and STEM departments to not only assess lessons and unit plans, but also to engage in student inquiry work and protocols to focus and use data to drive instruction in the classrooms every week. We implement CMP3, NTN Math, and Ready and i-Ready program for Math. Integrated ENL/ELA model allows the content teacher and the ENL teacher to better collaborate, modify, and differentiate assignments to be comprehensible based on varying English Proficiency Levels within the subject area. During common planning, we utilize NYSESLAT Targets of Measurements (ToMs) and NYSESLAT Performance Level Descriptions (PLDs) as well as adding language objectives for stand-alone and integrated ENL classes. In addition, the stand-alone ENL model allows the ELL student to improve in reading, writing, speaking, and listening. Supplemental programs for ELLs are available in the form of AIS, extra help during lunch time, and after-school programs, which not only addresses academic and testing prep needs but also cultural needs through a bimonthly cultural excursion. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? 2018-19 CEP 76  Exams are ordered in the Native Language of ELL students annually. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a. SIFE students are monitored initially and provided with extra help and interventions as appropriate. There is more of one-on-one support when needed. b. Newcomers are similarly monitored and provided with extra help and interventions as appropriate. These students are partnered with someone who has a higher English proficiency level and speaks the same home language. Small grouping is also done so that they have opportunities to develop productive interactions during instruction. They are given opportunities in order to access their prior knowledge and experience. From there build on what they know. We encourage and support them in their home language by providing translation and interpretation when necessary. We also provide charts, diagrams, graphic organizers, visual representations, technology, home language books, glossary, and dictionary. In addition, we incorporate read-alouds and sentence starters for conversation activities. Furthermore, they are supported in their home language when needed, and encouraged to practice and develop their English speaking, reading, writing, and listening skills. c. Developing ELLs are provided with scaffolded strategies and instruction by incorporating charts, diagrams, rubrics, graphic organizers, visuals, and technology in order to move them across the continuum of language proficiency level eventually becoming proficient. They engage in complex grade-leveled text-based reading, writing, and conversation activities in which students are supported in using language and ideas from the texts. They are put in a group to discuss and engage in meaningful conversations accordingly by using stem talk. Conferencing also takes place every marking period to discuss their academic improvements and areas of need. d. For Long term ELLs, they receive small group instruction and be provided with multiple types of assessment with ongoing assessment to guide instruction. Technology through programs such as iReady on the ipads, laptops, and desktop computers are used to further support them. They will be provided with extra help and interventions as appropriate. e. Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status will receive small group instruction and be provided with multiple types of assessment and with ongoing assessment to guide instruction in their content classes for an hour and a half every week. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? ACCION Academy is data driven and because the ENL teacher is providing integrated ENL services in ELA classes to serve the ELLs, a student's status, whether it be a SIFE, long term ELL, ELL with an IEP or behavior related, is known, used in class groupings and in the differentiation of teaching. Through the use of the core curriculum materials of Ready and iReady ELA and Math, Teachers College Writing workshop, NTN Math, and CMP3, students are provided with targeted, scaffolded, skills-based instruction to improve literacy and numeracy comprehension. As an example, in 701/801 class, the math teacher used foldable vocabulary graphic organizer to accelerate English langugage development of ELLs. In ELA classes, Flocabulary was used to build vocabulary and engagement with Word Up to deepen ELLs' language development. These programs have enabled many long term ELLs to focus their reading fluency and comprehension, numeracy, and ultimately writing skills. Through these web-based, differentiated instructional, adaptive technology programs newcomers, long-term ELL , ELLs with IEPs, and Former ELL students are able to engage in targeted literacy and numeracy instruction focused on (fiction and nonfiction) texts and extended responses to improve language acquisition, numeracy, fluency, and reading comprehension. 2018-19 CEP 77  7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? At ACCION Academy ELL-SWDs are provided with targeted skills and instruction based on their IEP goals. We also focus on increasing their literacy and numeracy through AIS, explicit vocabulary support, use of graphic organizers and visual aids to support greater levels of content comprehension, and the use of technology to provide audio/visual experiences to engage multiple intelligence modalities where possible. As many of our ELL-SWD students are at the Intermediate (Transitioning) levels, they receive additional services such as speech to support targeted language acquisition skills. The LPT team come together to discuss about the interventions and strategies to better support our ELL-SWDs on a consistent basis as we reach for their IEP goals. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. ACCION Academy provides targeted academic intervention program through Academic Intervention Services (AIS) for ELLs. This program provides support at the school level as they are assigned to AIS personnel by grade level and needs. A maximum of 60 minutes per day 5 days a week in content classes such as ELA and Math. We determine academic intervention needs of the students in the school based on data, establish targeted means of assessing students, determine methods for dealing with academic issues, and – most important – monitor on an ongoing basis whether these methods are resulting in increased student learning and achievement. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? We will implement Teachers College Reading and Writing Workshop, National Training and Eureka Math next year which will support our ELLs in their native language and improve their English language proficiency development in reading, writing, and math. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? Not applicable 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. Supplemental programs for ELLs are available through AIS classes in ELA and Math core subjects, advisory program, and extra-curricular activities during lunch time, which not only addresses academic and testing prep needs but also cultural needs through a bi-monthly cultural exclusion. ELL students are integrated in all aspects of ACCION Academy student life. ELL students participate in a host of activities that are open to all students, including but not limited PHIPPS After-school activities (i.e., cursive writing, book club, poetry/song writing, band, chess club, homework help, test prep, robotics etc.) We also have special events and celebrations each month offered to ELLs such as multicultural fair, career day, spirit week, literacy fair, science fair, United Nations Jr. Ambassador's Program, field day, musical shows, and school trips. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. ACCION Academy currently uses NYC Department of Education Core Curriculum materials from Ready and I-Ready ELA and Math, Teachers College Reading and Writing Project, Eureka and NTN Math. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? We do not offer TBE and Dual Language programs at this time. ACCION Academy’s ENL Free-standing program is a language-rich environment created for the ELLs to increase exposure to print and language such as bilingual dictionaries, posters, charts, interactive word wall, books, and reference materials. During instructional conversations, the Entering/Beginning ELLs are encouraged to form, express, and share knowledge learned in their native language in order to ensure students are comfortable enough to participate and work with others. 2018-19 CEP 78  14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. In the beginning of the school year, the school utilizes data from ATS, EDAT, and IEPs to ensure that all ELLs in Grades 6-8 receive required services. Our free-standing ENL program provides mandated ENL push-in and pull out services which is then entered in STARS classroom. In addition, the ENL teacher shares the schedule and collaborates with other teachers: content teachers, speech therapist, guidance counselor, paraprofessionals, and physical therapist to ensure that all ELLs receive appropriate services. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? ACCION Academy shares the campus with David C. Farragut Elementary School (CS44). We coordinate services and have common areas that are share. These include:computer lab, which provides space and technology aid that help our ELLs to develop English fluency and language skills. We also use the auditorium and cafeteria together to hold school events, assembly meetings, and celebrations for our scholars including ELLs. Furthermore, one nurse is assigned to our school building to provide health and mental hygiene services to ELLs. There is also a school Psychologist, and Social Worker. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Newly admitted ELL students are monitored by the ENL teacher, content teachers, parent coordinator, and guidance counselor and school administration. These newly enrolled students are provided with extended enrichment, support and interventions appropriately. They are placed in a heterogeneous class and assigned to a partner who speaks the newcomer’s L1, willing to provide a supportive partnership and transition into the school. This strategy has helped newcomers integrate positively into their respective classes and build healthy relationships with peers. We also highly recommend newcomers and their parents to join our after-school PHIPPS program and PTA meetings. In addition, we plan and hold various activities and events for them such as multicultural day, career day, Science Fair, Literacy Fair, school trips, and parent/family events. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Not applicable 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Not applicable Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? All ELL personnel at the school is sent to an ELL Liaison meeting and professional development on a monthly basis that are held by Bronx Field Support Center (BFSC) and Division of English Language Learners (DELLs) to meet a minimum of 50% of the required PD hours of language acquisition in alignment with the core content area instruction. 2018-19 CEP 79  2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. ELL liason meetings and professional development are provided on a monthly basis through the New York City Bronx Borough Field Support Center (BFSC), Graduate School of Education Center for Educational Partnerships and The NYS/NYC Regional Bilingual Resource Network, and The Division of English Language Learners & Student Support (DELLS) to ENL teachers and teachers of ELLs. As a small school, most of the times only the ENL teacher is able to attend these PDs. Instead the information is turn-keyed to the staff during departmental or staff meetings. These ELL specific professional development is offered during Election day, Chancellor’s Day, after-school hours, summer session hours to all teachers of ELLs including paraprofessional. The ENL Teacher provides both PDs and formal/informational ELL training for all staff- including all teachers, paraprofessional, and staff. Through the delivery of PD over the course of the school year all staff receive the minimum 50% of required PD hours of ELL training. Sign-in sheets and agendas are recorded and maintained in file. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? The Parent Coordinator and the ELL Coordinator have individual meetings with parents of ELLs by creating space and time during school hours to ensure that translation and interpretation are available in their preferred language. They also facilitate parental involvement by informing and inviting parents to meetings throughout the school year by distributing flyers and contacting them on social media such as school website and twitter. These meetings are not limited to parent-teacher conferences, parent/family workshops, and SLT and PTA meetings to discuss ELL student progress, assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas. Furthermore, family/parent workshops are available for parents of ELLs with varied topics ranging from ENL orientations to informational sessions such as what parents can do to help their students achieve, develop their socio-emotional growth, and strengthen their relationship with parents, updating child’s progress, and celebrating student success. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. The Parent Coordinator and the ELL Coordinator facilitate and foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs by providing series of workshops such as ELL orientation, Tone of Your Voice Matters, resume workshop, nutritional workshop, Teens on Social Media, fire safety, stress management, and Elevate trainings. These events and workshops take place throughout the school year. Additionally, teachers hold various workshops every month based on parent's interest and importance. Our school leadership Team and Parent Teacher Association coordinate surveys and reviews of parent activities annually through SLT and PTA meetings. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. NA 2018-19 CEP 80  2018-19 CEP 81 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Victor Frias, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 82  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Accion Academy School DBN: 12X341 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Victor Frias Title Principal Karen Henry Assistant Principal Massiel Rodriguez Parent Coordinator Sarah Kim ENL/Bilingual Teacher Angelica Santos Parent Jeffrey Nichols Teacher/Subject Area Malcom Robertson Teacher/Subject Area NA NA Coach Coach Ecena Cueto School Counselor Rafaela Pacheco Espinal Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 06/21/17 06/21/17 06/21/17 06/21/17 06/21/17 06/21/17 06/21/17 NA NA 06/21/17 06/21/17 2018-19 CEP 83  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 12X341 School Name: ACCION Academy Superintendent: Rafael Espinal The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (Sarah Kim ENL Coordinator Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Parents come in and speak with working personnel in the office such as a secretary and/or a parent coordinator. Our staff in the office is bilingual (English and Spanish). Majority of our parents prefer oral and written in Spanish. The parent coordinator and ELL personnel ensure that letters, flyers, notices, and schedules are written in English and Spanish. Few students whose native language is not Spanish, we get a translated version of important letters and notices for the family. We check the student's emergency contact card, HILS, and the ATS reports to provide both written and oral communication. 2018-19 CEP 84  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Arabic French English Spanish 1 1 120 84 0.49 0.49 58.25 40.78 1 1 120 84 0.49 0.49 58.25 40.78 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. English and Spanish Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families September, November, March, May September, October, November, December, January, February, March, April, May and June September, October, November, December, January, February, March, April, May and June September, October, November, December, January, February, March, April, May and June Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. We use DOE Intranet template(s) for covered languages; we also use school staff to translate letters home. For non-covered languages, we will use translation vendor when needed. We use school-based personnel to translate the monthly school calendars. For non-covered languages, we use translation vendor when needed. We use school staff to translate the flyers and newsletters. For non-covered languages, we use translation vendor when needed. For non-covered languages, we will use a translation vendor. Letters from the principal and assistant principal, school leadership, Parent Teacher Association (PTA), and ENL Coordinator Monthly School Calendars Flyers and Newsletters IEP monthly meetings 2018-19 CEP 85  2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Parent-teacher conferences. Parent call logs by teachers on a weekly basis, arranged meetings with parents/families throughout the school year. Attendance teacher, guidance counselor, parent coordinator, and administrators calls to parents on a weekly basis curriculum nights/family nights at least once a month, NA NA September, October, November, December, January, February, March, April, May and June interpretation service(s)? All staff and teachers use over-the-phone interpretation services by calling the language line directly throughout the school year. We also have on-site qualified bilingual staff interpreters such as the parent coordinator, secretary, guidance counselors, and paraprofessionals. September, October, November, December, January, February, March, April, May and June We also have on-site qualified bilingual staff interpreters such as the parent coordinator, guidance counselors, afterschool staff, and parent volunteer NA NA NA NA 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. We reach families by backpacking letters and notices home in their preferred language and/or making phone calls using over-the-phone interpretation service. We also use bilingual school personnel available in the school building to reach out to parents through social media like Twitter. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. The Language Access Coordinator will turn key the information (policies and procedures) and materials regarding translation and interpretation services to the staff in the beginning of the school year. We will also invite Field Language Access Coordinator to provide training to our staff (secretary, teachers, paraprofessionals, and administrators). Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services 2018-19 CEP 86  Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) A Multilingual poster is displayed in front of our main office entrance to remind parents that our school can assist them in their preferred language. We have a language identification guide card on the desk to help school staff identify parents who prefer a language other than English, in case translation and interpretation service is needed. We also provide a parent whose primary language is a covered language and/or require language assistance services with a copy of the Bill of Parent Rights and responsibilities during face-to-face interaction. In addition, we will provide them with the NYCDOE website concerning the rights of parents to translation and interpretation services and how to access such services. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Speak to parents during parent teacher conference in May. Provide a language translation and interpretation survey to teachers, staff, and parents 2018-19 CEP 87 
