2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 09X361 School Name: THE HIGHBRIDGE GREEN SCHOOL Principal: KYLE BRILLANTE 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information The Highbridge Green School 09X361 6, 7, 8 School Number (DBN): 200 W. 167 th St, BRONX, NY 10452 718-410-5770 718-410-5770 Phone Number: Fax: Kyle Brillante kbrillante@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Email Address: Kyle Brillante Erin Sonoda MasineKing Billingslea Rachel Wiegand Vacancy N/A Tiffany Stewart District Information Geographical District: 09 Superintendent’s Office Address: Leticia Rodriguez Rosario Superintendent: 1245 Washington, Bronx, NY 10456 Lrosario2@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718 579 7143 Phone Number: FSC: Bronx 7184107170 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) Jose Ruiz Executive Director: 2018-19 CEP 3  Executive Director’s Office Address: 1230 Zerega Avenue, Bronx, NY Jruiz2Schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-828-776 Phone Number: none Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Kyle Brillante Erin Sonoda MasineKing Billingslea Jordana Batista Tiffany Stewart Malik Barr Graciela Pichardo Tomica Fergerson Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/UFT Member/ UFT Member/ PTA 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Tyrone Spivey Olivia Acosta Selaine Martinez Member/ PTA Member/ PTA Member/ Title 1 Rep Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? 1. We will equip our students with the skills, attitudes and knowledge necessary to have and make successful choices about high school, college and careers. We will do this by providing learning experiences that are relevant to our students’ identities, adolescent development and social context. This means that our students will receive a strong foundation in literacy and mathematics that will help them develop capacity for self-reflection, socio-emotional intelligence and critical analysis. These experiences will be grounded in an emotionally supportive learning community of parents, community members, staff and students that fosters academic and personal responsibility and ensures 2018-19 CEP 9  that all students succeed. Our community will recognize growth as well as achievement, empowering our students to believe that positive thinking, hope and resilience will lead to success in high school, college and careers. Our school's racial equity statement: The Highbridge Green School is a community school that serves predominantly black and brown students. We believe that students learn to navigate and "read" the world by engaging intellectually and critically with texts of all kinds (including different forms of media), as well as experiencing joy and curiosity as a part of the reading process. At our school, teachers will embed cross content literacy strategies that will allow students to talk, question, and challenge themselves and each other. Students will be able to engage regularly with attention to different audiences in formal and informal discussions. As a result students will learn to think critically about ALL academic disciplines, and teachers will continue to value and uplift their voices, to encourage authentic spirits. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. At our school, there will be three components essential to this vision: Advisory Program, Academic Curriculum and Professional Development Program. Our Advisory Program is the vehicle through which our students will develop social and emotional skills to make successful choices about their future. A strong Academic Curriculum and skill base will be paramount in ensuring that our students make successful choices about their futures. In order to prepare our students for the rigors of the 21st century, our curriculum will exhibit several key qualities. It will be Common Core Learning Standards aligned, research based, uniform and consistently implemented across grades and teachers and supported by a periodic assessment and student tracking system. Implementation of the Common Core across all subjects and units will not be a matter of mere compliance, but of strategy. The CCLS emphasis on college and career readiness is well-aligned with our mission of developing students’ ability to make choices. Furthermore, incorporating periodic and formative assessments in reading, writing and math will allow us to effectively identify and track students who need intervention and enrichment services. We prioritize the consistent implementation of a research-based curriculum so that we can focus our time on quality instruction. Additionally, because our students enter our school with a variety of academic gaps, it’s integral to our mission to accelerate their growth, providing differentiated opportunities in the classroom to meet their diverse needs. Our participation through the Middle School Quality Initiative and Learning Partners program highlights our recognition that grade-level reading is paramount for our children to succeed in college and the workforce. We split the double block of English into two sections: one aligned to Expeditionary Learning, and the other aligned to small-group reading called “Strategic Reading.” The latter block allows students to work in smaller reading sections on their level. Our lowest readers receive Just Words and LLI guided reading instruction while our highest level readers engage in self-selected book clubs. Our goal is to focus Professional Development initiatives on instruction and the development of teacher-leaders. If we do not focus on regularly helping our teachers be effective, then we will not be able to ensure that our students learn the core knowledge and skills to make choices about their futures. This means that professional development can be executed in a meaningful way, without rushing through material in order to address other responsibilities. It also 2018-19 CEP 10  means that we will need to make frequent observations of teachers so that we have information on which to plan professional development and remain accountable to our plans. WHEDco – We are proud to meet the needs of our students through an enhanced day program through a partnership with the Women’s Housing and Economic Development Corporation (WHEDco). The program extends our students learning time by 2 hours, making the schedule for our students 8:00-5:20 PM, five days a week. Approximately 70% of our students participate, receiving an additional academic and enrichment block each day. Examples of enrichment are: dance (salsa, merengue, bachata), visual arts, dramatic arts, choral music, instrumental (keyboarding), chess, and additional gym time. Approximately 10% of our teaching staff participates in this program, giving our program a coherence and consistency with the rest of the day, alongside relationships with talented teacher artists and community members. Last year, our students put on a winter showcase and spring showcase of their talents, and our chorus was invited to participate in the Garden of Dreams Talent Show at Radio City Music Hall, and one of our students won the citywide Poetry Slam! To date, all students, staff and most families can articulate the big goals and can read JumpRope progress reports with respect to an awareness of grade-level proficiency (e.g. “I need to have a 3 or above” or “I need to be in the green” and my big goals are “to grow two years in reading, writing and math”). This is why 99% of parents on our recent learning environment survey strongly agreed or agreed that the school keeps them aware of their child’s progress. 2. Our Highbridge unicorns comprise a diverse, beautiful community. Approximately 25% of our students are English Language Learners, and approximately 28% of our students have Individualized Education Plans (IEPs), and 99% of our students receive free or reduced lunch, making us a school-wide Title 1 program. Most of our students are of Hispanic descent – of which Spanish or English is the primary language spoken at home – in particular, the Dominican Republic and Puerto Rico. We have a small minority of students from West Africa or are of West African descent, primarily Ghana and Gambia and many students that identify as African American. Our educators are equally diverse – hailing from all over the United States, with a majority calling The Bronx their homes. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. As mentioned above, we have a 25% ELL/ENL population; 28% Special Education population -- comprising the range of services, including self-contained to integrated collaborative teaching environments. Additionally, approximately 15% of our students are in temporary housing. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. 3. The elements of the capacity framework in which we have made the most progress are effective school leadership. Effective School Leadership: Our strongest vehicle for high expectations comes from our school leaders’ emphasis on communication and mutual accountability. As cited in our recent Quality review, “The principal communicates high expectations to staff and families and provides training to support them towards helping students to meet expectations for learning.” We utilize a variety of tools, including calendars, monthly progress reports, weekly academic and behavioral checks, quarterly report cards, monthly workshops, etc. to ensure that staff, parents, community members, and students thrive in an emotionally supportive, academically rigorous environment. We have excelled in this arena, communicating a strong vision according to families and teachers on our recent NYC school survey report. In addition, supportive environment significantly improved. We implemented a daily advisory program, which resulted in greater levels of trust between students and teachers. Our data on student perception survey (2017-2018) also signals growth as we saw increased levels of trust between students and teachers as a result of the daily 2018-19 CEP 11  program. Morning advisory transformed the way we begin our day, setting ourselves and our students up for success by allowing us to transition them into the school day better. Areas in which we need to strengthen: Collaborative Teachers: In order to strengthen collaboration between teachers and shift from a culture "of nice" to a culture of constructive feedback and critique that impacts kids even more, we need to build teachers' capacity to give each other feedback. We piloted Teacher Rounds, a district initiative this year, and are excited to expand it by designating space and time to support peer observation. In addition, we want to continue our equity work by deepening our work around our racial identities and privilege. Last year, this work around race and equity revealed significant gaps in adult communication skills and prejudices within our communities that we are still healing from and processing. It was not a surprise, then, that teacher to teacher trust decreased on our 2018 Learning Environment surveys. Strong Family and Community Ties: While strong family and community support has been a strength of ours as evidenced by high levels of participation and percentage of answers that were positive regarding parents’ satisfaction with their child’s education on the NYC School Survey (see questions, such as “How satisfied are you with the education your child has received this year?”) an area of focus, aligned to rigorous instruction, is to strengthen our family engagement around mathematics grade level standards. As a result, we want to do more events for families that are not academically focused on student progress. We want to have barbecues and basketball games that bring our community together. 2018-19 CEP 12  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 09X361 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 397 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 15 17 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 26 23 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 97.0% % Attendance Rate 96.0% % Reduced Lunch 21.7% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.8% 73.6% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 1.0% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 5.25 9% 44% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 28.0% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES N/A NO YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A YES N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 89 85 93.9% 1.3% 25.9% 23.9% 0.5% 1.0% 4 50% 3.7 11.5% 34% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No YES N/A N/A NO NO NO N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 13  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. Comprehensive Assessment: The school implements Common Core aligned curricula in ELA and Math, Expeditionary Learning and Connected Math, respectively. The school also implements the Next Gen science standards for science and follows the NY State Scope and Sequence for Social Studies. According to our Quality Review, our strengths are student-centered classrooms that provide multiple points of engagement and scaffolding. The impact of this work to date has been to significantly impact our students' reading comprehension, compared to the national average as measured by the DRP. For instance, our 8th graders grew an average of 8 points (in the 2017-2018 school year) as compared to 3 points nationally. More significantly, the median 8th grader, a student that has been with us for three years, grew 18.5 points compared to 11 points nationally for the same time period. Moreover, our percentage of students reading at the highest grade quartile nationally has grown more than six times its original percentage, from 6% to 38.5%. Assuming a normal variation and normal standard deviation, that means the number of students reading above grade level is 14% higher at our school than the average school. We have seen considerable success in our students' literacy growth because we do much to ensure that all our teachers see themselves as literacy teachers. We train our science and social studies teachers to incorporate research-based, literacy protocols in class to support students at decoding and comprehending complex texts. We need to be better at ensuring all our teachers view themselves as math teachers. We need to shift our mindset as adults to see math not as getting answers correct, but rather, as problem-solving and sharing strategies. We need to similarly incorporate research-based math protocols across all classrooms that will support high levels of independent, critical thinking. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified 2018-19 CEP 14  priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, students' mathematics proficiency on statewide exams will increase by 5% as a result of teacher collaboration that offers multiple opportunities for students to showcase their voice and learning. 2018-19 CEP 15  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? The creation of five early release days to support vertical planning across departments in order to share cross-content teaching practices, such as protocols for annotation across 6-8th grades all teachers 5 dates throughout the year -- tentatively schedules for September 26th, October 31st, December 19th, February 6th and April 10th The use of one circular 6 period per week to inquire about effective cross-content practices all teachers Weekly -- every Wednesday Coordinated release time for facilitators of Wednesday Meeting in order to create intervisitation and debrief schedule Teacher Facilitators Twice per month between September 4, 2018 and Principal - responsible for scheduling and coordinating for calendar approvals and SLT Literacy and Math Coaches - responsible for organizing vertical curriculum days and deliverables Facilitators -- one per grade team will facilitate the meeting and set up intervisitation schedules and debriefs between teams Prinicipal - Schedule Per diem to provide substitute coverage for teachers that need to be released to observe 3 teacher facilitators and Principal or Assistant Principal 2018-19 CEP 16 Literature to support inquiry around effective, high- impact pedagogical strategies Teachers The creation of a pacing calendar Teachers May 22, 2019 Prior to October 10, 2018 Prior to October 10, 2018 Teacher Facilitators select a list of books Secretary purchase book list for teaching staff Teacher Facilitators will draft a pacing calendar of inquiry, including dates of intervistations, teams visited, and dates of debrief 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. One teacher who will be released twice every 30 instructional days for two periods each, will send create quarterly newsletters that share with families, teachers' improvement progress in rigorous instruction. Newsletters will be distributed by these tentative Dates: November 1, 2018, January 15, 2019, April 1, 2019 and June 15, 2019. We will also invite our PTA to join us on one of the meetings/intervisitations to see the work. The tentative date will be in January after one cycle is completed. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Per diem to support teacher release time Re-alignment of circular 6 period on Wednesdays to allow for inquiry, professional study, intervisitation and debrief times OTPS to purchase books Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 2018-19 CEP 17  By January 2019, each grade team will implement one instructional protocol across all contents and complete at least two rounds of intervisitations, delivering feedback supporting teacher implementation. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Peer feedback regarding the instructional protocols Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 18  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Recent data from the Great Schools Framework survey (2017) suggests student-to-teacher relationships are an area of need. AS a result, we prioritized professional development and the implementation of a morning advisory program. As a result, we saw a tremendous increase in student-teacher trust on 2018 student perception surveys -- over 5% positive response increase. As a result, we want to continue to strengthen our advisory program by focusing on implementing a conflict resolution program. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all students will participate in conflict resolution lessons in order to strengthen relationships between students and teachers, as measured by an 3% increase in positive responses in the student-teacher relationships indicator of the student perception survey and a decrease in OORS infractions by 3%. 2018-19 CEP 19  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Development of 15 conflict resolution lessons for middle school students, adapted from Morningside restorative practices curriculum Students July-August 2018 Advisory committee will develop the lessons over the summer and compile in a workbook for use Professional Development cycle -- approximately 4 sessions -- to support the implementation of positive culture and conflict resolution in Advisory Teachers November - December 2018 Advisory Committee will lead and facilitate Implementation of advisory survey -- to be administered three times per year to allow for revision, adjustment of program Teachers Implementation of advisory observations of conflict resolution lessons Teachers Implementation of character skills assessment modeled after The Character Skills Snapshot, a research based assessment designed to show growth in 8 socio-emotional indicators Students August 2018, November 2018, February 2019 October 2018 - April 2019 October 2018, January 2019, May 2019 Advisory Committee Advisory Coach -- Cooper for helping to support Lead Advisory Teacher in weekly observations Advisor will help implement the tool three times per year during advisory to chart progress and growth 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. During our Meet the Teacher night in September we will make families aware of our advisory program and the role of the advisor. Each adult will be paired with approximately 15 kids to ensure that each child is known well. The advisor 2018-19 CEP 20  will serve as the main liasion between the school and the family and help to facilitate all communication. They will meet with the family to update them on the child's socio-emotional progress - for example, give them feedback and share self-assessment results on the school's value of grit, responsibility, and conflict resolution skills. -- during Student Led Conferences on November 28, 2018 March 27, 2019. The final May 16th meeting will be a celebration of the advisor/advisee/family relationship. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Professional development time from November - December 2018 to support implementation of the conflict resolution lessons  Release time for Lead Advisory Teacher to conduct observations  OTPS for purchasing and printing advisory handbooks for all students and teachers  OTPS for advisory coach to support implementation of advisory program and ongoing support for Lead Advisory Teacher Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, all students will participate in half of conflict resolution lessons in order to strengthen relationships between students and teachers, as measured by an advisory survey of teachers. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. NYC Student perception survey results and teacher advisory survey Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 21  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths, according to Collaborative Teachers on the Framework for Great Schools report, are our school commitment, innovation, reflective dialogue and focus on student learning and collective responsibility. While we received a proficient in this area on our recent Quality Review, we need to improve our inclusive instructional practices and our teachers' toolkit to embrace and resolve conflict so that teachers trust each other more. Recent conversations about race, equity and privilege revealed prejudices and biases that many staff have about each other, students and ways of schooling. This created conflicts, from which we are still healing. As a result, we need to strengthen this indicator by bringing teachers together across teams to give each other feedback to restore trust in each others' work, despite difference. The impact will be that teachers get more informal feedback about pedagogy and student learning will increase. The main vehicle for deepening teacher trust and collaboration will be peer observation and feedback. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all teachers will participate in quarterly intervisitations and peer feedback to improve trust between teachers, as measured by a 0.10 increase in the learning environment survey around teacher-teacher trust. 2018-19 CEP 22  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Clearly define the purpose and goals of this circular 6 weekly Wednesday meeting Teachers September 20, 2018 Principal and team facilitators Create and administer a survey in order to solicit feedback about instructional areas of growth across content areas Teachers September 20, 2018 Team facilitators Team Facilitators decide on monthly pacing calendar for observation, feedback, debrief Team Facilitators September 20, 2018 Team Facilitators Create quarterly survey to assess impact of peer observation on teacher practice and administer it quarterly Team Facilitators Adjust peer observation tool as necessary to take into account teacher feedback Teachers Allocation of one monthly professional development meeting so that teachers can debrief observations Teachers Creation of peer observation schedule where teachers are assigned observers Teachers Team Facilitators Team Facilitators Professional Development committee Team Facilitators November 6, 2018, February 6, 2019, June 6, 2019 November 6, 2018, February 6, 2019, June 6, 2019 One Wednesday per month between October 2018 and May 2019 Each quarter -- September 20, 2018, November 20, 2018, February 6, 2019, April 10, 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement 2018-19 CEP 23  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. SLT can share progress on the goal and survey results with families to promote open dialogue and trust among teachers and families in the same way that this goal will address open dialogue and trust amongst colleagues. Grade teams can share culture focus areas with families and students so that the growth is community based. Families may also be provided with additional resources during student led conferences on November 27, 2018 and March 27, 2019 around classroom cultures and initiatives that have come as a result of intervisitations. In addition, the quarterly newsletter, mentioned above, can include highlights about peer observation. As mentioned above, the PTA will be invited to participate in one cycle of intervisitations in December. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. + Monies allocated to fund coach to support meetings and per session for team facilitators + Protocols from National School Reform and excerpts from Elena Aguilar's The Art of Coaching + Weekly scheduled time during circular 6 period on Wednesdays + One monthly Wednesday during professional development to support teacher feedback + Teach Like a Champion resources + Teacher Rounds resources Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, teachers will complete two peer observation and feedback cycles as measured by the survey responses. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Intervisitation survey of teachers' observation Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 24  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Comprehensive Assessment: Areas of strength in the element according to the Great Schools Framework 2015, are teacher influence, program coherence and principal instructional leadership. Additionally, our recent Quality Review highlighted 3.4 as well-developed and 4.1 as proficient, indicating that school leaders hold staff to high expectations and give them regular feedback and observation that develops them to be highly effective teachers. Lastly, this rubric on our recent Great Schools Framework increased as a result of our strong vision; we want to continue our work on distributed leadership that all teachers have a strong vision and can talk to that. Areas of growth in the element are inclusive principal leadership and building capacity of all teachers in a distributed leadership model; doing this will increase buy-in and trust among all stakeholders about the work. The reason this is an area of growth is we anticipate future coaching vacancies and want to strengthen our team work in order to ensure that teachers are ready to move forward with leadership positions when vacancies arise. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the school will implement a distributed leadership committee, known as a planning team, that will meet twice per month to strengthen teacher input in school-level decision-making, as reflected in a 4.0 or above in trust on the Learning Environment survey. 2018-19 CEP 25  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Create a planning team of facilitators of different distributive leadership teams to come together to deliberate school wide decisions Teacher Leaders September 26, 2018 Math and Literacy Coaches Distributive leadership teams create their own mission and vision statements to align with school wide values Teachers September 26, 2018 Math and Literacy Coaches Distributive leadership teams hold independent meetings based on time need to plan and implement changes to school wide structures Teachers Bimonthly planning team meeting Teachers, students, families School Retreat to build distributive leadership across schools All staff Teachers Principal, Assistant Principal, Math and Literacy Coach, Teacher Leaders All Staff As needed, but can occur on October 31, 2018, December 19, 2018, February 6, 2019, April 10, 2019 Every other Tuesday from September 4, 2018-June 20, 2019 Friday and Saturday October 13, 14, 2018 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We will post our goals for distributed leadership in the main office and ask for their input at our monthly School Leadership Team meetings, which are held on the last Tuesday of each month from 4-5 PM. As principal, I will be key in ensuring we discuss with families and our goals are posted. 2018-19 CEP 26  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. + Scheduling for distributed leadership meetings on half days + Per session for teams to meet + Fair Student Funding for a retreat Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, the school will implement a distributed leadership committee, known as a planning team, that will have met at least 10 times, strengthening teacher input in school-level decision-making. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The meeting minutes and times met. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 27  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Comprehensive assessment: Areas of strength according to the Great Schools Framework indicate that our scores are above average in parent and teacher trust, Academic Family Teacher Teams, and parent teacher home visits, which have enabled parents to feel welcomed and build relationships with the school community. Additionally, our partnership with WHEDco, the Women’s Housing and Economic Development Corporation, has enabled us to have a full-time social worker and parent coordinator to offer workshops about IEPs, Tenant’s rights, Welfare Rights, and Immigration legislation. The impact of the latter workshops has helped to elevate the parents’ rights and access to resources, positively impacting families and students. Lastly, our school is one of eight pilot schools in the city to offer an Expanded Learning environment, wherein students remain in school from 8:20-5:20PM every day. WHEDco offers a host of additional academic and arts enrichment programs to students between the hours of 2:50 -5:20 PM that keep students engaged and helps families work longer so they do not have to provide for childcare. Areas of growth include teacher outreach to parents and parent involvement in the school. We want to build on our successes with WHEDco to build relationships with the community so that we increase the amount of families that feel welcome in our school. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we will strengthen family relationships by having one non-academic family event per marking period as measured by a 3% increase in family attendance. 2018-19 CEP 28  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Hire a parent coordinator Families Determine a schedule of non-academic family events by each grade team Use of Kinvolved messanger system to communicate actively with families Teachers Families Monthly PTA executive board meetings with principal to solicit feedback about non-academic events Families Budget money for each team to spend on a non-academic event Families Principal Team Facilitators Principal Principal Principal Post the position in July 2018 and hire someone full time by September 2018 September 20, 2018 September 2018-June 2019 First Friday of every month One non-academic event per quarter; one before November 1, 2018, one before February 6, 2019, one before April 10, 2019 and one before June 20, 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement 2018-19 CEP 29  If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. WHEDco, The Women's Health and Economic Development Corporation of the South Bronx. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. + Parent Coordinator + Expanded Learning Time funding from New York State to provide monies for supplies, food for four events + Time during family engagement time to plan for activities Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP X Title I TA C4E 21st Century Grant SIG Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, we will strengthen family relationships by having hosted two non-academic family events as measured by a 3% increase in family attendance. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. PCAR report and family attendance data. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 30  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Below a 2.0 in JumpRope, scoring below a 1.7 on State Exam, below 45 in DRP Below a 2.0 in JumpRope, scoring below a 1.7 on State Exam Below a 2.0 in JumpRope, scoring in the bottom 10% on writing baseline MOSL Below a 2.0 in JumpRope, scoring in the bottom 10% on SS baseline MOSL Below a 2.0 in JumpRope, persistently low checks or more than three referrals For writing: Wednesday after school Hochman Writing Boot camp – offered for two hours For reading: below 45 – additional reading intervention For numeracy/automaticity issues: iReadyMath For connected math/problem solving: Tutorials Writing: small group tutoring and conferencing Reading: small group tutoring or Wilson program For writing: after school, Saturday school For reading: during the day during Strategic Reading and after school For numeracy/automaticity issues: small group tutoring and conferencing For numeracy/automaticity issues: during the day, after school, Saturday School Small group During lunch and before school during breakfast; during class. During lunch and before school during breakfast; during class. Tutorials Small group At risk counseling, parent-teacher- administration conference, behavioral contracts, conduct One-on-one or small groups During the day, after school, before school 2018-19 CEP 31  sheet, boys club/girls club intervention 2018-19 CEP 32  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) Currently, 14% of our student population is in temporary housing. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Services offered are: Provide families with support services and referrals to outside agencies through our full-time social worker Provide families with counseling and individual and family counseling, especially around challenges in transition Provide families extended day opportunities, including three meals a day -- students can remain with us from 7:50 AM until 5:20 PM Provide families with attendance support and transportation vouchers Provide families free eye care Partner with Legal Aid to provide information and resources through targeted workshops and outreach Provide pickup opportunities to ensure that children attend school Provide families access to free uniforms, medical care, and groceries -- through our community based organization, WHEDco, access to guidance programs, and Saturday School for intervention services. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 33  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 CEP 34  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Funds are allocated to fund instructional coaches and a coaching team of peer-instructional teachers whose purpose is to help support teachers in the creation of Common Core aligned curricula and give them observational feedback about instructional next steps that will support strategies for effective instruction. Observational feedback and professional development is aligned to the school’s goals in Danielson 3C and based on teacher observation. All teachers are assigned according to their credentials. For instance, if a teacher has a certification in Social Studies, the teacher teaches Social Studies. Teacher performance is celebrated by honoring perfect attendance, Danielson growth (i.e. moving from Developing to Effective), contributions to the professional community through certificates, shout outs, sharing of best practices – all strategies designed to promote retention and celebration of achievement. In addition, we have a Sunshine committee whose purpose is designed to celebrate and honor life events of staff, promoting good will. Information sessions are held to invite prospective teachers to learn more about the school, and partnerships with Teach For America and the Department of Education help to identify highly-qualified candidates. Recruitment fairs are also attended at local colleges, including but not limited to Teachers College, Bank Street, Lehman College, and Brooklyn College. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development 2018-19 CEP 35  Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Participation in city/curricular and Bronx Field support center professional development by allocating per-diem funds, and reorganization of schedules so that teachers and staff can attend. In addition, weekly professional development will be offered aligned to the Danielson rubric and based on teacher observations using the Danielson rubric. Resources from the Bronx Borough Field Support Center and the Danielson Study Component Guides will guide weekly professional development with teachers. Differentiated professional development will look like providing adults choice through participation in professional learning communities based on advance scores. For example, based on distribution of Advance scores, professional learning committees will exist in discussion, engagement, and creating a respectful learning environment. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Our school’s Measures of Learning Committee met over the summer to jointly and collaboratively decide on the benchmark assessments the school would use to measure student learning and teacher effectiveness. This same committee also serves as the professional development committee, which meets weekly on Mondays from 3-4 PM to discuss, implement, and support effective professional development. Through our collaboration, we selected three school-wide benchmark assessments to measure our progress towards reading, writing and math goals. Professional development is adult-centered and modeled after professional learning communities wherein staff uses their teacher evaluation feedback (Advance) to select high leverage communities rooted in a component of Danielson. For example, 2018-19 CEP 36  a teacher rated developing or ineffective in Danielson 3B – Questioning and Discussion, would work in a Danielson 3B professional learning community to study different discussion techniques that would lead to meeting “effective” or “highly effective” on the Danielson rubric. Therefore, teacher observation cycles follow and flow from professional learning cycles, and drive the content of the professional learning cycles in which teachers participate. Additionally, unit level common assessment drives the adjustment of units of study - resulting in unit level adjustment and the incorporation of low mastery standards. Benchmark data results in regrouping and reprogramming of students into different reading and math periods, and adjustments to units and after school interventions with Accelerated math. Lastly, as part of our ongoing collaboration with PROSE we have implemented PROSE Distributed leadership and are excited to pioneer a Steering committee of instructional leads that will meet weekly with administration to decide on and disseminate instructional and operational change/support within the school. The school will fund this initiative with a generous grant from the UFT. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) 5A-E NA 5A-E NA 5A-E Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 407745 0 12,366.00 0 3100105 x NA x NA x 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. 2018-19 CEP 37  Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 38  2018-19 CEP 39  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. 09X361, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. The Highbridge Green School will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 2018-19 CEP 40  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 2018-19 CEP 41  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) Template School-Parent Compact (SPC) 09X361, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for 2018-19 CEP 42  improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; 2018-19 CEP 43  ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year as part of Academic Parent Teacher Teams during student led conferences. Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities 2018-19 CEP 44  ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; 2018-19 CEP 45  ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 46  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP 47  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: The Highbridge Green School is a middle school in the Bronx where students love to engage in debate regarding current national conversations such as, "Are Green Technologies worth the investment?" or "Should drug companies be allowed to advertise prescription drugs on television?". Our ELLs need additional support and this is where the Title III program, entitled "ELLs Debate at The Highbridge Green School" will bridge this gap. The program will be scheduled for Saturdays between the hours of 9:00am-2:00pm. Research shows that ELLs acquire aspects of the English language more quickly for more of a "survival" basis but the true understanding of another langauge through more experienced vocabulary could take between 5-7 years (Baker, 2011) The rationale for this Saturday Academy is twofold: 1) to address the needs of Long Term ELLs who've plateaued at the Expanding Level. We've noticed that a key difference between Expanding and Commanding Level ELLs is the ability to write a variety of complex sentences. In light of this, we've invited these Expanding Long Term ELLs to the academy to receive direct instruction using Hochman Writing strategies to develop their academic writing in the content areas 2) to develop vocabulary of Entering/Emerging/Transitioning ELLs through mini- debates using the Word Generation program. Word Generation is a program designed to increase student vocabulary. The Word Generation topics are interesting, debatable articles that allow for students to be able to use accountable talk in mini debates. Research shows that "Oral language proficiency refers to the ability to use vocabulary and grammar of English to produce oral messages. This ability is critical for effective oral communication, reading texts, and writing. As English Language Learners ability to understand new language that they hear and their receptive vocabulary increase they begin to speak (Levine, 1995). Research also states that, "As [English language learners] vocabularies increase, so does their world knowledge, which results in improved reading comprehension and better overall performance (the Matthew Effect)" (Lehr, Osborn, & Heibert, 2004). This Saturday ENL Academy will be administered by two certified ENL teachers and one Special Education teacher. This ENL Academy will be a nineteen-week program administered entirely in English designed to help the Entering/Emerging/Transitioning and Long-Term Expanding ELLs Language Proficiency Levels. It will be conducted on Saturday and run from 9:00am-2:00pm. There will be 14 sessions at 4 hours each with 4 teachers for a total of $ 12,615.00. The sessions will begin the week of November 6, 2018 and last until the week of March 15, 2019. Twenty-two Expanding Long Term ELLs ranging from 6th, 7th, and 8th grades and thirty Newcomer and Developing ELLs that have placed Entering/Emerging/Transitioning in the 6th and 7th grades. The target population for the Title III program will be selected using the following criteria: Performance at the Entering/Emerging/Transitioning Level on the NYSESLAT and 6th and 7th year of ELL status at the Expanding Level ELL students will receive one hour of explicit language instruction utilizing iReady Reading, Leveled Literacy Instruction (Middle School Quality Initiative) to target needs of 2018-19 CEP 48  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Entering/Emerging ELLs. The start date of the program will begin in November and the program will end in May. The total number of sessions will be approximately 20. The language of instruction will be in English. Students will be grouped in small groups of approximately 15 students in order to minimize teacher to student ratios. The instructional time for students will be approximately 180 minutes or three hours. Students will have reading, writing, and iReady time, as well as physical education. Records will be kept on Saturdays, including a roster and attendance sheet where a teacher will follow up with absent students by calling and sending home letters to document attendance. All communication will be translated in Spanish to ensure families understand. Materials needed are the following and are the same for daily instruction (i.e. not supplemental): iReady subscriptions/licenses Headphones, bilingual dictionaries iPads/Computers to use the iReady program and to research debate topics Time for Kids magazine subscription Word Gen debate binders Laminating paper for flash cards Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: We will do three continuing professional development workshops throughout the Title III program. Research shows that “Professional development in culturally diverse schools assumes that combining content, ESL, and bilingual teachers would make complementary knowledge and perspectives available to everyone” (Adger & Clair, 1999; Clair, 1998; Gonzalez & Darling-Hammond, 1997). This exchange of knowledge is the benchmark for a successful Title III program. One primary way we develop ourselves professionally is to conduct inquiry. Last year and continuing in the future, we aim to use the Teacher Rounds model to conduct professional inquiry with our social studies department on our ENL student progress. Last year, for example, our ENL teacher used circular 6 professional meeting time to support content Social Studies teachers' with instructional techniques to build our students' speaking and writing abilities. Over the course of the year, she met once per week with teams and led them through brief inquiry cycles that included her own observational notes from students' speaking and writing production in class. Teachers then trialed instructional tools and strategies and measured their impact on students. We will continue that inquiry work in the future. Sample topics that will be covered include the following: #1 What Research Says: How Well Children Learn New Words. #2 ELL Data in Reading and Writing: How to Close the Achievement Gap. #3 Questioning and Discussion Techniques and Academic Discourse for ELLs. " The PDs will be open to the ELL teachers participating in the Title III program as well as the administrator in charge. Proposed Dates are Fridays beginning on October 12th and lasting from October 12th through December 14th . Agenda: Norming writing benchmarks and adjusting curricula for writing benchmarks and writing and vocabulary strategies. The PD will be provided at no cost. 2018-19 CEP 49  Part C: Professional Development Attendance sheets with minutes will be maintained on Google documents and available to anyone. PD will be conducted by Erin Sonoda, ELL Coordinator. We anticipate that PD will positively impact kids because it will broaden adults' capacities to be teachers of reading and writing by giving them specific strategies to help students access material better. Ms. Sonoda will have access to ongoing PD from the Field Support Center, and attended summer PD from MSQI (Middle School Quality Initiative). Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Parents are invited to work alongside their children during the Saturday, Title III program. This will create a unique partnership between parents and ELL teachers. The purpose is to give parents tools and strategies to help their child meet one or two school-wide goals. The parents will be invited to engage in discussion about the debate topics and invited to attend a session to explain the rationale and logistics of the ELL Saturday programming. Parents will also be asked to review flash cards with students at home in preparation, and to sustain their work in vocabulary acquisition, debate and writing in the Saturday program. Parents will be notified of all activities through school wide posters, backpack letters, and auto-attendant reminders in their native language. Parents will also participate in the end of program culminating event. In addition, parents of the ELLs students will be invited to a parent night in November -- we tentatively have scheduled it for November 14th -- to share within each other's cultures and understand the different literacy strategies that will be happening for their children on Saturdays. This will be a way for parents to work together and get to know their child's teachers and other family and community members. Then at the end of the school year, parents will be invited back to see a showcase of students' work that they have completed throughout the school year. Logistics We will utilize native Spanish speakers or translators from The Big Word to help translate all communication and be present at all events to ensure there is proper translation. The workshop providers are our ELL Coordinator, Erin Sonoda, certified DOE teacher. Topics discussed are mentioned above and include vocabulary strategies and logisitcs of the program. Meeting agendas, sign in sheets, and attendance will be maintained by the ELL coordinator and secretary in the main office to ensure compliance protocols are adhered to. 2018-19 CEP 50 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. 150 hours Per session for two ENL teachers to complete Saturday ENL Academy from 9-2 to provide supplemental instruction for 20 Saturdays (75 hours per session per instructor) NA $500 - Materials and supplies, including food to support family event in November for ENL families $2000 - Spanish language books and curricular resources for ENL classrooms NA NA Funds set aside for field trips, restaurants and excursions to support curricular units NA Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) 8000  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff NA and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 1736 NA NA 1866 NA 2018-19 CEP 51  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 09 School Name The Highbridge Green School Borough Bronx School Number 361 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Mr. Kyle Brillante Coach Mr. Rob Lacolla ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Ms. Johanna Marte Teacher/Subject Area Ms Erin Sonoda/ENL Teacher/Subject Area Ms. Celenia Nivar/SpED Related-Service Provider Ms. Stacey McElroy Superintendent Ms. L. Rosario Assistant Principal Ms. Anna Waters Coach Ms. Amy Liff School Counselor Ms. Tiffany Nieves Parent Ms. Selaine Martinez Parent Coordinator n/a Field Support Center Staff Member Ms. Sabrina Cruz Other (Name and Title) N/a C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 2 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 398 2018-19 CEP 52 Total number of ELLs 85 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 21.36%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): none If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 3 2 4 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 5 0 6 0 7 0 8 0 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Assessment tools Highbridge Green School uses to assess the early literacy skills of our ELLs are the following: Degrees of Reading Power (DRP), Fountas & Pinnell, WIST/TOWSRF, Word Generation vocabulary assessment, a HBGS Argument Writing performance assessment, ELA iReady assessments and the NYSESLAT. These are literacy based assessments and we also assess the students on their math skills through the Math iReady assessment. These assessments are administered school-wide to ELLs and Non-ELLs. The data from these assessments is highly useful because ELL performance on these assessments is demonstrative of the types of literacy support they’ll need in order to access content and successfully achieve in the classroom. For example, if a student scores below a 45 on the DRP, it signifies that the student might require instruction in decoding and phonemic awareness. If a student scores above 45, but does not score at grade level, then this can signify that the student will benefit from instruction in comprehension strategies. Similarly, the running records (Fountas & Pinnell) administered give us insight into the types of errors a student makes while reading a text. The running records also impart information about a student’s level of comprehension. These data, combined with performance on the NYSESLAT, guide 2018-19 CEP 53  programmatic decisions for our ELLs. To illustrate, an ELL who scores below a 45 on the DRP and scores a G, for example on an F&P running record, who placed Entering or Emerging on the NYSESLAT, will be programmed in a Stand-alone ENL class for Beginner/Entering, Low Intermediate/Emerging students. In addition, similarly performing ELLs and non-ELLs (within a range-not homogeneous), are scheduled to be part of a Strategic Reading group where the ENL/ELA teacher will focus on specific instructional strategies that will support students to simultaneously acquire language and develop literacy skills. Similarly, we have programmed ELLs for strategic numeracy class that target the math skills that they need to develop. In other words, ELLs that have similar scores on the Math iReady assessment will be placed homogeneously with other students that also need to develop the same skills. When the data from these assessments are analyzed it provides a holistic profile of the ELL that helps us to arrange the most effective class groupings and instructional strategies geared to address the areas ELLs need to develop. The HBGS Argument writing performance assessment is used to analyze ELL and non-ELL student writing. All these assessments are administered three times annually: once in the fall, once in the winter, and the final assessment in the spring. The average growth in writing (as measured by the argument writing performance rubric) for all students at HBGS was 1.00 points. This reflects that students made growth by one whole rubric category. Our overall ELLs average growth was .97 points. The average growth in writing for the Entering and Emerging Level ELLs (6th & 7th graders) was 1.11 points. The average growth in writing for all our Transitioning ELLs (6th, 7th & 8th graders) was .84 points. The average growth in writing for our Expanding population was .86 points. The overall growth for sixth grade ELLs was 1.09 points; seventh grade ELLs was .84 points and eighth grade ELLs grew .91 points. The average growth in reading (as measured by the Degrees of Reading Power assessment) for all students at HBGS was 7.08 points. In order to show two whole years worth of growth a student would have to show growth of 8 full points or reach grade level expectations. The average growth in reading for our ELLs was 8.09 points. The average growth in reading for the Entering and Emerging level ELLs (6th and 7th graders only) was 6.86 points. The average growth in reading for all of our Transitioning ELLs (6th, 7th and 8th graders) was 5.06 points. The average growth in writing for all of our Expanding population was 9.43 points. The overall growth for 6th grade ELLs in reading was 7.58 points; 7th grade ELLs was 7.09 points; and 8th grade ELLs grew 8.00 points overall. These data inform our instructional plan for ELLs. ELLs are registered into Strategic Reading groups and/or tutoring with 1:4 teacher to student ratio (within the school day and during extended day) that will meet their literacy needs so that they can achieve CCLS in literacy. These Strategic Reading Groups will meet 5x/week for 45 minutes. The data from these assessments also provide insight into which ELLs will benefit from instructional software such as iReady ELA and targeted instruction during our Strategic Reading classes. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? At HBGS, the students do each of these assessments at the beginning, mid-year and end of the year to monitor their growth. Students, both ELLs and non-ELLs, are able to monitor their growth through one to one conferences with their teachers after each assessment. During these one to one conferences the teacher and student develop a plan to achieve their two years of growth. For example, a teacher and a student can agree that the student will read a certain amount of books over a set period of time, and develop vocabulary through our Word Generation program. These assessments also form teacher's instruction. The population for our strategic reading classes is determined by these assessments. Students with similar reading levels will be placed together to better accommodate their needs in either phonemic awareness, comprehension, or basic English language skills. Teachers also use the results from these assessments to determine different instructional strategies for the classroom. Teacher might pull a smaller group of students to read a difficult text aloud, or define certain vocabulary words depending on their scores on these assessments. Teachers might also level different texts or have differentiated assessment tasks for students based on the assessment data. All staff spends time during Professional Development to review the results from these assessments. There is plenty of time for teachers to review all of the data for the whole school. We create a few instructional strategies in smaller groups to help different groups of students including ELLs. All content area teachers including ENL and SpEd teachers meet twice a week to discuss student work in both literacy/math and content inquiry teams. During these meetings teachers create new strategies to promote the reading and writing growth for all students. These meetings is driven by the data gleaned from the assessments and student work. During these meetings teachers look for trends within common core standards and identify 2018-19 CEP 54  standards that students need the most growth. These standards drive the team to create instructional strategies to target these common core aligned skills. Students who are identified as "at risk" in their literacy skills are placed into an intervention program that takes place either during the school day or after school. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? As The Highbridge Green School we are always reflecting on ways to develop our language with the support of administration and teacher teams, we have developed what the best program options would be for our ELLs while at the same time adhering to the New York State mandates within a program option. For the 2016-2017 academic year, we have established a formidable ENL program. Depending on the language proficiency level of an ELL, and their parent program choice, an ELL will receive the mandated number of ENL, or Integrated ENL units of study. In the Integrated ENL classes there will be two teachers delivering instruction, one ENL certified teacher, and one certified content area teacher (Social Studies/Science/Arts program) where the teachers will deliver a network of scaffolds through ESL methodologies for the ENL students. In addition, all ELLs are part of a Strategic Reading class that specializes in honing in on their specific reading needs, whether it is comprehension, decoding, etc. The goal is to increase their reading proficiency by two years and/or bring their reading level to actual grade level. To this end, the Highbridge Green School has implemented Word Generation to focus on building academic vocabulary. Word Generation has updated it's program to include ELL resources. During literacy inquiry and content inquiry, weekly PDs, teacher teams share and formulate best practices across the content areas. They include strategies such as annotating and using a reciprocal teaching chart to build comprehension of higher-level texts. All literacy teachers also employ close reading protocols alongside of sustained small group discussion to facilitate understanding of complex level text and orally develop their argument/position on a subject. These small group discussions work as a scaffold to prepare students to construct an argument in writing whereby students develop a claim and support it with evidence. All students across all content areas are working on these three reading and writing learning outcomes. In other words, our reading and writing rubrics are uniform across literacy content areas. All classes are equipped with bilingual dictionaries and computers where teachers can access programs that help ELL students access the material. In 2016-2017, ELL students who require more focused decoding and phonemic awareness instruction will benefit from homogeneous strategic reading classes, MSQI's Leveled Literacy Intervention or LLI, iReady for ELA and our continued monitoring of assessments such as, DRP, WIST/TOWSRF, iReady ELA/Math assessments, argument writing, Word Generation assessment, Fountas & Pinnell and NYSESLAT. These assessments are listed above as formative and are also summative because they determine whether students meet their two year growth goals in reading, writing and math.To assess student progress, teachers meet once a week for 45 minutes in either department/team meetings or literacy inquiry teams to analyze student work against rubrics designed by the state and teachers (ELA, NYSESLAT rubrics) and grade level assessments to gauge what the next instructional steps will be to support all students, especially ELLs and SWD and their subgroups. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Structures in place to address interventions once the summative data is gathered: - Students are placed in either an ENL stand alone class, ENL integrated class or ICT class to address their needs based on the summative assessments. Within this setting, students receive smaller student to teacher ratio which is given through team teaching. Team teaching provides ELLs and SWD with differentiated rubrics and instructional strategies based on students' needs. If a student requires further intervention, they are placed in small group reading and math classes homogeneously with a specific focus to help develop these specific needs. Students are also given opportunities for peer to peer tutoring in either math or ELA. If issues exists for students that have different socio-emotional struggles that impact their academic success there are programs during our CBO or after school program that provides an opportunity for students to participate in restorative justice practices. If students still need additional interventions, a tertiary level of support is to provide the student with one to one reading intervention. one to one data conferences with students - Strategic Reading class that address their specific literacy needs - intervention based on need with smaller class instruction 2018-19 CEP 55  5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] The Highbrige Green School is a 6-8 middles school. However, we do offer ELLs and non-ELLs alike focused support in their reading skills through our Strategic Reading instructional model. ELLs are grouped with ELLs and non-ELLs in groups that speak to their particular need/challenge. They are serviced by ENL teachers and content area teachers through a co-teaching model and are frequently monitored in order gauge effectiveness of strategies being used in the classroom. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The Highbridge Green School opened the year that the NYSITELL replaced the Language Aptitude Battery-revised or LAB-r. In it’s first year, the Highbridge Green School did not matriculate any new ELLs. In other words, there were no new ELLs from another state or country that were entered HBGS in 2015 up until 2017 school year. On account of this phenomenon, the NYSITELL has yet to be administered to an eligible, new entrant at the HBGS. As such, there is no NYSITELL data. On the other hand, all ELLs were administered the NYSESLAT in the spring of 2016 and the spring of 2017. The NYSESLAT data for the Spring of 2017 shows that our Entering ELLs account for 2% of our total ELL population and Emerging ELLs account for 5% of our total ELL population. Transitioning Level ELLs account for 20% of our total ELL population. Expanding level ELLs account for 68% of our total ELL population. In 2017, 58 students placed Expanding, 17 students placed Transitioning, 4 students placed at Emerging Level and 2 students place Entering level. There are 19 students placed Commanding (22.35%). Our 2017 data reveals that our Entering students are in 6th grade. At the Emerging Level, students are mostly in 6th grade (75% of Emerging Level students are in 6th grade), with one ELL Emerging student at the 8th grade level (self-contained, IEP student). At the Transitioning level, 53% are 6th graders, 41% are 7th graders, and 5% are 8th graders. At the Expanding Level, 24% are 6th graders, while 41% are 7th graders and 34% are 8th graders. Of all of these students, 36% moved up 1 language proficiency level, 5% moved up 2 proficiency language level and 22% scored Commanding. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? -FTT meetings (Family Teacher Team meetings happen 3 times annually where multiple families within a class are able to meet and discuss the class's data as a whole. Students with their families are able see how each student does against the whole class. The teachers always prepare a game for the family to play at home that targets a specific math/literacy skill. The families are given time to play the game and spend time with other families.) - Student led conferences with family - Promotion in Doubt (PID) letters - Data letters with all of the student's scores from baseline-endline testing are translated and sent home for parents - look at the data in PD and in grade wide teams- 7th grade literacy made changes - SR conferences - celebrations for growth/high achievement - teachers compare data from beginning of the year to end of the year - create changes for instruction based on growth - adjustments from stand alone ENL to integrated class - Standards Based Grading with JumpRope software where families are able to access their student's progress Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). 2018-19 CEP 56  a. Freestanding ENL program. For the 2017-2018 academic year ENL instruction will be delivered according to the new changes as per CR Part 154.2. In large part, ENL students will receive instruction through a block schedule model. ENL classes will be ungraded and heterogeneous. ELL students that place in the Beginner/Entering and Emerging and (some) Intermediate/Transitioning on the Spring 2017 NYSESLAT will receive ENL instruction in a Stand-Alone ENL classroom for 60 minutes/day, 5x/week, and one extra 60 minute period 1x/week for a total of 360 minutes/week. These ELLs will also receive 45 minutes/day, 5x/week of ELA instruction with a certified ELA teacher and a certified ENL teacher in a mixed level Strategic Reading class for a total of 225 minutes/week. These students are also co-taught Social Studies and/or science by certified content area teacher and a certified ENL teacher for 60 minutes each 5x/week totaling 600 minutes/week. ELLs who place Intermediate/Transitioning will receive Integrated ENL in the Social Studies core content through a team teach model with one ENL certified teacher and one Social Studies certified teacher for 60 minutes/day, 4x/week for a total of 240 minutes. In addition, the ELLs who place Intermediate/Transitioning will also receive ENL instruction in a Strategic Reading class with a certified ENL teacher for 45 minutes/day, 5x/week for a total of 225 minutes or social studies/science push-in, integrated support depending on programming and availability. Students who place Advanced/Expanding (and some Proficient/Commanding) will receive Integrated ENL through the Social Studies or Science core content for 60 minutes/day for three times a week in a co-taught setting. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A: c. DL program. If applicable. N/A: 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? The organization of our staff ensures that the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to the proficiency levels of each program model. Since we’ve incorporated a block schedule, ELL students travel together with the exception of the Strategic Reading classes, which are designed for students with similar literacy skills to receive support from an ELA/ENL certified teacher. In this way (as a block schedule), students are ensured to receive their proficiency level minutes from a team-teach model in the core content area: mainly Social Studies (as an Integrated ENL model), while the Beginner/Entering and emerging ELLs are ensured explicit ENL instruction in a Stand-alone ENL class. All HBGS core content classes will meet for 60 minutes/day, 5x/week totaling 240 minutes. All Strategic Reading classes are scheduled for 45 minutes/per day, 5x/week for a total of 225 minutes. Beginner/Entering and Emerging Level ELLs, whom are required to receive 2 units of ENL instructional time receive an extra block of ENL standalone instruction . Therefore they have 60 minutes 5x/week with an additional 60 minutes 1x/week totally in 360 minutes of stand alone ENL instruction. This is in line with the 360 mandated minutes that Beginner level ELLs are to receive and using the .5 units of flexible time for Emerging students as ENL standalone class. Intermediate/Transitioning and Advanced/Expanding ELL students receive 60 minutes/day three times per week in team-teach Social studies class for a total 180 minutes/week. These same students also receive a 45 minute period of reading class 5x/week totalling in 225 minutes per week or an additional integrated ESL coteaching class in science, depending on programming and availability. These ELL students are provided structures wherein to receive the mandated number of instructional minutes for the varied language proficiency levels as per CR part 154. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. The content areas are delivered in accordance to an ENL instructional model. In the Integrated ENL model (ELA, Social Studies, Science, and Arts at HBGS), the content is delivered through a co-teaching model with one content certified teacher and an ENL certified teacher. The Stand-alone ENL class is delivered by an ENL certified teacher. The Stand-alone class is smaller than a core content class in order to ensure that Entering and Emerging ELLs are effectively supported in their language acquisition. HBGS teachers use a variety of instructional approaches used in both Integrated ENL and Stand-alone ENL classes. 2018-19 CEP 57  Some of these instructional approaches are interactive- where the teacher(s) will use debates (Word Generation national debates), peer practice with complex texts, small group discussions, role-playing and co-operative learning groups to build background knowledge or so that ELLs are able to gain deeper meaning from readings. Other instructional approaches are direct, where the teacher(s) will use demonstrations, explicit teaching, and guides or checklists for reading, listening, or viewing. Teachers also incorporate graphic organizers created in the Literacy Inquiry team and content inquiry to support student writing and help them access higher level texts. Teachers also use experiential learning approaches where students construct experiments and build models (i.e the cell in 6th grade science). Teachers also incorporate indirect instructional approaches by using concept webbing/mapping to form big ideas around a unit theme, and use the reciprocal teaching chart and close reading protocol to build a framework to access meaning from texts that increase in complexity. In addition, Teaching Assistants are trained in MSQI's Leveled Literacy Intervention program. There are a small groups of students that are given time within the school day to focus on certain reading strategies that they each need additional support. In all classes in HBGS there are several bilingual dictionaries for student use and many instructional teachers will provide glossaries for all students to access difficult vocabulary in different content areas. Teachers also incorporate independent studies where students work to write essays on a researched topic related to a unit theme and construct an essay where they establish a claim and do research to support their positions on an issue. Students may also be asked to enter into a learning contract where they independently revise previous work to a gain a step up on a rubric category. Core content is delivered through multiple instructional approaches. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Within the HBGS ENL model, the Home Language is used at the beginning of the year for scaffolding purposes. However, ELLs do not have a home language assessment as we do not have a TBE program. We do administer the Spanish LAB, if the student's home language is Spanish, to determine the student's Spanish language proficiency when they first enter HBGS as a new entrant into the NYC DOE. Additionally, we administer the LENS and SIFE questionnaire for new entrants. This gives us insight into the child’s literacy level in their home language and if there was any formal interruption in their education. As per CR Part 154, all ELLs, are granted the use of simultaneous use of English and alternative language editions (with the exception of ELA and Foreign Language examinations). 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status As much as possible all students are expected to meet grade level standards and above where relevant. Since students do not have identical backgrounds, it is important that we consider the learning profiles of our ELLs. a) To date we have 4 SIFE students that are ELLs, 1 is an Entering level ELL and 2 are Commanding level ELLs as of the 2017 NYSESLAT, and 1 SIFE Long-Term Level ELLs. These students receive small group instruction during Strategic Reading, core class (w/ENL teacher), and/or in the ENL Stand-alone class. They are also supported in the content areas through co-teaching model. These students are also afforded extra time to complete projects/assessments as per CR Part 54 regarding ELL Testing Accommodations. A network of scaffolds and support are integrated into lessons so that students are able to access support. All students also benefit from our advisory time, where students have an opportunity to bond with other peers and their advisors to support their social emotional development. In addition, awards ceremony are held every 6 weeks for those students who have shown progress in one of our school core character values: grit, responsibility, empathy, enthusiasm and/or inspiration. This time to recognize their efforts and contributions either within an academic realm, personal development, or contribution to their class communities is important because it cultivates a school culture of inclusivity amongst a varied student body. b) Newcomer ELLs are expected to meet the same standards as all students. In order to achieve this goal, we make sure to reach out to the parents of ELLs and impart information regarding our school goals and what they can do at home to help support their child’s progress in school and language acquisition. A letter sent home detailing different strategies they can use to help support their child’s academic progress is to ask about their school day, to fill out an application for a library card to the local public library, to allot a special time in the day for them to read and to encourage conversation regarding what they’re reading. The ENL team is also designing trips that speak both to content areas and integrate cultural values, in this way, they learn about their 2018-19 CEP 58  new country while also not losing their own cultural heritage/language. Newcomer ELLs also receive Stand-alone ENL classes to support their work in content area classes and their English language acquisition. During extended-day they also have the opportunity to take part in visual arts class, dance class, chess club or a sports activity that will their social development as they are engaging with their peers outside of an academic class structure. c) ELLs receiving 4-6 years of service are afforded receive the same support as all students are receiving, however, their support is tailored to their needs which we assess through assessments such as the Degrees of Reading Power, in-house Common Interim Assessments (CIA), Fountas & Pinnel running records, and Word Generation vocabulary assessments, parent outreach/workshops to teach parents literacy tasks they can do at home with their child, and after school programming where they are tutored in groups of four by a tutor trained in the Harvard Reading Labs program, specific ENL after school programming, development of teacher strategies through PD, and analysis of their progress through the literacy inquiry team and department/team meetings. We also incorporate technology (iReady ELA/Math and Rosetta Stone) resources as provided by our network and through collaboration with teachers and teacher teams. d) Long term ELLs benefit from all supports that all students have access to, in addition, they will be supported with NYSESLAT test prep so that students are informed about the test structure and what is expected of them in regards to performance. Long term ELLs will benefit from reviewing the rubrics and looking at their level patterns since they matriculated into the NYC DOE as an ELL. Many will find that they are proficient in Speaking and Listening and Advanced in Reading and Writing. This analysis of their levels throughout the years will them help understand where they might not be performing as they should be on the Reading and Writing sections of the NYSESLAT. e) Former ELLs are afforded with the same testing accommodations they had as when they still had ELL status. Former ELLs also have access to all other supports provided to all students during the school day and during extracurricular activities. In addition, they’ll receive instruction in the Social Studies from a team-teach model where one teacher is Social Studies certified and the other is ENL certified. Many Former ELLs also are afforded extended time on state tests and other assessments as needed. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Instructional strategies and grade-level materials teachers of ELLs and ELLs-SWD use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development are: - Unpacking the Learning Target - Annotation strategies- Close reading strategies- Vocabulary building strategies: Word Generation and content specific strategies (writing a hypothesis, rationalizing a mathematics problem)- Reciprocal teaching strategies- Scaffolded graphic organizers that help students plan and organize their writing- Hochman Writing Resources- Bilingual glossaries/dictionaries- Access to technology (Rosetta Stone)- Spanish leveled texts- Leveled texts in English- Co-teaching models that lend itself to station teaching for re-teaching of content- Reader’s theater/Role-plays- Word walls- Word Generation materials in Spanish and English- Rubrics that are assignment specific and based on school-wide goals (i.e. argument writing rubrics for each grade level and the new NYSESLAT rubrics)- Incorporating the Writing Process (Balanced Literacy), with time for revision and editing - Milestones/Cengage ELL Designed text- Work with diphthongs, digraphs, cognates, prefixes and suffixes- Activating prior knowledge to build schema- Thoughtful grouping before lesson delivery - Questioning and discussion techniques that probe for student deeper comprehension- Small group discussions - iReady ELA/Math software - Standards Based Grading with JumpRope software 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? The Highbridge Green School uses curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable diverse ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English language proficiency within the least restrictive environment. In the case of ELLs that are also SWDs, they benefit from team-teach models in all content areas. Those ELLs w/SWD that have a self-contained IEP recommendation can have special schedules that allow them to experience Math and Science in a co-teach model (with one teacher being SpED licensed), while also benefiting from Social Studies class that is co-taught by a ENL certified teacher and a content area teacher, and an ELA class that is co-taught by a Special Ed teacher and an ELA content area teacher. In addition, these students also receive counseling in their native language as is detailed by their IEP. Students also receive ENL small group instruction. To date, the Highbridge Green School has two self contained special education classes; one for 6th graders and one 2018-19 CEP 59  for 7th and 8th graders. There are a few ELL students that have IEPs that will have their services met through team teaching with an ENL certified teacher, a Special Education teacher and/or a content specific certified teacher. Overall, our school has 22 students that are ELLs and have IEPs. These students are programmed in specific classes based on their IEPs. These students will have more support in their language development and meet their goals for their IEPs. Based on students' IEPs they are given flexibility within their schedule to move to general education classes during their Math and ELA classes. This past year, 6th grade math students as a whole were programmed into different classes based on their math ability on the Math iReady entrance assessment. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. All intervention services offered are provided in English. Home language is provided for 25% of instructional time during the beginning of the year and can be used based on needs of the student. Targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math and other content area are: - Different state test intervention during lunch and after school for specific students- ENL after school 2x/weekly for 55 minutes (content area support and basic English language acquisition skills: (beginner level ELLs, SIFE, ELLs-SWD-language of instruction is English with native language support)- Small group instruction for re-teaching content as deemed necessary by co-teachers after assessments- 2x/weekly 45 minutes- (beginner level ELLs, ELLs-SWDs)- Re-teach week: whole school allots time to re-teach content area material for topics/skills where students showed they needed more support – All ELLs and their subgroups)- Strategic Reading Classes designed to develop the skills the ELLs and ELLs-SWDs need specific help in to grow as readers-5x/weekly for 45 minutes) - iReady software for ELA and Math that continually adjusts to fit the students' level for ELLs and non ELLs alike. ELA will give student to work on phonemic awareness for students that are learning English. - Just Words and Wilson trained teachers that teach a handful of ELLs and SIFE students specific strategies for reading and breaking words down into specific parts. Just Words program is for students that have had interrupted schooling and works to fill in the holes that these students may face. - Leveled Literacy Intervention (LLI) from Fountas and Pinnell programs that happen during Strategic Reading and small group intervention through out the day.- 1:4 tutoring as designed by the Harvad Ed. Labs through WHedCo- Gladiator Boys Club; SISTARS Girls Club for social-emotional development each group meets 60 minute, once/week- Extended-learning day 5x/weekly for 2 hours devoted to homework support, arts activities 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? In the coming year, there will be a Special Education certified teacher to co-teach in the ENL stand alone classroom to help students with IEPs meet their academic and language goals. HBGS will still provide small group reading instruction for all students including ELLs. These students will receive reading instruction that is specific to their reading level as determined by the Degrees of Reading Power assessment and running records. Students will also start with peer to peer tutoring, restorative justice practices, and after school ENL clubs and/or ENL Saturday academy. ENL certified teacher will co teach the arts classes to have art and ENL integration. Our school has participated Parent Teacher Home Visit program for our incoming 6th graders but is opening to all grades next year. Our after school programming will modify its structure to give students more support in their socio-emotional growth as well as academic growth. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? The TBE program was discontinued in the 2014-2015 academic year because we did not have 15 students in two contiguous grades with a TBE designation as per the parent program selection form. If in the following year we do have 15 students total in two contiguous with the TBE designation we will reopen the program or a Dual Language program as per the Aspira Consent Decree. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All ELLs are afforded equal access to all school programs. Currently, ELLs take part in our extended-learning day that runs for 110 minutes after school. The first half of the extended learning day is devoted to building readership amongst our students. 2018-19 CEP 60  With a partnership through our CBO, WhedCo, the Highbridge Green School was able to secure a reading program designed by Harvard Ed. Labs that gives our students the opportunity to work with a specially trained tutor in groups 4 on increasing their reading comprehension. The second half of the extended-learning day provides students with an opportunity to take part in the chess club, a visual arts class, a music class, a dance class, sports or a do-it-yourself activity. Extended-learning day is open to all Highbridge Green students. When making considerations for tutoring and other activities ELLs are always included. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Instructional materials used to support ELLs in the content areas, as well as, language materials are: - Bilingual dictionaries/glossaries - Translated and scaffolded class room materials (graphic organizers) - SMART board technology - Flocabulary - Graphic organizers: Frayer-Model, reciprocal teaching organizers, scaffolded writing/reading materials - Access to computer (desktop and laptops) reinforce skills in math during Strategic Numeracy - BrainPop - Word Generation in Spanish/English; revised ELL curriculum materials - Spanish leveled texts (need more) - English leveled texts - Visuals: video, print, physical manipulatives - Audio-translators - Rubrics (translated); NYSESLAT rubrics; school-wide argument writing rubrics - Reference charts (English/Spanish) - Access to School Library to select independent reading books - Sofware: Rosetta Stone, iReady for ELA and Math - Math manipulatives -Bilingual libraries - Video Recording Cameras for video essays with arts/ENL integration - Standards Based Grading with JumpRope software 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Home language support is used 25% during instruction mostly at the beginning of the year. The Home language is used to clarify instructions or clarify vocabulary necessary to complete a task. The teachers of ELLs have discovered that after the fall, the ENL have acquired enough English language to fare well without using the Home language. ELLs always have access to bilingual dictionaries to help clarify meaning of unfamiliar words. Also, many of our teachers and teaching assistants are bilingual and are able to translate for students based on clarifying and non-academic needs. We are interested in exploring Dual Language models. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. All required services, support and resources correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. As we will now have all middle school grade levels, all materials are in accordance with NYS grade level standards in the content areas. Reading materials range from below 6th grade level, to 8th grade level and beyond to accommodate ELLs varying reading levels. Our ELLs DRP scores, language proficiency levels, and Fountas and Pinnell are all combined to ensure that all materials support student reading levels and interests. There is an array of fiction and non-fiction texts readily available for all students, including our ELL population. Grade level materials and enrichment materials supplement all extracurricular programs. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? The HBGS is fortunate enough to be the only school in our building! 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Activities in our school that facilitate newly enrolled ELLs before beginning the new school year are a new student orientation that is held in the spring where students and parents are introduced to HBGS core values; academic expectations, and behavioral expectations. At this time, the summer homework packet that involves reading and writing on a debatable topic is also reviewed. Teachers have an opportunity to introduce themselves and parents and students have an opportunity to ask questions. Also ENL teachers will provide a community tour for Entering and Emerging ELLs which would include the firehouse and post office and other necessary landmarks. Students are also given a tour of the building by our 8th grade students. These orientations are supported by the school counselors and school personnel. 2018-19 CEP 61  17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? N/A: 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? The professional development plan for all ELL personnel at our school will entail in-house (regarding new changes as per CR Part 154 and best practices regarding ELL instruction, and outside PD as advertised by the Office of English Language Learners. All ELL personnel, including all teachers at Highbridge engages in a weekly 65 minute PD where instructional strategies and current concerns regarding different student populations are discussed and practiced. Some resources used throughout this time our teachers’ own best practices, and materials provided by the Director of Special Populations, instructional coaches, and the principal. Our school wide learning outcomes are directly aligned with the Common Core Learning Standards. In collaboration with the ELL network liaison or equivalent representative, principal, and ELL personnel, PDs are designed to speak specifically on how the ELL population can reach grade level CCLS and access content within a heterogeneous classroom. To support all teachers of ELLs, PD is designed to speak to the diversity within the ELL population and how to best support ELLs in the classroom. For example, in August the ELL Coordinator will design a PD as an overview, or the nuts and bolts of language programs in the NYCDOE, to familiarize teachers with terms related to the ELL population such as SIFE, the new terms for ELLs (Newcomer, Entering/Emerging, Transitioning, Expanding and Commanding) and Years of Service. In addition, a review of assessments such as the NYSESLAT and NYSITELL and the role they play in ELL education are discussed. The ELL Coordinator has also designed a PD outlining the programmatic changes within the language programs as per CR Part 154 with all teachers. This PD was created with the support of the Director of Special Populations. This PD will also be shared in August when we have new staff. In addition, the ELL Coordinator (in conjunction with the PD Committee) will design an arc of PD that includes: thoughtful grouping, questioning and discussion techniques through small group discussion, and strategies that speak to the instructional shifts in ELL instruction to help all teachers of ELLs increase ELL literacy and language development. This series of PDs will include co-teaching partnerships and how they function as a support system to all students in the classroom, and how the presence of two adults can optimize instructional delivery. Professional development will also be designed with a focus around ESL strategies/methodologies and ELL assessments.During PD, teachers will participate in Professional Learning Cycles (PLCs) where a small group of teachers will ask questions to further their practice and research strategies to benefit the ELLs in their classroom. This is in part a response to information provided on teacher surveys and as part of the minimum 7.5 hours of ELL training as per Jose P. All records are kept with the principal and with the ELL Coordinator. Professional development will be designed in tandem with our school's MSQI partner and ELL Coordinator to highlight the ELL component of the Word Generation curriculum. All teachers of ELLs will be part of the 6 week cycle (of which they'll be 6 cycles for the year) and focus on topics pertaining to co-teaching strategies and integrated language and content instruction for ELLs. Non-pedagogic staff will be part of professional development that encompasses reading support for ELLs in small group reading structures (strategic reading). Non-pedagogic staff will also be trained in administering running records and understanding the types of reading errors children make, what that might indicate and how to develop these skills for growth. ELL teachers will also take part in a series of MSQI professional development related to integrating language into content 2018-19 CEP 62  instruction (such as vocabulary acquisition) and building complex sentences to construct compelling arguments. Topics for the 2017-2018 year include: - vocabulary acquisition + constructing complex sentences - co-teaching strategies - creating/establish a culturally responsive classroom by building trusting relationships - teacher interest topics as they relate to ELL learning 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. At HBGS, professional development (PD) is ongoing and supported through a variety of in-school structures such as our mandated PD minutes (65 minutes/week), Professional Learning Communities (PLCs), outsourced PDs, and our coaching network (school-based). To elaborate, all staff will engage in professional development that will be focused on vocabulary acquisition and constructing complex sentences. As this focus will have a year long arc, we'll be focusing on how to impact and increase vocabulary acquisition within different subgroups of both our ELL and non-ELL population alike. For example, within the larger focus of vocabulary acquisition, a PLC or a Rounds group (type of inquiry) will focus on the implementation of the ELL component of the Word Generation program within their context. The PLC or Rounds group will work on an inquiry question or problem of practice to brainstorm strategies that are most effective within their content and with ELLs of different language proficiencies. The PLC or Rounds group will have teachers of different ELL subgroups to gauge the success of implemented strategies that will move ELLs and non-ELLs alike to perform competitively on common core aligned tasks and assessments. Non-pedagogic staff have received and will continue professional development on how to administer running records and how to provide literacy support/development through the Leveled Literacy Intervention (LLI). All HBGS staff will have 5-6 cycles that run for approximately 6 weeks to engage in this professional development work. This will be Additionally, non pedagogic staff will meet with an LLI literacy coach once a week to work on strategies to move ELLs and non-ELLs alike in literacy. All ENL teachers will take part in the 6 week cycle PD, and will also attend specific MSQI professional development that will also includes topics related to co-teaching, and building/creating a culturally responsive classroom. ELL teachers also receive PD through school-wide structures such as literacy inquiry and content inquiry which meet 1x/week for 45 minutes/week. Minutes and agendas are kept of all in-house PDs. Agendas, presentations, sign-in sheets, and other pertinent documents are turn-keyed or kept for reference for outsourced professional developments. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? The ELL Coordinator and ENL teacher (2) will schedule individual meetings with parents of ELLs at the end of the of 2nd marking period, and again, at the end of the end of the 4th Marking Period. Notice of these meetings will be sent in writing in the parents' preferred language two weeks prior to the date. Parents will be asked to select a time to ensure that they will attend and that there is ample time in the meeting to discuss their child's performance and progress. Having the meetings at these two times during the school year (2nd and 4th marking period) will allow the ENL teachers to gain substantial knowledge of a student's language growth and challenge areas in English language acquisition, literacy skills and how it is affecting their content area performance, including math. The ENL teachers will provide strategies to the parents on how they can work with their child at home. This will include Word Generation vocabulary flashcards, reading response questions, and tips on engaging in conversation with students about daily activities. These materials will be provided in the parents' preferred language as well as in English. At these meetings, the ELL parent progress sheet (sent from the DELLS with language proficiency data and NYSESLAT scoring data will also be shared. If parents need a translation service in the preferred language (majority of ELL parents preferred language is Spanish) a school aide or teaching assistant will be scheduled as per the parents' requests. Just as with regular Parent-Teacher conferences, sign in sheets will be used to record parent attendance. 2018-19 CEP 63  2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Since we have such a high ELL and former ELL population, most of our focus has been on making sure that parents have access to our activities. In the past the Parent Association voted to create a Parent Teacher Association. This will provide many opportunities for parents and teachers to communicate on school and community related matters. Additionally, we host student led conferences three times a year, various awards ceremonies for students and families, and culturally relevant activities that foster community amongst staff and students (e.g. Thanksgiving celebration, Parent Pot Luck, Literacy Workshops, Workshops to impart knowledge and support with social services, i.e., housing, public assistance, and language services). This past year we have implemented a new model for additional conferencing. The Family Teacher Teams are for whole classes of families to meet together to understand students' growth and needs for improvement. These families set goals for their children and are able to play academic games with each other in order to help their children reach their goals. These conferences alongside the student led individual conferences are great for parents to understand their children's needs on a more holistic level. The school partners with the Women's Housing & Economic Development Corporation (WHEDco), who provides the school with a full-time parent liaison who is bilingual. Her job is to outreach to parents, and provide them with a range of services, including social work, therapy, housing, transitional, food/clothing services among others. In addition, she helps connect parents to additional agencies and resources depending on their needs. For example, she worked with one family of an ELL student to secure his family access to an after school program for a younger child so that the child could start learning English. We communicate with parents on a consistent and ongoing basis. The principal, School Leadership Team (SLT) and the PTA work to bring workshops and resources to families based on parental input. HBGS has designed their own parent survey based on the NYCDOE parent survey that we administer twice a year. In this way we are able to gather data from the parents sooner and can make modifications based on this feedback. Also, we communicate with them via the phone, email, our online grading system, JumpRope, which enables parents, teachers, and students to communicate about academic or behavioral concerns. We also communicate with parents through our student Checking System. The checking system is based on a weekly student check. Advisors comment on progress and challenges related to academic and/or behavioral issues on a weekly basis. Students then reflect on the comments and create a plan of 1 or 2 steps to improve. Students then bring the checks home to be read and signed by the parent or guardian. This checking system enables the parents to give teachers and students feedback about their child's progress. We send home calendars, flyers, notices and other distributed materials to receive feedback from parents. Also we have parent members on our School Leadership Team, Hiring Committee, and other governing boards to help us choose better ways to serve them, their children, and the school community.This will provide many opportunities to for parents and teachers to communicate on school and community related matters. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. None. 2018-19 CEP 64 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Kyle Brillante, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 65  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: The Highbridge Green School School DBN: 09X361 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Mr. Kyle Brillante Title Principal Ms. Anna Waters Assistant Principal N/A Parent Coordinator Ms. Johanna Marte ENL/Bilingual Teacher Ms. Selaine Martinez Parent Ms. Erin Sonoda Teacher/Subject Area Ms. Celenia Nivar Teacher/Subject Area Mr. Rob LaColla Ms. Amy Liff Coach Coach Ms. Tiffany Nieves School Counselor Ms. L. Rosario Ms. Sabrina Cruz n/a n/a n/a Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 06/27/17 06/27/17 06/27/17 06/27/17 06/27/17 06/27/17 06/27/17 06/27/17 06/27/17 06/27/17 06/27/17 06/27/17 06/27/17 06/27/17 06/27/17 2018-19 CEP 66  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 09x361 School Name: The Highbridge Green School Superintendent: Ms. L. Rosario The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Amy Liff IEP Teacher yes No * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. HBGS assess the language preferences of our parent community for both written and oral communication. HBGS assess our parents' needs in multiple ways. One way HBGS assesses this need is through the spring orientation for all new students and their parents. New students and their parents are invited to an Open House /information session where the principal and support staff provide an overview of the academic and behavioral expectations for HBGS students. During this time parents have an opportunity to communicate (via an information take in sheet) in what language they'd prefer to receive all school communications such as Student Checks, Progress Reports, Monthly Calendars, and Memos/Reminders. This information is also uploaded to our Family Tracker (google docs) for ease of review. At the start of the school year the ELL Coordinator olds the ELL Orientation and/or the ELL Parent Information meeting. During this meeting, the ELL Coordinator informs parents of their Home Language as per the information provided on the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS) and the RHLA report on ATS and confirms that this is information is current. In addition, to intake information sheet at the Open House and ELL Orientation and ELL Informational Meeting, parents also complete the NYC DOE blue cards where they provide all information, such as student address, all contact information, and what languages are spoken at 2018-19 CEP 67  home. In addition, to this information, advisors conduct a student information where the student notes what language is spoken at home.In the case of parent calls home for specific students,where teacher does not speak the student's home language, the ELL Coordinator will support teachers and parents in translation services. If the ELL Coordinator is unavailable, the community liaison or support staff from our CBO, WhedCO, will support in communicating with the parents. The majority of our parents' preferred language is Spanish. If necessary, language and interpretation services will be provided as requested by the parent. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Spanish Slovak Afrikaans Twi English Fulani French Estonian Mandingo French Sonnike 255 1 0 1 283 0 4 1 1 4 0 46.79% .18% 0 .18% 51.93% 0 .73 1 .18% .73 0 256 1 0 1 283 0 3 1 1 3 0 46.97% .18% 0 .18% 51.93% 0 .55 1 .18% .55 0 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Spanish, English Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. 2018-19 CEP 68  Document Name Month/Frequency How do you Distributed to plan to Families All communication from the school is written in both English and Spanish. For those parents whom have noted a home language other than English,their preferred language of communication is English. These are documents typically disseminated every year to families: - Monthly Calendars -Student Checks (HBGS utilizes a weekly checking system to update parents on their child's academic and behavioral updates) -Reminders: early dismissals, PTC dates, community events, holidays (or days when students are not required to be in attendance as per the NYC DOE calendar) -IEP meeting notices - Lunch Forms - Policy Updates (i.e. Cell Phone policy) - Progress Reports - HBGS website - Open House (orally translated as well as printed materials in Spanish) - Changes in ELL status: entitlement, non-entitlement, continued entitlement letters - School Leadership Meetings dates (posted on Monthly Calendar) - Testing Dates: CIA, State Exams, all school-wide assessment whether internal, city-wide, or State-wide) - HBGS dessiminates all communication in both English and Spanish - During any type of informational meeting, HBGS also provides oral translation Monthly translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. We allocate fund to translate and use the BigWord and over the phone translation whenever possible. We use Title 3 funds to translate. Additionally, the district now offers translation of IEP's which is offered to parents. Documents are submitted at least two weeks in advance in order to ensure timely approval and revision; we use a combination of google translate and in-house translators 2018-19 CEP 69  to ensure translation is correct. Additionally, the district now offers translation of IEP's which is offered to parents. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? We use WHEDco, our community based organization, that has Fulani, Sonnike, and Spanish translators and The Big Word. As a last resort, we use over-the phone translations. - Parent Teacher Conferences (4x/year) - Annual ELL Parent Teacher Conference (estimated 2x/year) - ELL Parent Meeting (2x/year) - ELL Parent Orientation (1x/year) - Attendance calls (daily- as necessary) - Teacher calls home (1x/month - minimum) - IEP Meetings (as per the scheduled meeting times in accordance with regulation) Monthly - Opehn House (2x/year) - Curriculum Night (1x/year) - ELL Coordinator calls to parents (ongoing) - Guidance Counselor (ongoing as necessary) 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. 2018-19 CEP 70  In the event of emergencies, we first reach out to all contacts on the blue card. Most of our families speak Spanish so we use a native speaker to make contact. In the rare case that there is an emergency with a student whose family does not speak Spanish or English, we first utilize our community based organization translators and then use over-the-phone translators. As a last resort, we will make a home visit or use google translate to post information on our website or twitter account. As a last resort, we will mail home information -- assuming it's not an emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. It is part of our school's non-negotiable and discussed annually during our welcome back PD. Additionally, we frequently check in on this goal at the beginning of PD for big family events, such as student-led conferences and Academic Family Teacher Teams. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) The school will fulfill Section VII of Chancellor's Regulations A-633 regarding parental notification requirements for translation and interpretation services will be fulfilled in the following ways: - translated school wide documents such as: calendars, notices, dates for parent conferences, special celebrations and IEP/SpEd documents - teachers provide translated versions of the following: grading policy, progress reports, outcomes, standards and all pertinent information regarding grading policy and standards, as well as changes made as city wide practice. In this way, parents are able to access the rationale behind how we grade and what the standards are that their child is expected to meet -audiotranslators, translation equipment during school wide meetings such as family orientation at the beginning of the year that provides simultaneous translation. We also use translators provided by the district and over the phone translators when necessary. - services of school-based personnel and volunteers from the Parent Association, we have 8 specific school-based personnel, including the principal, that can provide translation and interpretation services to parents, our PA also volunteers as interpreters when possible - when specific meetings regarding academic and/or behavioral meetings/conferences and/or phone calls need to take place, staff know to contact the ELL Coordinator and identified support staff to propose dates/times so that translation and/or interpretation services are provided to the parent, over the phone translators when necessary, 2018-19 CEP 71  - disseminate information regarding outsource translation and interpretation services from agencies such as LIS to our staff in order to provide parents with this service as the need arises and as parents will have indicated - visible posters located in key location for parent observation and information: Welcome Poster, Bill of Rights, Parent's Guide to Language Access and Language ID guide Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? HBGS is committed to recognizing and providing parents with the tools and information they request and need in order to strengthen our partnership in student achievement. Parents are asked to fill out an in-house survey twice a year regarding the quality of our communication.In addition, parents are encouraged to contact teachers via our grading syste website: Jumprope and our school website www.highbridgegreeen.com. To this end, we have provided a parent workshop to guide parents in how to use both systems to communicate with teachers and staff. 2018-19 CEP 72 
