2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 10X374 School Name: KNOWLEDGE AND POWER PREPARATORY ACADEMY INTERNATIONAL HIGH SCHOOL (KAPPA) Principal: PANOREA PANAGIOSOULIS 2018-19 CEP 1  2018-19 CEP 2  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 3  Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: KAPPA International High School 321000011374 9-12 School Number (DBN): 10x374 500 East Fordham Rd, Bronx NY 10458 718-933-1247 718-933-1568 Phone Number: Andrew Clayman Fax: Email Address: aclayman@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: 10 Superintendent’s Office Address: Panorea Panagiosoulis Alejandro Pena Lisa Rodriguez Mabel Mateo Alex Gonzalez Robyn Rodriguez Amber Gonzalez Not applicable District Information Richard Cintron Superintendent: 335 Adams St, Brooklyn NY 11201 rcintro@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-368-8515 Phone Number: Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) Affinity Group Alexandra Anormaliza FSC: Executive Director: 2018-19 CEP 4  Executive Director’s Office Address: 131 Livingston Brooklyn aanorma@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: (718) 935-5618 Phone Number: 718-935-2246 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 5  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name PanoreaPanagiosoulis Alejandro Pena Lisa Rodriguez Juan Caamano MernaTorres Robyn Rodriguez KailaniTorres Andrew Clayman KatherynFierman Mabel Mateo Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ AP Member/ AP Member/ Teacher 2018-19 CEP 6  Name Alex Gonzalez Elizabeth Calvert- Kilbane Cynthia Bristol Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/ Parent Member/ Teacher Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 7  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 8  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 9  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? KAPPA International is an open enrollment International Baccalaureate World School. We seek to inspire and empower scholars to become lifelong learners, well-equipped for the challenges of college and prepared to participate as compassionate citizens in the ever-expanding global community. We also place a strong emphasis on experiential learning, including international travel and authentic, real-world learning projects. We subscribe to a Mastery-based learning model and provide our students with daily advisory programming. 2018-19 CEP 10  2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. KAPPA is an International Baccalaureate World School, and Expeditionary Learning Associate School, a PROSE school, a Learning Partners Host School and a member of the Mastery Collaborative 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. We have an expanding population of English Language Learners and Students with Learning Differences. We are in the process of developing a robust bilingual program and emphasize an inclusive environment. Students who begin in 9th grade in a self-contained setting generally transition to an Integrated Co-Teaching model, which requires the school to strategically support that transition and to support adult capacity for meeting those varied student needs. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Our school has always prioritized the Framework for Great Schools' supportive environment, providing students with both academic and socio-emotional supports as well as embodying a collaborative community of professionals. Our most recent Quality Review established our school culture as a Well-Developed Area of Celebration and we also received Well-Developed marks for Curriculum, Assessment and Professional Collaboration. For our Area of Focus, we received a Proficient for teacher pedagogy. Over the past year, we have grown significantly with regards to providing a rigorous instructional program to all of our students and intend to continue that focus for the 2018-2019 school year. Our Learning Environment Survey indicates room for growth in our collaboration with families and communities, which makes that another area that we will revisit. 2018-19 CEP 11  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 10X374 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 488 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual YES Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 25 24 5 15 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 46 40 9 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 92.0% % Attendance Rate 86.1% % Reduced Lunch 14.3% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.6% 64.8% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 3.3% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 11.17 0% 51% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 88% 76% 90.9% 19.2% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A YSH N/A N/A YSH Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YSH N/A N/A YSH Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES N/A YES YES No N/A 87 65 1 85.3% 5.9% 24.2% 27.3% 2.5% 2.3% 4 23% 4.5 N/A N/A 90% 86% 77.2% 36% N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A YSH NO N/A N/A N/A YSH YES N/A N/A N/A YES 2018-19 CEP 12  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Our biggest strength with regards to rigorous instruction is our status as an International Baccalaureate World School. This internationally-acclaimed curriculum provides a clear standard of rigor and quality. This has been repeatedly celebrated as a school highlight by PPOs and Quality Reviews, year after year. Our biggest priority need is related to student engagement. Notably, as evidenced in the NYC school survey, there is a perception gap in how engaged teachers believe students are in their classes, as compared to how engaged students report that they are. As a PROSE school, KAPPA will continue to focus on students’ holistic development and ensure high-level authentic learning tasks in the school year 2018-2019, tailoring the Experiential Learning Opportunities (ELO) for students with real-life experiences with the goal of inspiring them and improving their academic skills. Additionally, we will continue to partner with EL Education to expand our previously piloted learning expeditions learning expedition work into the humanities departments. This work will continue to focus on identifying critical skills that are not limited to specific content areas. Teachers will make both content standards and common core literacy come alive through long term, in-depth studies of real-world topics. Teachers will use strategies adopted from expeditionary learning to develop learning targets, select anchor texts and engage students with experts and authentic field-work opportunities. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all students will experience an Expeditionary Learning style case study in each subject area which will ensure accessible, culturally relevant, engaging curriculum as evidenced by unit plan analysis and teacher observations and biannual Expeditionary Learning Quality Work Protocol analyses 2018-19 CEP 13  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Contract and collaborate with the research-based Expeditionary Learning Coach All teachers Develop a series of professional development sessions to support the implementation of EL case studies Teachers AP AP Summer 2018 Weekly, during department meetings Involve parents and the school community in “showcase events”, in which students will defend their learning Students and parents January and May AP A series of professional development sessions with Affinity Support from Specialized Student Support Lead Ongoing AP Instructional Support Team Teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. The practice of Student-Led Conferencing, in conjunction with detailed mastery reports provided by our online grading platform, JumpRope, provide parents with clear portraits of student mastery and next steps. At the biannual Student-Led Conferences, students discuss their performance on different learning targets, present their SMART goals and consider a series of next steps, including for their parents can continue to provide support. In addition, advisors contact parents on a biweekly basis to review academic progress as well as classroom behavior. At the end of the year, parents will be invited to end of year showcase event to see the culmination of student work. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Schedule adjustments: Extended periods (90 minutes) of common planning time built into each day Human resources and per session: Contracting with Expeditionary Learning Schools Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 2018-19 CEP 14  X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February, 2019, 100% of students will have participated in at least 2 well-designed, Common Core aligned, cross-curricular Experiential Learning Opportunities to increase curricular relevance to students’ lives and goals. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Instrument of measurement used will be the written document of the actual expedition plan submitted by teachers and evaluated by administration. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 15  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? KAPPA's strength continues to lie in its supportive environment. Visitors regularly comment on the warm and welcoming environment, our most recent Quality Review highlighted this as an area of celebration and the School Quality Guide data rates the school 10 points above the city average on most categories. Our priority need in this area is an increased level of consistency between our advisory groups. Observational data and teacher and student surveys and panels suggest that, while some advisory groups are highly effective and fully accomplishing the vision of ensuring that students truly feel supported by at least one staff member and acquire the soft skills necessary for future success, other advisories have fallen short of this goal. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of students will attend a daily advisory class and feel well that they are leaders of their own learning and feel supported by at least one staff member and as measured by periodic survey results and attendance data. 2018-19 CEP 16  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Continue student- advisory program that focuses on core-values, developing work habits, building relationships, improving literacy, providing service-learning opportunities, assisting in the development of student portfolios, dedicating space and time to reflect on learning, and introducing post-secondary opportunities, providing targeted support for high-needs subgroups in collaboration with the NYCDOE College Access for All Program Teachers Develop a series of professional development sessions that support the implementation of advisory in collaboration with Expeditionary Learning Teachers AP Summer 2018 and ongoing throughout 2018-2019 school year AP Three times between Sept and May Establish student panel to gather feedback and gauge progress and impact of student advisories Teachers January and June 2019 AP 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Advisors contact parents biweekly to provide updates on student performance. Student-led conferences facilitate student ownership of parental involvement Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Schedule adjustments: Provide 45 minute Advisory Period weekly. Instructional resources: Integrate different advisory curricula from a variety of sources Schedule adjustments and per session: Provide time and resources for professional development Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 2018-19 CEP 17  X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February, 2019, 100% of students will have attended their Advisory course at least 90% of the time. A sample of students/ student panel will be gathered to obtain feedback in January and June. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Observation visits of advisory periods and feedback from student surveys and panels will be used to assess quality of advisory and students' perceived levels of belonging Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 18  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. KAPPA's strengths are related to teacher collaboration are many. Our teaming is entirely teacher-driven, our mastery-based learning system provides common language to promote cohesion school-wide and allow students to take ownership over their own learning, resulting in increased Regents exam results, high International Baccalaureate exam results and ultimately an increase in college persistence. Identified by the city as a Learning Partners Host School, our priority needs involve collaborative inquiry teams that will better support our subgroup populations. We have a moral imperative to address the opportunity gap between and among our subgroup performance in Regents performance and credit accumulation. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, through a combination of increased vertical alignment and a focus on shared effective instructional strategies that focus on students' awareness of their mastery, and co-teaching practices, each department will narrow the subgroup opportunity gap, as measured by cohort 2021 and cohort 2022 math, science and history Regents performance and credit accumulation 2018-19 CEP 19  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Develop a plan that documents the vertical alignment of critical skills for each department. Teachers Fall 2018 AP ENL and SWD teachers will work with departments to provide targeted intervention strategies to address skill gaps of at-risk students Teachers Fall 2018 AP Parent Coordinator with Department Chairs will provide workshops to parents at parent Town Halls to share critical skills that students must master at the end of each grade level. Parents October 2018 & March 2019 Parent Coordinator Teacher Leaders Develop departmental periodic assessments that measure critical skills Teachers November 2018 3b – Parent and Family Engagement AP AP How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Student-Led Conferencing is a highly effective strategy that ensures families develop a clear understanding of how they can best support their child at home. Biweekly advisor/family outreach allows parents to better understand teachers' collaborative relationship, as they underscore the idea that all adults share the charge of educating their children. Teacher-developed syllabi also outline the skills and content students must master for each course and the document requires parental signature Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Schedule adjustments and per session: Provide time and resources for professional development 2018-19 CEP 20  Human resources: Allow time during Monday meetings to develop plan. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By December 2018, 100% of departments will have a written action plan that supports the goal of narrowing the subgroup performance gap By March 2019, 100% of departments will have conducted a midyear assessment of their progress toward the goal Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Departmentally developed action plans as well as student performance on Jumprope standards and mid-term assessments grades will help identify implementation and mastery of critical skills. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 21  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. KAPPA's strengths as related to effective school leadership is a distributive leadership model that empowers teachers to work as change makers in the school community. This is highlighted by survey results and Quality Review feedback. Our priority need involves the structured ways in which we support teacher leadership development. We want to be able to directly relate leadership moves with improved student outcomes, by providing increased clarity of direction, vision and intended impact. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By February 2019, 100% of grade team, department team and whole staff meetings will adhere to a pre-planned PD cycle, developed with collaboration from the team leaders and administration. 2018-19 CEP 22  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Conduct weekly leadership meetings to align team needs and strategies with student outcomes Biannual quality work review protocol Teacher leaders Teachers Ongoing Assistant Principals November and May Assistant Principals Pre-establish the time for teachers to engage in inter-visitations Teachers Ongoing Assistant Principals Cycles of observation include teacher leadership norming Teacher leaders December and March Principal 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Assistant principals ensure that parents are aware of the Parent Leadership Training Institute. Parental feedback is incorporated into instructional debriefings Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Schedule adjustments: Block schedules Human resources and per session: Professional development surrounding effective instruction in block scheduling Expeditionary Learning coach Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other 2018-19 CEP 23  Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By October 2018, 100% of team meetings are pre-planned according to the PD cycle Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The Expeditionary Learning Core practices document will be used to self-assess progress Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 24  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Our school's strength in family involvement is our current advisory structure. During the 2018-2019 school year, advisors will continue to reach out to the parents of all of their advisees bi-weekly and provide updates on academic and behavioral progress. Having one point of contact for all parents/guardians ensured that parents were frequently contacted and updated on student progress and upcoming school events. To promote family support and involvement and increase student ownership over their learning, we’ve decided to continue with Student-led Conferences in lieu of traditional Parent Teacher conferences, all of which has resulted in strong scores on the NYC School Survey Our priority need involves the incorporation of parental involvement in student work products and we are excited to incorporate showcases that highlight student learning, culminating in a celebration of student work at the end of the year Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 95% of families will have attended student-led conferences and learning showcases allowing for active participation in their student’s learning and development. 2018-19 CEP 25  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Facilitate the creation and organization of student portfolios and conference dialogue Teachers Provide training for successful development of portfolios and student-led conferences in advisory, with special attention to supporting high-needs subgroups Teachers Send out letters and conduct personal phone calls to invite families in for student-led conferences Teachers AP Ongoing throughout 2018-2019 Sept and Oct 2018 AP AP Oct 2018 and March 2019 Conduct bi-weekly phone calls and outreach to parents informing them of student academic and core-value performance Teachers Ongoing AP 2018-2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. N/A Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human resources: Restructure P/T Conference Time Human resources: Utilize support staff for sending out letters to families Human resources: Provide time and resources for professional development Schedule Adjustments Teacher Per Session 2018-19 CEP 26  Supervisor Per Session Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February, 2019 95% of families will have attended one student-led conference Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Parent attendance, completion of SLCs and phone logs. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 27  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Failing after MP2 and 70% attendance or better Failing after MP2 and 70% attendance or better Failing after MP2 and 70% attendance or better Failing after MP2 and 70% attendance or better Students are referred by teacher or self-report to guidance counselor Small group Small group Small group Small group Review of class material, reassessment of learning targets Review of class material, reassessment of learning targets Review of class material, reassessment of learning targets Review of class material, reassessment of learning targets Students work with guidance interns from Fordham University and focus on areas of difficulty. When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) During school day or after school During school day or after school During school day or after school During school day or after school Small group or one-to-one During school day or after school 2018-19 CEP 28  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 14 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Counseling, advisory program and additional mental wellness support through Montefiori clinic personnel. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). n/a 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 29  n/a 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. n/a 2018-19 CEP 30  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Staff members attend hiring fairs hosted by NYCDOE and New Visions for Public Schools, as well as posting on the New Teacher Finder and accessing Open Market Candidates for recruitment purposes. In terms of retention and support KAPPA provides an extensive series of professional supports, including: mentorship; department teams; grade teams; inquiry teams; intervisitations; differentiated professional development; and administrative coaching and observations. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Staff participates in annual professional development provided by NYCDOE, New Visions for Public Schools and The International Baccalaurate Organization. In addition, we have recently contracted with Expeditionary Learning Schools to provide professional development surrounding the development of authentic, real-world experiential learning opportunities. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. MA 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). 2018-19 CEP 31  NA Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). NA 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Teachers are invited to participate in the Measures of Student Learning Committee which determines summative assessments for each course. In addition, departments collaboratively establish multiple different assessment measures, including examinations, performance assessments, research papers and Socratic seminars and presentations. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) X X Column B Section Reference(s) 5E 5C Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Federal Federal Federal 372,533.00 0 11,200.00 2018-19 CEP 32  Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Local 0 3,092,158.00 X 5A-5E 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs. 2018-19 CEP 33   Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 34  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. KAPPA International, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. KAPPA International will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 2018-19 CEP 35  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Providing biannual student-led conferences which, due to their personal and pre-scheduled nature are better attended and parents report that they are more helpful than traditional parent-teacher conferences Biweekly advisor outreach provides continuous updates and feedback regarding student performance Daily text messaging service (Kinvolved) assist the school in communicating attendance patterns to families Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the 2018-19 CEP 36  parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; 2018-19 CEP 37  ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) KAPPA International , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; 2018-19 CEP 38  ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; 2018-19 CEP 39  II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; III. Student Responsibilities 2018-19 CEP 40  ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 41 Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components: 1. 2. 3. The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers. Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. 1. 2. 3. 4. High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” 1. Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences. Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. 1. These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 3 9 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP 42  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the · · · · · · rationale subgroups and grade levels of students to be served schedule and duration language of instruction # and types of certified teachers types of materials Begin description here: Rationale: We need an after-school and Saturday School program for ELLs to target academic content and skill gaps to catch students up and prepare them towards college and career readiness. We want to provide them with direct targeted instruction to increase literacy and writing skills, as well as confidence and success in the classroom. We have 4 emerging, 6 Transitioning, 41 Expanding, and 30 Commanding ELLs. Of these, we need to provide literacy and writing support to our special needs populations that are SIFE ELLs, long-term ELLs (with 6 or more years of service), or ELLs with IEPs. We are using the EDAT monitoring tool to support our at-risk ELLs at levels 6, 7, and 8. This is one major critical shift of our school for SY 2018-19. We will do so by closely monitoring progress and implementing short-term, tiered academic interventions to address common skill gaps and/or content gaps. We will provide support for Commanding ELLs with students who participate in direct small-group instruction. All materials will be at no cost to Title III. Since there are three certified ENL teachers across the grades and contents, we will each provide one hour after school for each subgroup and proficiency level area: Sarah Van Etten will provide support for students of Algebra and Science; Tammy Wang for US and Global, and Bryan Cockrell for Global. This content teacher support is at no cost to Title III. Strategies to Build Skills for various subgroups: · · identify thesis statement and claim · · method for planning · · development · Academic Vocabulary Toolkit with Kate Kinsella Connect reading and writing with templates with sentence frames targeted instruction to identify thesis statement and claim Discussion with debates NYSESLAT prep- teachers include oral language development strategies with the SIOP method for planning Classroom, Inc. literacy pilot program Witsi (Writing Through Strategic Inquiry) using Hochmann methods for writing development Rewards Reading (through Anita Schedule & Duration (Part B Direct Instruction Supplemental Program) Math and English Saturday School Academy: Academic Vocabulary Toolkit with Kate Kinsella &nbsp; Connect reading and writing with templates with sentence frames targeted instruction to Discussion with debates NYSESLAT prep- teachers include oral language development strategies with the SIOP Classroom, Inc. literacy pilot program Witsi (Writing Through Strategic Inquiry) using Hochmann methods for writing Rewards&nbsp;Reading&nbsp;(through&nbsp;Anita&nbsp; 2018-19 CEP 43  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information This will occur December and January will take place throughout mid-May and June 2019. For ELLs, Saturday Academy will take place twice in January and twice in June for ELA and Algebra with two ESL-certified teachers (and content teachers) at no cost to Title III. This support targets Commanding, Expanding, and older Transitioning ELLs who participate in tutoring/Sat school (ie Regents, SAT, CUNY Placement prep) 3 hours on Saturdays 9-12 noon twice in December and twice in January. Support for Entering and Emerging newcomer recent arrival ELLs will take place during Saturdays for English language acquisition and content-specific support for success in the classroom. Academic Intervention Service Small-Group Instruction through Support Centers Start Dates: October 31, 2018 to April 28, 2019 1 hour after school three days a week for ELLs and other general education students: Wednesdays for ELA, Thursdays for Math, Tuesdays for History and Science from 3- 4 pm. There will be a content-certified teacher and an ENL teacher coplanning as a team for curricular design. The ENL teacher teaches ELA, History and Math, Science using direct small-group instruction. Specific target groups to work with are newcomers, particularly SIFE students, as well as long-term Special Education ELLs in small groups of no more than 10 at a time per teacher. Each group of focused students are in different grade groups, so that all ELLs who are struggling in any classes in different graded groups will participate for a minimum of three weeks. Teachers will utilize small flexible groups and team-planning as needed for content and language development. Teachers will use English with ample home language support, materials, and peer to peer buddy systems. They will also provide home-language translated texts for classes for students to utilize bilingual strategies for deeper comprehension. Regents-aligned materials with appropriate translations will be used for Regents support; students will also be able to bring class work and performance tasks for further assistance or clarification, especially for newer immigrant students who may need directions translated and brainstorming in home language before writing final products in English. Instruction Type of Materials: All materials (laptops, paper, printer ink, textbooks, handouts, books highlighters, markers, dictionaries, index cards, videos, ipads) are at no cost to Title III. Instructional materials are standards-based for Saturday Academy are with differentiated scaffolds created by ENL teachers. For the transitioning and expanding ENL students in grades 9-11: We’re going to focus on: Writing instructional strategies for revision, Hochmann Method, and Vocabulary Instruction with Kate Kinsella’s Academic Toolkit and the SIOP Lesson Plan format. Materials already provided at no cost to Title III. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. · · · · · rationale teachers to receive training schedule and duration topics to be covered name of provider 2018-19 CEP 44  Part C: Professional Development Begin description here: Rationale: We want to focus on creating space and time to meet in various team formations to move our practices towards best practices for our wide range of students. Therefore, the teachers involved in year-long professional development will include the ENL and Special Education department. We meet for one hour bimonthly on Mondays from 3-4 pm to develop tiered intervention systems, procedures, and strategies as well as instructional pedagogy monthly starting September and ending in June 2019. We meet as an Instructional Support Team to focus on improving our methodology and pedagogy in curriculum design and differentiation for students with various needs across our classrooms. Our school embraces a team-teaching model across all content areas with the exception of International Baccalaureate classes. These meetings are at no cost to Title III. We need scheduled time to meet together in order to develop our strategy instruction and differentiation exemplars to model to other teachers, as well as to observe each others' work to improve our lesson delivery and differentiation practices on-demand. The ongoing inquiry-based PD sessions for the core Instructional Support Team will be per-session once a month for an hour for 3 teachers. Attendance is taken on our meeting minutes that are recorded in our school-wide folder that is available for any staff member to see on our shared KAPPA Teacher Google Drive Dept Folder. For IST professional development, the department chairs of the Special Education team Michael Gallin and Anne Beggs, will coordinate and train newer teachers on differentiation, with particular focus on long-term ELLs and ELLs with IEPs. For ENL development, Tammy Wang will attend SIFE training provided by Rachel Hoff and other sessions provided through Fordham University and the Office of ELLs. Sarah Van Etten is taking classes for bilingual methodology and Math certification. These outside PD trainings are at no cost to Title III. The Instructional Support Team will coordinate instructional strategies across the ENL and Special Education departments. The department leaders will meet after-school for two hours once a month to continue shaping the development of the rest of the team through data analysis, program review, student work analysis, and debriefing together on lesson observations and student shadowing visits. The Instructional Support Team also will provide whole-staff professional development sessions on various whole-staff meetings during PD Day November 6, 2018 from 11-1pm and monthly whole staff meetings in October, November, and December for an hour each. Attendance is taken on our meeting minutes that are recorded in our school-wide folder that is available for any staff member to see on our shared KAPPA Teacher Google Drive Dept Folder. These meetings are at no cost to Title III. These bigger team meetings with eleven members are at no cost to Title III. The members of both departments will then meet once a month for 1.5 hours for instructional strategy development on writing, literacy and discussions. This long-term professional development will meet over a period of four years; 2 two-hour long twice in June, twice in August, mid-September and so-on, as well as after-school. For record-keeping, the school secretary will file all agendas of PD sessions in our staff files. Per session is the current hourly rate with fringe benefits for teachers at $55.23. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. · · · rationale schedule and duration topics to be covered 2018-19 CEP 45  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities · · name of provider how parents will be notified of these activities Begin description here: The ENL Department, with our Crystal Lopez our Parent Coordinator, will plan workshops for immigrant parents at no cost to Title III. These include a class for new immigrant parents for basic introductory English, college and FAFSA info sessions, as well as job resume/interview sessions. For low-incidence languages, we will utilize the Language Translation and Interpretation Services provided through the Dept. of Education. Parents of Title III students as well as parents of ELLs will participate in these activities because these workshops are open to all immigrant families. Some staff are planning different parent engagement workshops- one where parents are paid to teach staff Spanish through another grant funding source and teachers and parents interact through hands-on activities Records will be maintained in a ENL Community Engagement binder, including agendas, attendance sheets, and invitations in parents’ preferred languages. To date, parents have received surveys to indicate interest, availability, and needs for workshops. Parent workshops being planned currently with Parent Coordinator. Fall Semester- all served with coffee and light refreshments (provided at no cost to Title III) September 28, 2018- Thursday evening 5-6pm (Parent Orientation Meeting for New Families, before Parent Meet and Greet October 18, 2018 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. - Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) 1. 2. Purchased services 1. Per session Per diem High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials 2. 3. Must be supplemental. Additional curricula, instructional materials. 2018-19 CEP 46  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. 4. Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL $11,200 $11,200 2018-19 CEP 47  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 10 School Name Knowledge and Power Preparatory Academy Borough Bronx School Number 374 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Panorea Panagiosoulis Coach Aurora Kushner ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Samantha Heiderscheid Teacher/Subject Area Elizabeth Calvert Kilbane/Hist Teacher/Subject Area Alejandro Pena/Spanish Related-Service Provider Anne Beggs Superintendent Richard Cintron Assistant Principal Andrew Clayman Coach Heidi Ludwig School Counselor Leslie Lambertson Parent Lisa Rodriguez Parent Coordinator Crystal Lopez Field Support Center Staff Member Jose Ruiz Other (Name and Title) Sarah Van Etten C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 2 1 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 4 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 1 2 D. Student Demographics 2018-19 CEP 48  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 503 Total number of ELLs 70 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 13.92% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): Spanish If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 2015 1 K 0 Lang. Spanish Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 3 0 4 0 2 0 5 0 6 0 7 0 8 0 9 1 1 10 11 12 1 1 1 1 1 1 Tot # 4 0 0 0 0 0 4 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Formative teacher-created assessments that are curriculum embedded assessments like unit exams and quizzes, plus Performance Series and the DRA are used to guide instructional planning for ELLs. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Teacher teams meet in coplanning models, grade teams, and content departments meet to align assessments and learning targets. The ENL team reviews formative assessments with their coteachers and modify unit assessments as needed up until the final exam and mock Regents. 2018-19 CEP 49  3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? Summative Assessments include Performance Series for baseline literacy and vocabulary levels. mock Regents, Regents, MOSL, and the NYSESLAT are exams to identify progress and areas of need. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Once the summative data has been gathered, structures to address interventions include grade, content, and IST teams conducting a data analysis. IST is an Instructional Support Team of ENL and Special Education teachers meeting together to determine academic intervention sessions. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] KAPPA International uses the RtI framework and inquiry process to systematically approach our struggling ELL needs and especially when reviewing for special education services. When using this RtI framework to guide instruction, we examine achievement at the classroom level, using multiple data indicators such as formative and summative assessments and anecdotal observations, analyze data using a language acquisition lens, conference with individual students, design and implement targeted supplemental supports, and monitor progress over time and plan for mid-course corrections. In doing this, we determine if the needs of the struggling ELLs are specific to language acquisition needs, or reflective of the broader needs of the class as a whole. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The ENL team uses the RNMR report and the EDAT tool to evaluate and inform the ELL programs. We use the outcome assessments as listed in number 5 to inform which students need extra support services and what extra courses students need. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? In our team structures, under our Student Services Coordinator and data programmer, we review findings and make programmatic adjustments. These teams meet multiple times across the year. We have an end-of-year meeting to review and adjust final needs after outcome assessment data is finalized. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Freestanding ENL program follows the mandated time components for ENL standalones and integrated ELA as per CR Part 154.2. The newcomer emergent bilingual cohort testing at entering and emerging travels in a graded groups for an ENL stand-alone called "Language Skills." All ENL students, including recent commanding ELLs, receive a ENL support cotaught by an ENL teacher and either content or ELA teacher b. TBE program. If applicable. Students are grouped to receive bilingual support in their grade level and content-specific courses. For example, Newcomers testing at entering and emerging for 9th grade have bilingual Global History 9 and Algebra 9. Grade 11 and 12 bilingual newcomer students whose parents prefer as per parent choice survey, have integrated ENL, bilingual US History and Geometry. The TBE group is a smaller group of students who receive intensive language and skill 2018-19 CEP 50  support in their co-taught bilingual classes, and depending on their Regents scores, also receive extra support in a Regents Prep class that focuses on building vocabulary and literacy skills. c. DL program. If applicable. no DL program 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Each program model provides at least the minimum mandated number of instructional minutes according to proficiency levels in each program model. ENL minutes are delivered through a stand alone for students who tested at an entering and emerging level in the most recent NYSESLAT. With our current rotating block schedule, that means students have a minimum weekly 200 minutes of a stand-alone and maximum of 300 minutes. Then all students testing at an entering, emerging, transitioning, expanding, and commanding receive integrated ELA with a co-team of ELA and ENL teachers on the same rotating block schedule. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Core content is delivered in ENL and TBE program models. All ENL students receive cotaught ENL support in Algebra, Global and US History. Depending on the program model, students receive ENL or bilingual content support. Spanish home language support, a variety of instructional approaches and second language acquisition approaches are used. Total Physical Response, community oral language building activities, guided under the RtI framework with Common-Core aligned SIOP lesson plans are used. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? ELLs are evaluated in their home languages throughout the year and across the grades from intake to graduation. Upon intake, the ENL team with the Spanish teachers evaluate students in their home language skills in all four modalities. Students who preferred the TBE program model are assessed in their writing skill development and content accuracy in Spanish across the year. During the year, all students who have a French or Spanish home language background are in a native language class as well, where the LOTE teacher continuously evaluates their HL development. Students who wish to be evaluated in their HL in core content classes may do so easily in French or Spanish. This applies also for IB courses. We also have some Bengali and Arabic speakers, who are supported with bilingual students who speak their HL. If students whose languages are other than French or Spanish and wish to be evaluated in their HL, they may do so through the support of the Language and Interpretation services. Finally, once students have acquired sufficient credits of Spanish of French as part of the LOTE program, they are invited to take the Spanish or French Regents, which usually happens their senior year. This allows the team to apply for the seal of biliteracy for eligible students in the following year. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Instruction is differentiated for each of the following ELL subgroups. SIFE students are specifically targeted for afterschool programming and extra tutoring help to ensure support across content areas. They are provided with specific instruction in academic skills and strategies that extend beyond language needs, 2018-19 CEP 51  including socio-emotional supports and buddy systems. Newcomer ELLs are supported in an Newcomer stand-alone ESL class where they focus on navigating U.S. schools and culture in addition to developing specific language and literacy skills. Arabic-speaking SIFE students are supported with one period of native-language literacy group per week with ENL teacher and advisor Heiderscheid for basic school skills, literacy work, and targeted tutoring as well as ELA Regents Prep Tutoring every other day for 35 minutes. A newcomer Spanish-native language study group once per week after school and twice weekly during Advisory for Global, ELA, Science and Math content support with entire ENL department team. In addition, 11th and 12th grade newcomer ELLs have an every other day tutoring period of ELA Regents prep with Heiderscheid. Developing and Long-term ELLs are in co-taught integrated ELA courses to target academic reading and writing at the high school level. Students showing signs of struggling academically - especially those who are Long-Term ELLs - are included on a list of students for Academic Intervention Services and scheduled for extra tutoring and support that meets their content and language needs. Most students in this subgroup also have IEPs, so they tend to be observed and monitored in a tri-team rather than co-team, with the Special Education, ENL, and content teacher working in concert to target learning needs. Whenever possible, former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status are programmed into co-taught content area classes so that they continue to benefit from language modification and targeted literacy supports. Former ELLs receive two years of additional services and supports by having an Integrated ENL/ELA or Content class. Current and former ELLs (recent who tested out within last two years) receive testing accommodations of smaller testing location, word-to-word bilingual glossaries, and can take the exams in home languages except for the ELA Regents Exam. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? A variety of instructional strategies are used across content areas to provide access to grade-level material and support English development including pre-teaching vocabulary with visuals, explaining concepts with visuals, building on background knowledge, guided note-taking and graphic organizer activities, kinesthetic card-sorting and performance activities, writing assignments supported with graphic organizers, sentence starters, and pre-writing class discussions, and explicit reading strategy instruction and modeling for discipline-specific texts. These supports benefit all ELLs, though different styles or versions of supports may be implemented for different students so that ELL-SWDs are receiving materials appropriate to their current abilities. For beginning ELLs, a summary of difficult texts may be provided in a student’s native language before a student tackles the English version, or same-language reading partners may be used so that students can negotiate the English text together. All students are held accountable to the same grade-appropriate standards with varying levels of support. The ENL team uses the SIOP lesson plan format and has shared it repeatedly with staff to provide an easy way for teachers to plan with students' second language acquisition needs in mind. Many co-teacher teams coplan with ENL teachers to modify texts and differentiate for the various proficiency levels. For newcomer students, ENL and content teachers provide strategic home language supports as needed. In classes with a newcomer cohort, we provide strategic and intentional opportunities for processing in preferred languages throughout the lessons. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? KAPPA uses curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain language proficiency in the least restrictive environment. The integrated ELA class contains students with IEPs working next to ELL and general education students. Teachers work in teams to support students with relative proficiency in speaking and listening who need additional support with written literacy skills, e.g. long-term ELLs, students with IEPs, and students with expanding, transitioning or commanding in reading and writing scores on the NYSESLAT. We also provide support as per IEP for self-contained content classes, with the goal of having students move towards ICT after one calendar year to provide the least restrictive setting at all levels with appropriate modifications and scaffolds. These goals are reviewed by IEP team and ENL department for ELL-SWD students. Second language development support is integrated across content areas through co-teaching and staff education programs. 2018-19 CEP 52  First, certified TESOL instructors co-teach and co-plan with teachers in math, science, history, and ELA classrooms, ensuring that ELL support techniques are integrated into some classes in each core content area. These content-specific co-teachers also turn-key information by sharing successes in their weekly department meetings. Additional information about how to support ELL comprehension and foster language growth is disseminated to content teachers through staff-wide suggestion emails, staff training during PD, and one-on-one support and modification suggestions for interested content instructors. Finally, the math department chair and a TESOL certified teacher are attending a professional development series on Teaching Math to ELLs organized by the NYC DOE and disseminating strategies and curricular suggestions to the entire math team 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Freestanding ENL program follows the mandated time components for ENL standalones and integrated ELA as per CR Part 154.2. The newcomer emergent bilingual cohort testing at entering and emerging travels in a graded groups for an ENL stand-alone called "Language Skills." All ENL students, including recent commanding ELLs, receive a ENL support cotaught by an ENL teacher and ELA teacher. Entering and Emerging newcomers receive more than their minimum 180 standalone, 180 integrated, and 180 integrated cotaught ENL minutes with content areas for a total of 540 minutes, as we find that Entering newcomers need more than their required 360 total minutes of support. Transitioning students receive more than their required 180 minutes of 90 integrated ENL-ELA and a 90 minutes co-taught content class. Expanding students receive 90 integrated ENL-ELA and a co-taught content class. Expanding students receive more than their 90 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA or integrated content minutes 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Based on data and trends, there may be extra Regents prep courses targeted specifically for ELL groups with a focus on vocabulary acquisition or extra literacy interventions. There may also be prep content courses designed for bilingual ELL students who want to focus on acquiring the content in Spanish. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? did not close program 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs are afforded equal access to all school programs. Like all KAPPA Scholars, ELLs are encouraged to participate in any school programs that interest them including a range of student organizations such as debate team or Spectrum Club (a Gay-Straight Alliance that has branched out into all areas of discrimination), campus-wide sports, and the International Baccalaureate Diploma program. Currently we have several ELLs with a full IB program while eleven additional students take IB classes in their areas of interest. Students in these advanced classes are invited to participate in the IB Scholar-to-Scholar afterschool peer-tutoring program that operates independently of tutoring and supports so that they get additional help with the difficult content and language of these classes. Finally, ELL-SWDs receive SETSS or other services in accordance with the goals set forth in their IEP. Ells are afforded equal access to all school programs- all students are invited to all after-school programs such as College Now, Mini-Meds, and supports such as Regents Prep and tutoring. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Instructional materials and tech are provided to support ELLs. Struggling readers and low-performing ELLs participate in stand-alone classes with laptops and literacy programs. In these courses, students receive explicit literacy instruction and guidance using basic computer skills including how to use the internet as a research tool, keyboarding skills, and appropriately using the school email system to access the Google Drive resource. Core content areas use technology and differentiated scaffolded materials to support ELLs, including iPads for ST Math (through a grant that runs to end of 2016), bilingual supports for the newcomer cohorts of LE, Global and US as needed. Students who score at a second-grade reading level or below will be programmed for an literacy-based class using a web-based literacy program. The English teachers offer a leveled library and the ENL teachers have leveled bilingual texts that target SIFE and newcomer students. 2018-19 CEP 53  13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Home language support is assessed and delivered in each program model. In United States History, Global, Algebra, Geometry, LE, and Earth Science, students receive home language support fluidly and continuously. Native language support in our ENL program is provided through Spanish for Native Speakers courses as well as translated texts, native-language study groups, peer-to-peer native-language tutoring, and native language partners during in-class work time. The latter is offered in both stand-alone ESL classes and content courses during group work time, especially for texts or content that is particularly difficult to grapple with. Native language glossaries and exams are additionally provided in some content area classes for beginning and newcomer ELLs as well as those who feel they may want to take Regents Exams in their native language. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. The school ensures all required services support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grades. All high school ELLs receive literacy-focused instruction with relevant, age-appropriate content geared for high school students. Literacy and language targets are tailored according to Common-Core literacy standards and benchmarks. Texts are leveled according to Lexile levels as measured by the diagnostic Performance Series, so the students read and write about the same subject/content and demonstrate mastery of the same learning targets with leveled texts. Young Adult Literature books with translations, are given preference for independent reading to ensure that high school ELLs receive age-appropriate books. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? KAPPA is in a shared building, where space is a constant struggle. However, the ENL team of three work carefully with the Student Services Coordinator who is also the programmer. They ensure that there is reserved space for the four stand-alone sections and multiple co-taught classes. Additionally, the Technology Coordinator is also part of the ENL team and ensures that the ENL department has their own laptop cart to provide technology to their students as needed. Socioemotional supports are provided with frequent counseling and conferencing with the ENL teachers regarding personal and academic concerns. The ENL ELA teacher works in conjunction with the Social Worker and the Guidance Counselor to maintain supports across relevant staff members to monitor and assist students. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Because KAPPA was closed for renovations, there was no summer program for recent newcomers in 2015 beyond summer school housed at a partner location, East Bronx Academy. However, all freshmen including newly enrolled ELLs come to KAPPA for orientation to review KAPPA expectations and community building. New ELLs who enroll throughout the school year meet Alvarez, the Sttendance Secretary, the Parent Coordinator, Samantha Heiderscheid, the ENL Coordinator, and Michael Paulson, the Student Services Coordinator. During day one of the intake process, the ENL Coordinator connects the new student to one of the older bilingual ELL students who become a “buddy” for the week. The buddy shows the new student how to get lunch, uniform, takes them on a tour of the school, and walks them to class. This is a process that has been put into place for the past two years, to build community and responsibility between the students and allow the older ELL student to be the expert for the newcomer. The newcomers who are newly enrolled are invited to a lunch and an after school outing with a group of older bilingual ELLs, where they have a chance to socialize and discuss how to adjust to their new schools and homes. Newly enrolled ELLs are invited to attend special trips out of school with Principal. Prior trips included Dorney Park, Hershey Park, and Niagara Falls. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Spanish and French, Italian for College Credit 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? 2018-19 CEP 54  d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? do not have a dual language program Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Teachers of ELLs are going to on-going professional development. The team has attended one compliance PD during Spring 2015 and Sarah and Samantha attended one in August 2015 to prepare for the new CR-Part 154 changes. Ongoing instructional support based PD for the team is differentiated: During Fall 2015, Tammy Wang attends PD for SIFE-related topics and shares that with her History and ELA teams. Sarah Van Etten attends STEM trainings and shares that with her Science and Math teams. Samantha Heiderscheid attended CCELA for ELLs and grant-writing for ENL education and shares Common Core-related ELA Regents information with her ELA team. TESOL certified teachers improve their practice in part through participation in a variety of professional development opportunities offered through the New York City Department of Education, Teachers College (as part of the Teaching Residents at Teachers College continuing education program), and other independent conferences offered by NYCORE, Educators4Excellence, Urban Word, and other private and nonprofit institutions. The department has partnered up with several grant-funded organizations for further ENL-specific support: a TBE grant under CUNY-NYSIEB, Low-Literacy SIFE, and ST Math. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. The professional development plan for all teachers of ELLs includes: 60 minutes weekly of professional development time with grade teams and department teams after school. Each ENL teacher coplans with several teachers weekly during or after school. The ESL department share workshop session time to turnkey or develop strategies with staff during team and PD time. The ESL department assists the other teams with case studies, data analysis, shared best practices, and discipline-specific modifications during grade-team Instructional Support Team meeting. Professional development for all teachers include: Danielson, Experiential Learning, Mastery Collaborative PD, Advanced Personal and Behavior, A2i with New Visions for Math and Science training with A2i with the STEM-ENL Teacher . Twice a year in the fall and spring, we go on a weekend retreat for a day and a half to engage in intensive professional development in teams. During Chancellor’s Day (PD Day) in November 2 and June 8. The ENL team worked on building scaffolding into lessons, using the SIOP lesson plan template, and unit planning. There is some collaborative team time built in during content department meetings for teachers to coplan with an ENL person (there's one in ELA, History, and Math/Science). The ENL teachers receive ELL-specific PD more than 50% of the time, and the rest receive at least 15% ELL-related training and support. The ENL teachers also receive literacy-focused and SIFE PD. ENL Specific PDs: Heiderscheid attended CCELA Regents Writing On-Demand PD, and SVE attended STEM. Tammy Wang attended SIFE-related PDs. The team collaborated across the year to work with CUNY NYSIEB to monitor and spread the strategies developed during the prior two years under CUNY NYSIEB’s grant-funded professional development, and attended a fall Circle of Care evening session to regroup and share best practices. 2018-19 CEP 55  Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? The ENL department, over the school year, will call and schedule parent meetings (outside of parent orientation and parent teacher conferences) individually to discuss goals, language progress, language assessment results, and language –related needs in all content areas. The DOE Interpretation and Translation services, as per our LIT plan, can provide extra help as needed, but the school has instead relied internally and utilized the assistance of Spanish teachers or the ENL teachers who all speak Spanish. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Specific workshop for parents of ELLs, targeting bilingual ELL parents include: A 1.5-hour workshop that introduces parents to financial aid and the college application process in the fall, and then one in the spring about completing financial aid and submitting the paperwork correctly. Each take place once a year and will be led by the College Guidance Counselors Kamanga and College Bridge Counselor, who speaks native Spanish. Last year, there was also an ESL for Adults evening class taught by the Spanish teacher Alejandro Pena for newcomer parents. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Incoming freshmen and precise subgroup counts not up to date because ATS data still pending (RNMR and RLAT). Programming is in progress, and the next draft of this LAP will reflect new changes and programmatic adjustments. 2018-19 CEP 56 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Panorea Panagiosoulis, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 57  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Knowledge and Power Preparator School DBN: 10x374 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Title Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) Panorea Panagiosoulis Principal Andrew Clayman Assistant Principal Crystal Lopez Parent Coordinator Samantha Heiderscheid ENL/Bilingual Teacher Lisa Rodriguez Elizabeth Calvert-Kilbane/Hist Parent Teacher/Subject Area Alejandro Pena/Spanish Teacher/Subject Area Heidi Ludwig Aurora Kushner Coach Coach Leslie Lambertson School Counselor Richard Cintron Jose Ruiz Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Jose Ruiz Sarah Van Etten Other ENL Math teacher Tammy Wang Other ENL History teacher Casey Smith Other Assistant Principal 8/29/18 8/29/18 8/29/18 8/29/18 8/29/18 8/29/18 8/29/18 8/29/18 8/29/18 8/29/18 8/29/18 6/29/18 8/29/18 8/29/18 8/29/18 2018-19 CEP 58  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 10x374 School Name: KAPPA International HS Superintendent: Richard Cintron The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Samantha Heiderscheid ENL Assistant Principal yes Crystal Tammy Lopez Wang Parent Coordinator ENL Coordinator yes yes yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. HLIS from Part 3, informal parent survey and interview, Parent Language Preference form from the DOE, Emergency contact blue cards 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 2018-19 CEP 59  Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Spanish English Bengali French 257 372 7 6 39 56.62 1.07 0.91 263 366 7 6 40 55.71 1.07 0.91 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Spanish Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to Families College Night Parent Letters November October ELO Week Parent Letters and Permission Slips December January June- Awards Night and graduation Regents Parent letters Regents- December and again in May How do you plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. College documents are translated in Spanish two weeks earlier Phone calls and robocalls for reminders week and day before to attend Family FAFSA night are bilingual from our bilingual Parent Coordinator Specific Date Announcements are translated and distributed two weeks or more before hand (ELO Week) and robocalls a week before and day before, so parents are aware if their children have alternative start and end times and need permission slips signed. Letters regarding NYS Regents testing dates are distributed in English and Spanish Letters and robocalls sent in English and Spanish to notify parents of Saturday Academy for Regents Prep written three weeks ahead; mailed two weeks before; robocalls one week and day before 2018-19 CEP 60  Student Led Conference Night Parent Letters October and March Specific Date Announcements are translated and distributed two weeks or more before hand (Parent Teacher Conference 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Parent Orientation for newly identified ELLs within first few days of identification September and ongoing Parent Meet and Greet twice a year, Open House in October and November ongoing College Night and Financial Aid Nigh October, December, January Parent Teacher Conference (called Student Led Conferences) September, March interpretation service(s)? Bilingual staff will be available for walk ins and meetings; if unavailable, staff know to call for language interpretation services Bilingual staff will be available for walk ins and meetings; if unavailable, staff know to call for language interpretation services College Night and Financial Aid Night are split sessions in English and Spanish by two different college counselors. Specific Date Announcements are translated and distributed two weeks or more before hand (Parent Teacher Conference 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. School is prepared to use over the phone translation services in this event Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. All staff are briefed in beginning of year whole-staff meetings around these regulations and resources available, as well as point people to refer to in need Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services 2018-19 CEP 61  Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) The school uses DOE-provided materials, including letters, posters, and web pages to inform parents about the requirements for translation and interpretation services. For example, translated signs were posted prominently in each of the parent languages for parent-teacher conferences. These signs indicated the availability of interpretation services are found at http://schools.nyc.gov/Offices/Translation/TipsandResources/Default.htm. Official interpretations services are used to translate student transcripts for identifying incoming new student programming needs. Intake staff determine within a month the language preference of the parent of each child. Records are updated on ATS and on student blue cards to maintain an appropriate and current record of the primary language of each parent. If the staff identify parents who will require language assistance to communicate with the school, the Language and Interpretation Unit will be called. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? We will use a parent survey this year to gather feedback from parents about the quality and availability of services, available first at Parent Teacher Conferences and onward. The parents will also give feedback during the annual individual parent meetings. The question feedback range will ask parents to rate from very helpful somewhat, to not helpful. 2018-19 CEP 62 
