2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP-CS) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 07X379 School Name: JILL CHAIFETZ TRANSFER HIGH SCHOOL Principal: CARLOS BENITEZ 2018-19 CEP-CS 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: 718.402.2429 Phone Number: Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Number (DBN): 07X379 Jill Chaifetz Transfer HS 320700011379 9 – 12 / Ungraded 778 Forest Avenue, Bronx, NY 10456 718.402.3120 Fax: School Contact Person: Carlos J. Benitez Email Address: CBenite4@schools.nyc.gov Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Carlos J. Benitez Michael Wolach MadellinDiaz Ana Santos Simmone Banks Bestsy Gonzalez SataTouray Stephanie Wingert Transfer HS Geographical District: Superintendent’s Office Address: District Information Paul Rotondo Superintendent: 198 ForsythStreet, New York 10002 protondo@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 646.654.1261 Phone Number: 718.778.7385 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 CEP 3  FSC: Bronx Executive Director’s Office Address: Jose Ruiz Executive Director: One Fordham Plaza Jruiz2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718.740.2721 Phone Number: 718.740.2720 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Carlos J. Benitez Michael Wolach MadellinDiaz Luis Vargas SataTouray BestsyGonzalez *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Stephanie Wingert CBO Representative, if applicable Noemi Martinez SherileeCousins Kimberly Cummins Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Teacher 2018-19 CEP 5  Karen Esdelle FlaviaMartinez Vincent Jordan Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Member/ Assistant Principal Member/ Parent Member/Teacher Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Signature (Blue Ink) 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? The Jill Chaifetz Transfer School is dedicated to providing an alternative high school environment for students who have previously been unsuccessful in high school. We believe that learning must be relevant, that school should be a place of joy and growth and that all learners have the right to a safe, loving and supportive environment from which to grow. We are firm in our belief that young people deserve second chances, especially those who may have previously slipped through the cracks. We strive to meet each young person where they are, help them achieve their goals and treat them as individual learners and people. We seek to provide a demanding instructional program 2018-19 CEP 9  coupled with a loving and nurturing environment. Our commitment to collaboration is evident in how our staff works with young people and how we work with each other. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. The Jill Chaifetz Transfer High School (JCTS) is a Community School that serves young people from 16 – 21 years old who have fallen behind academically and become overage and under-credited in their progress towards graduation. Through our partnership with BronxWorks, we provide Learning to Work internships and our AIDP/Community Schools grant allows us to support our students with a Primary Person model that ensures that our young people are known well and cared for on the social/emotional side of their lives so they can overcome whatever obstacles present that are undermining their academic success. We were rewarded the "Respect for All" school in 2016 and we accept this award with great seriousness as we believe that every student, regardless of their multiple identities, has the right to a safe, joyful and challenging learning environment. We serve a population that is approximately 30% Students with Disabilities, and 10% ELLs. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. We serve a population that is approximately 30% Students with Disabilities, and 10% ELL’s. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. This year, we have made great strides in the areas of teacher collaboration and maintaining a supportive environment. We have two main focuses for the 2018/19 school year; (1) refining and building capacity to implement an outcome-based learning system and (2) expanding the breadth and depth of our "Family Group", a teacher-led advisory structure, curriculum. Since our opening in 2007, we have always excelled at the Framework element of building and maintaining a supportive environment. Students feel cared about, feel part of a positive community and each community member is known, respected and celebrated. The elements we are most focused on for the 2018/2019 school year are (1) continuing to build on our structures and methodologies to engage teachers with collaborative and coherent professional development and (2) to focus on refining our assessments to include more rigor and consistency across classrooms. 2018-19 CEP 10  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 07X379 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 218 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 1 1 4 1 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 65 50 2 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 84.0% % Attendance Rate 84.4% % Reduced Lunch 9.2% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.9% 61.9% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 0.9% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 1.66 0% 13% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 38% 32% 12.2% 0.0% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A YES N/A N/A YSH Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES N/A N/A YSH Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A N/A NO No N/A 20 19 3 55.3% 0.0% 26.6% 34.9% 1.4% 0.9% 4 13% 3.9 N/A N/A 45% 35% 44.7% 2% N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A YSH N/A N/A N/A N/A YSH YES N/A N/A N/A NO 2018-19 CEP 11  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Needs Assessment: Current Strengths: Peer Collaborative Teachers (PCTs) completed Teaching Matters micro-credential on Strategizing for Assessment which addressed: identifying high-leverage standards/outcomes, assessing alignment, and improving assessment according to UDL principles. Teaching staff has received targeted support over the past two school years when revising assessments according to the Hess Matrix to gauge rigor. Developed outcome revision tool / rubric revision tool. Created common rubrics across disciplines. We have agreed to include a common outcome across all classes at JCTS that allows our staff to achieve a common understanding for what rigorous and aligned assessments entail. Needs: We need to design the micro-credential PD for rigorous, aligned assessments. We addition coaching support to provide targeted assistance to teachers who are completing their course outlines and assessment maps. Analyze current summative assessments to inform PD offerings. Develop a micro-credential on UDL principles. Include in regular cabinet meeting time for reviewing ADVANCE data regarding designing coherent assessments. Departments will need scheduled time and guidance for looking at student work and identifying alignment, rigor, and student learning gaps. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 2018-19 CEP 12  By June 2019, 75% of teachers will demonstrate growth in designing robust and rigorous formative and summative assessments that are aligned to rubrics and outcomes. Teachers will demonstrate this growth in their assessment maps, rubrics, and assessments (formative and summative). This growth will be measured by observations, inter-visitations and teacher submitted artifacts. Additionally, the department chairs will support this through providing feedback and collegial support. 2018-19 CEP 13  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional  programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Peer Collaborative Teachers (PCTs) will develop Strategizing for Assessment micro-credential Organize existing resources (outcome development protocol, rubric revision tool, Hess Matrix, assessment template, UDL principles summary chart) into a guidebook to support teachers when developing and refining assessments Contract with ISA coach to ensure ample coaching will be available to the entire JCTS instructional staff Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All teachers All Teachers By mid-July 2018 By mid-July 2018 PCTs All Teachers By mid-August 2018 Principal Host assessment “share-fair” where teacher assessments are disseminated and published. All teachers All coaches and administration will continually review ADVANCE data, student work, and teacher curricula to ascertain when to intervene and offer targeted assistance. All teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement TSI team members from JCTS and select staff from LPN schools JCTS instructional staff By mid-October 2018 Ongoing throughout SY 2018-2019 How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Monthly School Leadership Team meetings and annual Community Schools forum, and parent newsletter. 2018-19 CEP 14  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. We will use existing institutional knowledge of our teachers, funding will be earmarked for support for Peer Collaborative Teachers (ie Emerging Teacher Leader program). Teacher teams will meet during morning meetings and there is per session funding for after school team meetings throughout the year. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. From a non-evaluative standpoint, the Peer Collaborative Teachers will provide feedback around assessments and rubrics. Administration will provide evaluative feedback around assessments and teaching practices. Should a teacher struggle, additional coaching sessions will be provided to support teacher growth. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Scholarship data, student reflections, inter-visitations notes, PD logs, and feedback from the Peer Collaborative Teachers and Department chairs. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 15  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Based on ongoing needs assessment from our community-based organization, classroom-level data, and feedback from our staff at our staff retreat at the beginning of June 2018, we have identified a need to strengthen our existing support to individual students (and special populations) both academically and behaviorally.. Current Strengths:  Master schedule includes staff collaboration in the classroom.   High staff buy-in around the importance of staff to staff communication around supporting students academic Special Education push-in support was established. and social-emotional needs. Priority Needs:  We need to designate a time for co-planning for ICT, push-in, and content teachers.  To build capacity around effective co-teaching models.  To better support the academic and social emotional needs of individual student Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. During academic year 2018-2019, our school community will improve the way in which we support individual students by expanding ICT to more classrooms, enhance the social-emotional push-in support by having designed co-planning time and accountability measures, and create a behavioral support system that includes triads (student, teacher, and academic advisor conferences) and a Behavioral Support Team to oversee the implementation. 2018-19 CEP 16  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Provide ICT training in order to build capacity around team teaching models. All DOE staff July and August 2018 Administration and Peer Collaborative Teachers July 2018 Assistant Principal ICT, Push-In, and Content Area Teachers ICT and Departments September, 2018 Select Staff September 2018 All staff Fall 2018 Administration and Peer Collaborative Teachers Assistant Principal Principal, Assistant principal, CBO program director Establish co-planning time for in the master schedule ICT teachers will be incorporated into departments. Establish the Behavior Support Team Provide professional development around growth mindset, restorative justice, triad conferences, mediation, and reporting 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. We will message to parents/family/ supportive adults through orientation, newsletter, parent coordinator communication, and during SLT meetings. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. We will use existing institutional knowledge of our teachers, funding will be earmarked for support from outside institutions (training costst). Teacher teams will meet during morning meetings and there is per session funding for after school team meetings throughout the year. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 2018-19 CEP 17  X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. We will monitor progress through weekly Behavior Support Team meeting and weekly Administrative Cabinet meetings in order to analyze data (Jumprope triad logs, OORS reports, and observations). Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Scholarship data, student reflections, reflections/analysis from Cabinet meetings and Behavior support team meetings. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 18  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Needs Assessment: Current Strengths: In SY 2017-2018, we partnered with the Transfer School Institute (TSI)/Learning Partners Network in a three school pilot in order to learn how to implement Japanese Lesson Study. Through this ongoing collaboration with the Learning Partners Network, we will have the support to implement the best practices that drive the successful implementation of this initiative. In prior school years, teachers have engaged in rounds of intervisition. Teachers are accustomed to working in teacher teams within a collaborative and supportive school environment. Needs: The department chairs will need to meet weekly to monitor and support lesson study teams. The department chairs will compile lesson study resources from East Brooklyn Community Transfer School to create a facilitation guide book. The team will need to create and offer professional development on taking low-inference notes, collaborative planning, debriefing focus lessons, and sharing best practices for facilitating adult learning and team management. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, seventy-five percent of teachers will engage in Japanese Lesson Study in order to improve teacher pedagogy and increase collaborative discussion performance as evidenced by rubric scores, observation reports, and through write-ups of focus lesson debriefs. 2018-19 CEP 19  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Create a Japanese Lesson Study Facilitation Guide Collaborate with JCTS department chairs to create professional development sessions which address the identified PD needs Meet with schools of the Learning Partners Network (LPN) to coordinate the modes and frequency of the support to-be-provided throughout the school year Conduct first round of JLS focus lesson observation (selecting some focus students who are ENL and/or have special needs), debrief, reflection, and revision Turn key best practices identified from the first round of JLS to entire staff to drive student performance on measures of collaborative discussion. Department chair team publishes a report on the implementation of JLS and its impact on student achievement (including data on the performance of ENL and SPED student sub-groups) and teacher growth. Based on the findings of the cycle one JLS report, the department chair team will take steps to adjust and refine plans for the second round of lesson study implementation. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All Teachers By the start of SY 2018-2019 (and ongoing as responsive PDs are needed) All Teachers By the start of SY 2018-2019 (and ongoing as responsive PDs are needed) All teachers By mid-September 2018 All Teachers By end of cycle one (end of November 2018) All Teachers December 2018 (and again in March 2019) All Teachers December 2018 (and again in March 2019) All Teachers December 2018 (and again in March 2019) Peer Collaborative Teachers (PCTs) and AP JCTS department chairs TSI team members from JCTS and select staff from LPN schools JCTS instructional staff Department chairs Department chairs Department chairs During the transition to cycle three, use this iterative process to once again plan and refine lesson study implementation. All Teachers March - end of June 2018 Department chairs 2018-19 CEP 20  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We will message to parents/family/ supportive adults through orientation, newsletter, parent coordinator communication, and during SLT meetings. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. We will use existing institutional knowledge of our teachers, funding will be earmarked for support from outside institutions (ie Esklota and Institute for student Achievement) Teacher teams will meet during morning meetings and there is per session funding for after school team meetings throughout the year. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. The progress of this initiative will be monitored and evaluated in two ways. First, because this work depends on non-evaluative peer-to-peer feedback, we will heavily rely on teacher surveys and other means of self-reflection and evaluation. Secondly, administration will use Advance to track the progress of relevant Danielson Framework components. In collaboration with administration, instrcutional coach, the Peer Collaborative Teachers and Department Chairs, will consistently reflect on their own practice and work through reviewing Advance data and teacher feedback Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Scholarship data, student reflections, ADVANCE observations Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 21  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Current Strengths:  Principal and AP's are well-trained in low-inference transcripts and other forms of classroom observation.  Teachers are used to a collaborative environment and look at feedback on practice as a positive.   Informal communication between key stakeholder takes places Informal communication amongst administrators and instructional coach happen on a regular basis Needs: Job embedded training for administrators & teachers using Advance   An accountability system to ensure administration is on pace  Observation write-ups should reflect the communication between administrators, coach, and Peer Collaborative Teachers Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. During 2018-2019 school year, 100% of teacher observation reports will include at least one of the following: reference to coach log, previous admin observations, peer collaborative teacher notes, ICP/ End of Year goals in order to provide clear and consistent feedback that supports teacher growth. 2018-19 CEP 22  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? At the beginning of the year, administrators will meet to map out and divide up teachers and the observation cycle. Principal, AP September, 2018 Principal /Assistant Principal Participate in JESA training Principal, AP Fall 2018, Principal / AP Administrators will meet on a bi-weekly basis in order to discuss observations, share ideas and enter information into Advance. Administrators will use their observation notes to share professional development needs with the instructional coach and Peer Collaborative Teachers on a weekly basis At the end of the year, administrators will use observation notes, PD notes and Advance data to inform instructional goals for the following year. Spring 2019 Principal, AP October, Principal / AP 2018-May, 2019 September 2018- June 2019 Principal / AP May 2019-June 2019 Principal/AP Principal, AP, Coach, Peer Collaborative Teachers Principal, AP, Coach, Peer Collaborative Teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will be included in the dialogue around Effective School Leadership during our monthly School Leadership Team and annual Community Schools Forum with the support of our Parent Coordinator and Community School Coordinator. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. We will use existing institutional knowledge of our teachers, funding will be earmarked for support from outside institutions (Institute for student Achievement) and the staffing of Peer Collaborative Teachers made possible by the Emerging Teacher Leader Program. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 2018-19 CEP 23  X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Each academic cycle the administrators, coach, and Peer collaborative teachers will meet to review the data. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Instructional coach log   Peer collaborative teacher notes  Observation notes  ICP/End of Year goal sheet Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 24  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. As a community school, parent and community involvement is integral to our success. Due to the older non-traditional student population we work with, we have struggled with parent involvement in the past few years. Some of our strengths in regards to family and community ties include supportive services, low student to staff ratio, and offering a variety of community events. As a community school, we have many in-house services for our young people, including access to mental health facilities, access to medical facilities and access to services offered by BronxWorks including housing, health, and welfare support. We have a low student/adult ratio, making it possible for each student to be well-known by one or more adults and for our adults to make contact with many families per day. These staff members encourage families to come in for behavior and academic support meetings. We have had some success in bringing in families by offering a variety of community school events, not just traditional parent/teacher conferences. For example, our Arts Fest performances give families the opportunity to discover what students have been working on during Friday electives. In terms of school needs and action steps, we have determined that our success in community engagement lies within:   redefinining our concept of “family” and improving our ability to include key stakeholders that may lie outside of the traditional family model. connecting a balanced and thoughtful needs assessment for families to concrete services organized by our Parent Coordinator both at the beginning of the school year and midway through the year  Continuing established positive partnerships for student health, mental health and wellness variety of community events (arts fest, multicultural, parent teacher, CS forum)   Connected to CBO, have access to resources for families (Astor family resource specialist)  Encourage families to come in, invite them to meetings, ask their feedback, involved in behavior support  Creating a newsletter sent out to families monthly over email to notify them of upcoming events and collect family feedback  Creating a structured events committee spearheaded by our newly appointed Parent Coordinator Priority Needs:  Variety of events is good, but need to vary the scale, and do better at pinpointing what parents need through needs assessment  Redefine what “family” means, not all students because of age are connected to a mother and father/traditional family model  Add in social/emotional piece to existing community events, i.e. come see this performance but also get information or a service (health screen, housing assistance, legal) 2018-19 CEP 25  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June, 2018, the school will host nine community school events directly tied to family needs assessment results. 2018-19 CEP 26  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Work with BronxWorks and the community schools personnel to develop nine community school events throughout the school year, both large and small scale. Families September, 2018 Coordinate student events that historically have had a positive impact on student health, mental health and wellness Students September 2018- June 2019 Design and distribute a needs assessment that will help us gauge what kind of services we might be able to offer in conjunction with a school-wide event such as Arts Fest Families October, 2018 Use community school meetings, BronxWorks meetings, and events planning committees to assess community needs and coordinate the distribution of services Create monthly newsletter to email to families that includes upcoming events and asks for community feedback. Utilize monthly newsletters and DOE Vendor services KinVo & Jumprope) as another strategy for increasing family attendance as each of our events. Families Families October, 2018-June, 2019 October, 2018-June, 2019 Parent Coordinator, Community Schools Coordinator & Events Committee Community Schools Coordinator, Astor Mental Health Clinic and CBO Leaders Parent Coordinator, Community Schools Coordinator & Events Committee Administration, CBO Members and Parent Coordinator Parent Coordinator & Community Schools Coordinator & Events Committee Use resources from BronxWorks to create raffle for prizes to increase family attendance at school events. Families October, 2018-June, 2019 Principal/AP's, CBO administration 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. BronxWorks (variety of social welfare services), Department of Health (eye screenings), Step Up (STI screenings), CATCH (sexual health awareness and services), 2018-19 CEP 27  Astor Family Services (Mental Health & Family Support services), SMILE (dental screenings) Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. We will leverage our Community School and LTW budgets to support in purchasing supplies for these events. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. In January, we will monitor our current progress by reviewing attendance data from our first three community school events as well as conducting a mid-year needs assessment to determine Spring supportive services. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Needs Assessment data, attendance data from school events, surveys circulated to parents for feedback through the monthly newsletter, anecdotal evidence from community member meetings. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 28  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) All students are overage/undercredited upon entering the program All students are overage/undercredited upon entering the program All students are overage/undercredited upon entering the program All students are overage/undercredited upon entering the program Ats/SESIS reports. Students’ self-identification, Parent outreach through Community Schools Innitiative. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Various depending on student need. Small Group/Tutoring Before, during, and after the school day Various depending on student need. Small Group/Tutoring Before, during, and after the school day Various depending on student need. Small Group/Tutoring Before, during, and after the school day Various depending on student need. Small Group/Tutoring Before, during, and after the school day Individual or small group counseling. Referral to outside resources. Individual or small group counseling. Referral to outside resources. Before, during, and after the school day 2018-19 CEP 29  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 20 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Through student needs assessment and individual referrals, JCTS will provide our STH population with items to meet unmet needs improving overall wellness. Items include hygiene kits, Winter wear and laundry detergent. STH plan also includes linking students to resources through our CBO BronxWorks and Mental health clinic Astor. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 30  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 CEP 31  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Our school has a relatively stable teaching staff, we generally need to recruit for no more than 1 position each year. We recruit from Open Market, and area universities. Our staff is expected to participate in Professional Development both within and outside of our school building. We provide funding for any PD teachers would like to participate in. Our support of teachers is highly individualized. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). We participated in the Transfer School Common Core Initiative through which our Inquiry team collaborated weekly on embedding CCSS across disciplines. We contracted with coaches from Institute for Student Achievement and Institute for Student Achievement to provide workshops tailored to individual teacher strengths and areas of need. In addition, through the work of Eskolta, our school will partner with another transfer school to examine 'lesson study' in network & collaborative fashion. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). 2018-19 CEP 32  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) X X Column B Section Reference(s) 11,13,15,17,19 11,13,15,17,19 Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) 1Explanation/Background: Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 136296 0 0 0 1702737 2018-19 CEP 33  Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities 2018-19 CEP 34  funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 35  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Jill Chalfetz Transfer HS, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students Jill Chaifetz Transfer HS will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 2018-19 CEP 36  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; 2018-19 CEP 37  ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) Jill Chaifetz Transfer HS, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement 2018-19 CEP 38  between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; 2018-19 CEP 39  ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; 2018-19 CEP 40  II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; 2018-19 CEP 41  ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 42  Addendum: Community School Partnerships Directions: The Community School (CS) strategy is directly aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. Community Schools bring schools and community partners together and integrate academics, health, youth development, and family engagement to provide students with the tools and opportunities they need to succeed. The Core Services in Community Schools are Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness. Part 1 – Community School Partnerships Goal(s) How is the CS strategy integrated into academic instruction at your school, and what impact has it had on student academic outcomes? Our Community Schools strategy is integrated into the fabric of the school culture at JCTS. We are consistently seeking to support students through making various connections to community partners that can provide our students with the necessary skills and resources that they need to successfully complete their high school diplomas. In addition to the many supports referenced in Section 5E that provide social-emotional support to students and their families, our Community Schools strategy is also directly integrated into academic instruction at JCTS through our new Friday elective initiative at JCTS. This initiative, offered on the traditionally lowest-attended day of the week, has increased the number and variety of community partnerships that engage our students through weekly courses in various fields including the culinary arts, visual art, dance, technology, fashion, and music. These courses have increased the level of student engagement in our community, have allowed students to build their professional networks, have encouraged students to attend school more regularly, and have allowed students to express themselves in ways that they were previously unable to in school. Indicate the summative goal(s) of the Community School for the 2018-19 school year. Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. During the academic year 2018-2019, the Community School will leverage our Friday elective courses and other school structures to increase attendance and student/family engagement by expanding the supports available to students. We will accomplish this in the following ways: 1. Incorporating student voice to course offerings, better matching students to courses by interest; thereby increasing the level of engagement in the community as evidenced by increased attendance and student engagement surveys at various points in the year. 2. Securing partnerships that can offer supported mentorship opportunities to students, increasing the number of quality internship sites by 10% by November 2018, and working in conjunction with our mental health clinic and Internship Coordinator for students who many need additional social-emotional support to be successful at their internship sites Integrating Friday elective programming with our new CDOS programming initiative, to better engage students in the classroom while better preparing them for life beyond high school. 3. 4. Utilizing the Friday elective and career-focused programming as a gateway for parent engagement events throughout the year, thereby increasing parent and student engagement in the community to improve attendance Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Community School Annual Goal(s): How will achieving your Community School Goal(s)--in Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness--support your academic goals for students? The increased engagement that will come as a result of our Friday supports, CDOS supports, and the ongoing needs assessments that will connect students and their families to necessary resources will assist to diagnose and combat the barriers that prevent students from attending school. It will also assist to increase engagement from the students and will help parents feel more of a connection to the school community. As the student and their families feel more 2018-19 CEP 43  supported, there can be increased collaboration between the home and school to engage the young adult in order to create a successful student. Studies show when a student attends school their academic successes improve. Students who attend school gain more credits and score higher on Regents examinations. Anything that we can do to remove barriers that hinder attendance will support our academic goals for students. Having a mental health clinic onsite allowed students not to miss school for counseling appointments. It is also our goal to have our CSC connect students to CBO resources with fewer reasons for students to skip school to attend other appointments such as entitlement, housing help or case management. Part 2 – Community School Partnerships Core Services Action Plan Part 2a. Identify the Community-based Organization (CBO) partnerships that you will develop in ELT, Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness, their target student population(s), and scope of the services provided. As well as supporting schools’ supportive environment and attendance work, CBOs should be helping to support your school’s instructional focus. CBO Partnership BronxWorks (Lead CBO) Target Population Scope of Service SY18-19 SMART Goal Students with low credit accumulation ELT 80% students enrolled in tutoring will increase their credit accumulation rate BronxWorks (Lead CBO) DOE Staff Identified Community Partners Internship Sites All Students and their families Attendance SupportFamily Engagement BronxWorks (Lead CBO) DOE Staff Identified Community Partners Internship Sites All Students and their families Attendance SupportFamily Engagement 2018-19 CEP 44  BronxWorks (lead CBO) All students Health and Wellness Astor Services for Children and Families CATCH Program DOHMH 1. Increase in student attendance and engagement as evidenced by attendance records and student surveys at various points in the year 2. 9 family engagement events throughout the year led by the Community Schools Coordinator and Parent Coordinator 3. 10% increase in internship sites by November 2018 80% of students identified as having a mental health or sexual health concern are connected to in-school or other resources Part 3 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 3a. Indicate resources your Community Partnership will leverage to achieve your summative SMART goal(s) and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Financial: CS budget Additional funding sources Human: BronxWorks staff Other BronxWorks programs as referral sources Enhanced school structures Community Partnerships In-School Partnerships (DOE Staff/Instructional Staff/etc) JCTS Administration 2018-19 CEP 45  Part 3b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 3c. Describe how the school will partner with the Lead CBO to do the following: 1. Community Schools are expected to partner with a community-based partner organization (CBO) and together with members of the School Leadership Team, hire a Community School Director. The Director will lead implementation of the asset and needs assessment process, and other critically important coordinating activities. Indicate how you will leverage this aspect of the work. Community Schools are expected to personalize the needs of all students, through strategic programming and services, as determined by the asset and needs assessment, and must also offer Expanded Learning Time (ELT) and mental health programming. In completing this section, ensure that you think about how: (1) the right services are provided to the right students and families at the right time; and (2) how you will seamlessly coordinate services with instructional programming happening throughout and outside of the school day. Indicate how you will implement this work, and describe other programming you anticipate to be in place to strengthen this initiative. Community Schools are expected to emerge as Partnership Schools, which are places where parents and families feel welcome, actively participate in the conversation and decision-making around the renewal of their schools, and have many opportunities to advocate for their children. Monthly meetings and Community School Forums engaging families and community stakeholders will be a critical part of this family engagement strategy. Describe how you will implement this aspect of the work. Community School Principals are expected to meet on a weekly basis with their Community School Director, select Assistant Principals, key staff, and other CBOs, to analyze trends in data and case manage individual students. Data tools – including the New Visions Data Sorter - and training will be available for schools to use. Indicate how you will implement this aspect of the work. 2. 3. 4. This year, as part of our Community Schools initiative, our Community Schools Coordinator (CSC) worked to secure community partnerships that would serve the needs of our school community. For the upcoming academic year, the strategy is to better assess the needs now that the CSC has developed a relationship with our students and many of their families. She has developed a needs assessment in collaboration with our mental health clinician that can better gauge the needs of our students to better inform the kinds of partnerships she needs to develop during academic year 2018-2019. In addition, she will work with school administration to refine the Friday elective initiative so better gauge student interest, and improve communication between the school and the families around what the students are learning and the skills they are gaining through the electives and the CDOS career courses. She will work on creating a monthly newsletter and organizing parent events that celebrate student successes so that parents are able to build relationships with the school and feel welcomed into our community. The CSC will work closely with Parent Coordinator, and will continue to take a leadership role in the CST and the weekly attendance meeting, the focus of which is to utilize data tools – including data pulled from the New Visions Data sorter – to gauge the impact that our Friday elective and CDOS initiatives are having on student attendance and engagement across various groups of students and developing strategies for making improvements in real time. The meetings will be held every Monday at 3PM. Part 4 – Community School Partnerships Oversight 2018-19 CEP 46  Part 4a. Key Staff and Partners 1. Name and describe the scope of involvement of all community partners working in the school (include partners supporting ELT, counseling, enrichment, etc.) 2. Name the members of your Community School Team and how meetings will be organized and structured to engage all stakeholders and be focused on results. 3. Explain data strategies including the use of the data sorter, and steps that the school will take to ensure that the appropriate interventions are provided to the right students Key Staff and Partners include the school administration, school social worker, guidance counselor, staff of the mental health clinic, mental health program manager, lead instructors on the DOE staff and the Parent Coordinator. The CST is comprised of: Carlos Benitez, Principal Karen Esdelle, Assistant Principal Stephanie Wingert, Program Director Dana Gelles, Community Schools Coordinator Shaista Qazi, Social Worker Samantha Arfin, Astor Mental Health Clinician Ana Santos, Parent Coordinator Michael Wolach, Lead Teacher Milagros Morales, Parent Meetings will be held once per month, and will focus on reviewing the data to ensure that the initiatives are having the intended effects. These meetings will serve as an opportunity to brainstorm strategies for course correction at various points in the year if necessary. Part 4b. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the Community School program. Financial: CS budget Additional funding sources Human: BronxWorks staff Other BronxWorks programs as referral sources Enhanced school structures Community Partnerships In-School Partnerships (DOE Staff/Instructional Staff/etc) JCTS Administration Scheduling: CDOS program Friday elective programs Part 4c. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. Data Sorter Training for Staff: Summer 2018 2018-19 CEP 47  JCTS Community Needs Assessment: Summer 2018 - September 2018 Friday elective outcomes meeting: July 2018 Grading policy for Friday electives: July 2018 Securing CDOS syllabi/programming conversations and documentation: Summer 2018 Course catalogue created for Friday electives created: August 2018 Advertising Campaign for Friday elective courses by early September 2018 Match staff to elective courses: Summer 2018, with a start date of actual push in by September 2018 for Cycle 1 Attendance Meetings Begin with use of Data Sorter: September 2018 Success Mentoring Begins: September 2018 CDOS programming begins: September 2018 ELT Begins: October 2018 – May 2019 Internships/Mentorship Opportunities for students begin: November 2018 – May 2018 Student Surveys/Gauge Student Engagement/Impact of CDOS and Electives: 1 per cycle Development of New Partnerships: October 2018 and ongoing as needed Minimum of 9 events by June 2018 Referral to resources as needed based on weekly attendance meetings and success mentoring interventions Part 4d. Mental Health Work Plan Separate from this S/CEP, schools will complete a Mental Health Work Plan that will become an addendum to this document. 2018-19 CEP 48  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information Borough Bronx District 07 School Name Jill Chaifetz Transfer High School School Number 379 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Carlos J. Benitez Coach ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Giuseppina Tramontana Teacher/Subject Area Michael Wolach Teacher/Subject Area type here Related-Service Provider Vincent Jordan Superintendent Paul Rotondo Assistant Principal Karen Esdelle Coach type here School Counselor Shaista Qazi Parent Simonne Banks Parent Coordinator type here Field Support Center Staff Member Anita Bush Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 211 2018-19 CEP 49 Total number of ELLs 26 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 12.32%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 2 4 3 K Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 0 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Our school is a transfer high school that enrolls over aged & under credited students, therefore, all of our students are beyond the beginning level. We are prepared to use the Fountas and Pinnell program for assessing the literacy skills of any student who enrolls at the beginning level. The information gathered from this data would help us determine the instructional supports that our team would unpack & provide both in language acquisition and its lateral impact in all other subject area classes. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Our ENL teacher prepares alongside the content area teachers for alignment of goals & assessments. In addition, our ENL teacher is a part of the instructional team that meets to increase the quality of IEPs since there is an overalp of ELLs with IEPs. Programming structures are in place to facilitate the time needed for services to be provided for our ELLs. 2018-19 CEP 50  3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? The success of our program for ELL's is measured through improvements in course pass rates, credit accumulation per cycle, scores on NYSESLAT exams, evaluation of student writing samples (collected each cycle) and teacher feedback. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Common Planning Professional time for ENL and other content departments. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] n/a 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. We have 26 enrolled ELLs. These students are operating at an intermediate or advanced level of proficiency. We pull data from traditional scholarship reports like credit accumulation patterns, Regents scores, NYSESLAT, and assessment grades from our Outcome Based Learning gradebook which focuses on developing skills (some of which are language based skills). 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Our ENL department is integrated with the other content area departments through CPT, CBO extension structures, School Implementation Team meetings, End of Cycle data dives, etc. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. For all subject areas, the ELL teacher does both push-in and pull-out services for her ELL students. She works with the general education teachers to ensure they are using ESL strategies to reach the ELL students. Other interventions are giving the ELL students the option to complete projects, tests, and assignments with her; modifying directions and instructions to make them more comprehensible and pulling students out to work on their particular needs in a content area. All interventions are offered in English. b. TBE program. If applicable. n/a c. DL program. If applicable. n/a 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? The ESL teacher works along side with our programmer to make sure all instructional minutes are met for each individual student. 2018-19 CEP 51  3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Paste response here: 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? n/a 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Currently, we have 8 students that are newcomers & 6 that are long term. The teachers work with the ENL teacher on a regular basis to adjust their lesson plans and class activities to foster individualized attention to student needs. The ENL teacher also modifies lesson plans for teachers that need assistance and will push-in to classes where students are in need of more attention. We also offer tutoring before and after school for those that need additional assistance. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Teachers have been given ample material to help students with ELL-SWD needs. The special education, ENL and general education teachers meet to discuss what each subject area needs and the Principal helps with accessing these materials. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Every student is programmed for classes on an individualized basis, meaning the student's needs (IEP needs, ELL needs, credit needs, and regents needs) are taken into account when their program is made. The special education department, ENL teacher and the programmer meet before every term to make sure all the student needs are being met for each student. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. We offer a variety of intervention programs for ELLs. These include, individualized pull-out sessions to work on subjects they need help with, push-in services to get more assistance in classes, modified lesson plans by the ENL teacher, extra tutoring before and after school, and one-on-one help from advisors. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? We are currently re-vamping our Regents tutoring and how it is delivered to the struggling students (including our ELL population) and we will be tracking the success in the Regents to come in January. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? As I stated above, our Regents tutoring is being re-vamped so the morning sessions may look different than our afternoon sessions. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELL students have access to all school programs. We have after school tutoring, sports clubs, and classes that are available to ELL students. 2018-19 CEP 52  12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Dual-language dictionaries are available to ELL students as well as computers when needed. Teachers are regularly trained on the latest technology that would help in their classrooms for ELL students. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Paste response to question here: 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Paste response to question here: 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Dual-language dictionaries are available to ELL students as well as computers when needed. Teachers are regularly trained on the latest technology that would help in their classrooms for ELL students. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Our students undergo a new student orientation process that allows them access to their peers, school staff and support staff. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? We currently offer Italian classes for for ELL students. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? n/a Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Paste response to question here: The ENL teacher attends workshops and training to keep abreast of new policies, materials and strategies to support our ELL students. Often times, they are provided with the opportunity to attend PDs offered by the Bronx Field Support Center. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. The ENL teacher tracks each ELL student's progress and regularly informs staff of improvements that have been made and where each student is still struggling and proper training is done to assist teachers with teaching these specific skills that are 2018-19 CEP 53  lacking in the students. The ENL teacher will also assist teachers with modifying lesson plans and activities in order to help the ELL students. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Our ELL coordinator makes the parental outreach to bring the parents of our ELLs into the school (once a year) and discuss program objectives & student progress. These events usually include food and refreshments as an incentive for parental participation. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. The ENL teacher works with our advisory staff to reach out to parents to get them involved in our after school programs and events. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. We received a grant to offer an F-status teacher at the school to teach the ARTS for specific inclusion of ELLs. We also received a separate grant to bring in other Theatre Arts related programming at the school that address in scope the needs of our ELL population and operate to contextualize their learning through agency in other non-core classes in our school's programming. 2018-19 CEP 54 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Carlos J. Benitez, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 55  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Jill Chaifetz Transfer School School DBN: 07X379 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Carlos J. Benitez Title Principal Karen Esdelle Assistant Principal Amanda Perez Parent Coordinator Giuseppina Tramontana ENL/Bilingual Teacher Simonne Banks Parent Michael Wolach Teacher/Subject Area Vincent Jordan Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Shaista Qazi School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 1/1/01 11/4/15 1/1/01 11/4/15 1/1/01 11/4/15 11/4/15 1/1/01 1/1/01 11/4/15 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 2018-19 CEP 56  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 07X379 School Name: Jill Chaifetz Transfer School Superintendent: Paul Rotondo The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this Giuseppina Tramontana ENL teacher - - - - - - - - - conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No No - - - Yes - - - * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. The enrollment process at our school requires for multiple visits by student & their parents. During these visits, information about home language preferences are obtained through dialogue, filling out forms, and ATS data. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 2018-19 CEP 57  Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral The overwhelming majority of our population with LEP are spanish speaking. Less than 1% speak Bengali and a regional African language from Gambia. The overwhelming majority of our population with LEP are spanish speaking. Less than 1% speak Bengali and a regional African language from Gambia. 65% English 33% Spanish 1% Arabic 1% African Language The overwhelming majority of our population with LEP are spanish speaking. Less than 1% speak Bengali and a regional African language from Gambia. 65% English 34% Spanish 1% African Language - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. We do not have languages represent that minimum percentage outside of the languages denoted in parenthesis. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. We have six important annual events which coincide with the end of the curricular cycles & the parent teachers evening events. We make use of Google translate & the DOE offices that support our needs by translating documents & providing translators via telephone. Sept, Nov, Jan, March, May, June All of our annual documents are mailed out in both spanish and english. The other two languages are translated using various forms of external resources (BOCES, T&I, Former PTA members, etc). Our annual mail out events include but are not limited to the following: Orientations, Open House, Homecoming event, Spooky Halls, Multicultural Dinner, JCTS Holiday Give back, 5 graduation ceremonies per year, Parent Teacher Conferences, 12 Progress Reports per year, JCTS Field Day and other events in conjunction with our CBO. - - - - - - - - - 2018-19 CEP 58  2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Open House Events (from May to October & December to March), New Parent Orientation (August - October & February - March), Parent Teacher Conferences (Nov. 9th & 10th and March 8th & 9th ). Each of these events are facilitated with a largely bi-lingual staff that includes Teachers & Advisors. - - - Sept 28 & 29th, Oct 5th & 12th interpretation service(s)? Google Translate On site translators - Bi-lingual staff Nov 9th & 10th & 30th DOE Translators (via telephone) Feb. 1st, 8th, 15th March 1st & 8th May 3rd June 25th - - - - - - 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. We make use of KINVO which is an email, text based interface platform for communicating with parents. it has the ability to 'translate' message from English into several languages (as outlined through the BOE as frequent languages of our student's families). Also, our staff is 60% bilingual and are often used in all manners of facilitation for meeting with families during school events. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Professional development days issued by the Chancellor, Professional Learning Community meetings, Weekly Staff emails for school updates Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services 2018-19 CEP 59  Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Translated brochures using Google Translate & back-packed home, Multilingual staff, KINVO Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Our parent surveys inform us on overall climate & community. In addition, we derive information from the other annual events because Advisors & Teachers go beyond and beyond the minimal expectations for attained accurate, correct information - both from the receiving & the output sense. 2018-19 CEP 60 
