2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 10X382 School Name: ELEMENTARY SCHOOL FOR MATH, SCIENCE, AND TECHNOLOGY Principal: AVON CONNELL-COWELL, PHD 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: 321000010382 Kindergarten to Fifth 125 East 181 st Street 718 933 8061 Section 1: School Information Page School Information Elementary School for Math, Science & Technology School Number (DBN): 10X382 718 933 8157 Fax: Phone Number: Ms. Nordely Ramos NRamos9@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: Email Address: Dr. Avon Connell Cowell Mr. Michael Strochansky Ms. YudyFleming Dr. Avon Connell Cowell SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Ms. Sylvia Hopkins Not Applicable Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Ms. Melissa Romero District Information Geographical District: 10 Superintendent’s Office Address: Ms. MaribelHulla Superintendent: 1 Fordham Plaza, 8 th Floor, Bronx, New York 10458 MHulla@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718 741 5852 Phone Number: 718 741 7098 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 3  FSC: Bronx Executive Director’s Office Address: Field Support Center (FSC) Jose Ruiz Executive Director: 1 FordhamRoad, 8th Floor, Bronx, NY Jruiz2@@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718 828 7776 Phone Number: 718 828 6280 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Avon Connell Cowell, PhD Mr. Michael Strochansky Ms. YudyFleming Ms. Camille Gaetan Ms. Sylvia Hopkins NA NA Ms. MelissaRomero Ms. Rosanna Carrasco Ms. Laura Guzman Mr. Emmanuel Mberku Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Good Shepherd Services Member/Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Ms. Jacqueline Delaney Mr. Michael Dong NA NA NA NA NA NA Member/ Member/ Teacher Member/ CSARepresentative Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? P.S. 382’s vision is to create a highly effective K-5 school that produces 21st century learners by fostering an inclusive learning environment that communicates and empowers individual student academic and social progress while encompassing interdisciplinary and trans-disciplinary Science, Technology, Engineering, Art, and Math (STEAM) integration in order to prepare students for the challenges in the world around them. Our mission is to produce 21st century learners by implementing academically engaging curricula, developing high order thinking skills through the use of Thinking MapsTM, and encompassing STEAM inquiry learning; thereby 2018-19 CEP 9  creating a community that will empower and inspire students to reach their academic, social, and emotional potential. We believe that all our students are learners of English, new to and in the process of mastering the language of school and society at large. As such, we endeavor through our instructional practices, to promote the following in our students: Identification as citizens who are literate for the 21st century and beyond   Enjoyment in the use and production of language  Experiences that engage students in a wide variety of texts (traditional and multimedia, including techno-literature) and structures (prose, poetry, scripts, infographics, blogs, etc.)  Opportunities for expression (writing, speaking, multimedia production)  Understanding that learning is a process of having many failures that will eventually lead to success; that persistence, tenacity, and being a part of a strong and supportive community make the success possible 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. At PS 382 we believe that students need to be socially and emotionally secure in order to learn. Hence, to support students’ social and emotional well-being, PS 382X has instituted an Adopt a Child Program for students who have lost a parent through death or incarceration, who are currently living in temporary housing, trans-gendered or, who are in foster care. As part of the program, with the parent or guardian’s consent, staff members “adopt” these students, spending non instructional time with them, such as taking them to lunch during recess and on other excursions, such as shopping, visiting the cinema or museums on the weekends, and celebrating special events and milestones. School-wide, students also receive consistent guidance lessons from our school counselor. For example, third grade students are currently learning executive functioning skills, while fifth grade students are learning about personal hygiene, and preparing for adulthood through college and career readiness. Our partnership with Asphalt Green and Fan4Kids provide on site support in healthy eating and the benefits of regular exercise, our partnership with Good Shepherd services provide after school support for our students and off site counseling services for students and family who are in need. PS 382 uses the Sheltered Instruction Observation Protocol (SIOP) model lesson planning template to develop more thoughtful lesson plans, designed to support students who are English Language Learners meet the language objectives, and help teachers focus on connecting students’ previous learning to the current lesson. We consistently use Thinking Maps school wide to provide the students with the tools they need to appropriately access the eight cognitive processes in which learners engage. During the 2016 -2017, we implemented the Student Assessment Cards (SAC) that was observed in use at one of the showcase schools visited by PS 382 staff. These SACs allow students to provide immediate feedback to their teachers during the lesson regarding their understanding of the content, as well as their (students) capacity to adhere to the task. We will continue these initiatives for the 2018 - 2019 school year in order to strengthen teachers’ capacity to support the students’ learning, develop students’ independence to self-select the appropriate tools for the learning tasks, and promote self-regulated learners. Regarding Thinking Maps, eight full time staff members and one consultant have been certified and are able to support their colleagues in effectively using these mid- range tools to improve students’ learning outcomes. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. PS 382 began in September 2008. In the first five years of the school’s existence, we had experienced consistent gains in student achievement in literacy, math, and science, as measured by the state assessments. In 2013, the Common Core Aligned assessments indicated a significant decline in the number of students meeting grade level expectations, as measured NY State English Language Arts [ELA] and Math tests. Although most of our students are still not meeting grade level expectations, the number of students meeting grade level expectations in ELA during 2014, more than doubled, indicating that our instructional and organizational supports are positively impacting students’ learning outcomes. In 2015, the number of students meeting grade level expectations in literacy increased by six percentage 2018-19 CEP 10  points and in increased in math by nine percentage points. During the 2017 - 2018 school year, according to the New York State Education Department[NYSED], we have been identified as a school in good standing, suggesting the changes we have implemented are supporting increased student learning outcomes. Therefore, we will continue our efforts in implementing effective strategies, as identified by New York State, that support our English Language Learners [ELLs]. Teachers will continue to engage in peer observation and developmental feedback in order to refine their use and consistent implementation of these strategies. Current units of study are being created to ensure we are incorporating advanced literacy instructional practices, horizontal and vertical alignment, and coherence across our school, while allowing for differentiated instructional support and learning tasks to ensure all students have access to the curricula. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. The 2017 Framework for Great Schools Report indicates that we are meeting the target in rigorous instruction, teacher collaboration, effective leadership, and trust. We are, however, working toward the target in strong family and community ties. Although we continue to struggle with parent engagement as it relates to student academic support, during the 2017 - 2018 year over 60 per cent of our parents consistently communicated with teachers using Class Dojo. With the digital instructional resources such as MyON, Fast ForWord and ST Math, we continue to facilitate monthly workshops for parents on how best they can use these resources to support their child's learning at home, in order to strengthen our home school connections. During the 2017 - 2018 school year we provided more opportunities for targeted individual meetings for parents, resulting in a higher level of parent engagement as measured by parent signatures on sign in sheets. We were more strategic in our planned events and we made a more conscientious effort to advertise and remind parents of said events, resulted in high attendance, especially during spring events. Organizationally, PS 382 teachers continue to have daily common planning times in grade bands: k – 2nd and 3rd – 5th, allowing for consistent collaboration and inquiry within and across grades. Cluster teachers provide RtI support two hours daily for 1st, 3rd and 4th grade students. Teachers will have regular support from trained leaders who facilitate weekly grade meetings in literacy and math and who provide classroom support through modeling, inter-visitations, and lab sites.. During said meetings teachers create unit and differentiated lesson plans, analyze students’ work samples, create child friendly rubrics to assist students in self- monitoring, norm writing samples and other professional work and inquiry. Although our students consistently do well in science, with at least 90% of our students meeting or exceeding grade level expectations as determined by the NYS Science tests, we continue to struggle with students’ poor comprehension skills, which impede not only their literacy learning, but learning in all content areas. Regarding instructional practices: our biggest challenge for the past five years has been the changes in grade level expertise, as there has been several organizational and instructional changes. Subsequently, these changes have had a big impact on instructional practices as it disrupts the consistency in the classrooms and can sometimes be stressful for students. For the 2017-2018 school year, however, classroom and cluster teachers provided targeted and explicit phonemic awareness and phonics instruction, resulting in more students developing their literacy skills. In addition to on site mentoring from our teacher leaders, peer mentors and the assistant principal, and with minor changes in our instructional personnel, we will continue to provide opportunities for frequent collaboration among the instructional staff, consistent professional learning support, and timely and effective feedback on instructional practices. 2018-19 CEP 11  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 10X382 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 273 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 1 1 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 16 14 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 97.0% % Attendance Rate 93.8% % Reduced Lunch 34.1% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.7% 76.6% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 0.4% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 10.25 0% 5% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 23.0% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 85% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A NO N/A N/A NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A N/A NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A YES N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 16 16 92.2% 1.8% 16.8% 22.3% 0.0% 0.7% 2 5% 6.2 22.3% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No YES N/A N/A NO NO NO N/A N/A YSH NO N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 12  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Regarding Rigorous Instruction:  Curricula Strengths & Challenges: Through weekly grade meetings, teachers meet in grade level teams, and occasionally in grade bands (k-2nd & 3rd -5th) to design unit and lesson plans that are developmentally appropriate, aligned with the standards, and engaging for students To ensure consistently rigorous curricula, similar units are cross referenced to check for standards alignment and task complexity. For example, how do author studies differ across grades? Lessons and units are analyzed for evidence and types of differentiation; and audited periodically for standards being addressed at each grade (3.3). In Social Studies and Science, PS 382 follows the NYS curricula, using their respective scope and sequence. Fridays are designated specifically for science and social studies instruction to ensure these content areas are taught consistently and with fidelity.   Most of our fourth grade students (78%) continue to meet and exceed grade level expectations in science, as  measured by NYS Grade 4 science test. In math, PS 382 uses a amalgamation of engageNY, TERC Investigations, Go Math, and Cognitive Guided Inquiry to ensure all the key concepts are being addressed and are aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards. In 4th and 5th grades, math instruction is departmentalized and is provided by teachers most competent in math instruction. Because students struggle with being able to engage in mathematical discussions and explaining their thinking, students 2nd - 5th grade engage in Math Talks 2 - 3 times weekly,using a specific protocol. So doing afford students the opportunity to make their thinking visible while unearthing possible misconceptions. Teachers are then able to determine next steps for supporting students learning regarding specific concepts.  A yearly assessment calendar provides clear guidelines for the frequency and types of informal assessments that will be used throughout the school year.Types of assessments include Reading, Writing and math rubrics, which allow teachers to strategically group students for targeted instructional support ((3.5); SACs are used to help students self regulate as students are able to give immediate feedback regarding their understanding of the lesson to their teachers (3.5). Students are also provided opportunities for self and peer reflections. Assessment data, including student work samples, are analyzed in grade meetings and professional learning sessions in order to norm the work, and identify students’ strengths and areas of growth, and implications for teacher instructional practices. Consequently, these data inform the ensuing lessons and units foci (3.5). Challenges/ Area of Focus 2018-19 CEP 13   School level assessment data, such as the Number Fluency Assessment (NFA) in Math, BLAST phonics assessments, Fountas & Pinnell Literacy Assessments, PROBE II literacy assessment, end of unit literacy and math assessments, math performance tasks, as well as state assessment data revealed that although students may be able to read at high levels, poor vocabulary development and inconsistent application or strategies for close reading of text impede students’ abilities to interact with, engage in, and critically think about their reading, and identify key problem solving strategies to improve comprehension. Hence, our focus is to consistently use Thinking Maps and state identified ELL scaffolds in all content areas to help students improve their reading comprehension skills.  To support our ELLs, students with special needs and beginning readers, 10 teachers and paraprofessionals have been trained to implement the BLAST program, which support students' phonemic awareness and phonics development. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. June 2019, 45% of our students will meet grade level reading comprehension expectations; provided in targeted instructional groups. Students' growth will be measured by the Fountas & Pinnell Literacy Assessments, the Probe Reading Assessment, and the Grade Level Reading Comprehension Rubric. 2018-19 CEP 14 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All students Sept 2018 – June 2019 Classroom, RtI and Special Education Teacher Support Services (SETSS) teachers, and paraprofessionals; school administrators Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Consistent guided reading instruction to students in all grades. Key vocabulary will be explicitly linked with past experiences and past learning. A variety of questions based on Depth of Knowledge questioning(DoK) that promote higher level thinking will be incorporated. Consistent implementation (3 - 5 times weekly) of the BLAST program to explicitly teach phonemic awareness and phonics. Daily Response to Intervention (RtI) support in literacy instruction. k, 1st and some 2nd grade students; 3rd - 5th grade ELLs and students with special needs students, as needed Students at risk, ENL and Students with Special Needs Oct 2018 – June 2019 Classroom teachers; Response to Intervention (RtI) teachers Daily shared reading experiences & frequent opportunities for discussion of concepts and topics among students, requiring them to cite evidence or share strategies. All students October 2018 – May 2019 All instructional staff students Workshops for parents on the use of the Thinking Maps, MyON, and digital libraries, to support students’ learning. In house weekly professional development in literacy support provided to classroom teachers & monthly literacy PD support provided to RtI providers to develop teachers’ capacity to implement effective guiding reading instruction. All parents October 2018 May 2019 Classroom teachers and certified TM trained teacher. All teachers Sept 2018– May 2019 Lead teachers, classroom and cluster teachers. 2018-19 CEP 15 Observing all teachers facilitating guided reading instruction and provide timely and effective feedback. All literacy and RtI staff October 2018 to September 2019 Administrators, classroom and select cluster teachers. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Monthly parent workshops during the school day and the parent engagement times will be used to provide strategies to parents, such as effective read aloud and math games that they can use at home to support their child's learning. Periodic Individual and familial parent meetings to review students' progress, create learning goals for their students, and share strategies they may use to support meeting those goals. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Teacher collaboration during daily and weekly grade planning time; grade bands (k – 2nd & 3rd -5th) have similar preparation periods each day to provide more opportunities for teachers to plan both across and between grades; cluster teachers all have common prep times to engage professional learning opportunities. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded X In Kind X Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Progress will be monitored by using F & P reading indicators for the reading levels, during guided reading lessons, independent reading times, and student teacher conferences. By the completion of the third literacy assessment round, which will be completed February 2019, we anticipate 30% of the students will demonstrate progress towards this goal, as measured by the comprehension and writing rubric Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) BLAST phonics and reading assessments will be used to measure students' phonemic awareness and phonics skills; Fountas & Pinnell Literacy Benchmark Assessment will be used to determine students' reading levels and the Generation Ready rubrics and Probe II Literacy Assessments will be used to determine students' reading comprehension at their identified levels. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 16  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Strengths  PS 382 has consistently participated in the Positive Behavior and Interventions Support (PBIS) program since the school’s inception in 2008. Students are taught the expected respectful, responsible, and safe behaviors in the different areas of the school and are rewarded for consistently demonstrating them; students set behavioral goals and work towards them throughout the school year. Most of our students consistently follow the PBIS expectations in our school. They are able to articulate these expectations and know the consequences when these expectations are not met (5.2).  Students also consistently participate in guidance and Respect for All lessons, provided by the school counselor and their classroom teachers, where they learn to make responsible and safe choices, and respect others’ culture, beliefs and uniqueness; they are also taught to identify actions by adults and peers that are deemed disrespectful, unacceptable, and unsafe towards them. Such practices have resulted in a steady yearly decline in the number of disruptive and unsafe incidents that have occurred in our school as is evidenced in the Online Occurrence Reporting System (OORS) (5.3).  Based on school wide data, with the permission of parents, students who are living in temporary housing, or have an incarcerated or deceased parent, are "adopted" by a staff member who spends non-instructional time with them playing games during lunch, or engaging in activities before or after school, even on the weekends to support their emotional well-being (5.4). Challenges and Areas of Focus  We, however, continue to struggle with the two percent of students who require the highest levels of intervention and supports in order to make responsible and respectful choices for themselves, and towards staff members and peers. Currently, students requiring these levels of intervention and support participate in a daily program during lunch where they are practicing self-monitoring techniques to help them realistically monitor, reflect upon, and practice strategies for improving their behaviors. We have incorporated more parental support for those students by articulating with their parents daily, either orally or in writing, and most parents have been responsive and proactive by visiting our school frequently, to support their child(5.5). Part 2 – Annual Goal 2018-19 CEP 17  Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be a 30% decrease in off task behaviors of TIER III students through daily behavior monitoring check-in, check out supports and familial collaboration as measured by their self- monitoring tracking reports, teacher feedback and decrease in the number of incident entered into the Online Occurrence Reporting System (OORS). 2018-19 CEP 18  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Daily progress monitoring and supports. Tier III students Sept 2018– June 2019 School counselor, Push in support in the classroom and small group at risk counseling session to help students monitor their behaviors Tier III students Sept 2018– June 2019 PBIS team members School counselor Quarterly meetings with support team, including students and parents, to discuss students’ progress and determine next steps. Tier III students Sept 2018 – June 2019 Administrators and PBIS team members RtI support in terms of additional PE instruction and activities to help students learn mindfulness Tier III students Sept 2018 - June 2019 Cluster teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Consistent communication with parents and families of students who require such intensive support to meet the social and academic expectations; guidance support and referrals by our school counselor to external agencies who provide additional resources and services as needed; workshops with parents on how to use music, movement, dances and yoga to help students channel their energy into positive outlets, participation in our school school Adopt A Child program, where students in challenging circumstances are adopted by at least one staff member who spends quality, non instructional time with students to provide a nurturing environment for those students. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Teachers will meet with parents during the Parent Engagement to provide workshops for, and to collaborate with, parents regarding individual students learning; teachers will meet during the other professional learning time to plan the workshops for the parents and plan various events. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A Title III, Part A PTA Funded X In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other 2018-19 CEP 19  Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By 31 January 2019, Tier III students will be able to participate with all students in at least two school wide procedures daily, for example, morning line up, lunch or dismissal, without requiring individual or small group intervention and supervision, as measured on the reduced number of incident reports in OORS and feedback from check in coaches. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. PBIS Individualized Daily Monitoring Checklist; OORS Reports; Coach feedback.. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 20  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year.  From the school’s inception in September 2008, teachers have consistently participated in weekly collaborative learning to improve their professional practice, set, monitor, and revise professional and school wide goals. (4.2)  By consistently analyzing students’ work samples and running records across and between grades, during grade meetings, we were able to identify students’ poor comprehension skills due to a lack of vocabulary development, the inability to respond appropriately to text, and to think critically regarding mathematical challenges.(4.5)  Weekly grade team meetings are intended to develop teachers’ professional capacity as they allow the teachers to collaborate with colleagues to enhance their professional practice when they create unit and lesson plans, and use data to plan differentiated learning activities; participate in making and implementing school wide decisions when they collectively analyze students' work and determine the learning needs of the students, normalize writing samples, create rubrics, etc.; use observations of colleagues to improve their teaching when they participate in demonstration lessons, inter-visitations and lab sites, reflecting on the observations, giving feedback to their colleagues, and identifying strategies that may be effective in their own classrooms; contribute to the learning of other educators because they consistently discuss and reflect on their practice. (4.5)  Weekly grade team meetings provide the forum for discussing trends in practices based on informal observations, formative assessment on students’ behaviors as evidenced by conferring, observations, feedback from related services providers, and notes from parents. The frequency of the grade meetings allows for discussions about these observations and the opportunities for revising curricula and instruction as needed. For example, we modified the third literacy unit plan on the third grade based on student performance on and understanding of the unit. We have also modified the math curriculum (TERC investigations, engageNY; Math in the City) to focus on units that are more prevalent on the state assessments to ensure that students have ample time to learn these concepts prior to the test. During summer 2016, 5 additional teachers will participate in 36 hours of Thinking Maps training to develop their capacity to effectively and consistently use Thinking Maps in their instructional practices to improve students reading comprehension and writing skills (4.2).  During the 2016 - 2017 school year, PS 382 instructional staff member conducted a year long study of the the professional text, Visible Learning for Literacy by Fisher, Frey and Hattie (2016). We identified key instructional strategies that support student's learning and have adjusted our literacy and math curricula to ensure our 2018 - 2019 units of study will include consistent implementation of said strategies. Area of Focus  As of June 2018, we are now a school in good standing; teachers, however, need to continue to ensure their instructional practices include the hallmarks of advance literacy while they continue to develop their capacity to individually reflect upon their craft and use their individual strengths to improve our collective instructional approaches. As we are being more deliberate in incorporating STEAM learning experiences into our curricula, 2018-19 CEP 21  teachers also need to spend significant amounts of professional learning time unpacking the science curricula. Therefore, teachers will engage in collaborative planning, peer observations and feedback, using the lenses of the pillars of advance literacy to become critical friends and promoting collegiality among each other without mediation from school administrators (4.2) (4.5)  To ensure more thoughtful and strategy analysis of student work, through a grant from and with the Literacy Design Collaborative (LDC), 3rd - 5th grade teachers will participate in more structured student work sample analysis in order to be more deliberate in identifying students' learning needs and the implications for their instructional practices (4.3). Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all teachers will collaborate at least 4 times with their critical “peer-support” friend to improve the culture of collaboration and refine instructional practice, leading to an increase in the NYCDoE Learning Environment Survey: Collaborative Teachers from 3.40 - 3.65. 2018-19 CEP 22  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Teachers will collaborate with critical “peer-support” friend during Tuesday afternoon “other professional work time” to reflect upon instructional practice and identify areas of need and strategies for improvement, specifically through the lenses of hallmarks of advance literacy All teachers November 2018- June 2019 All instructional Staff Teachers will participate in peer observations to provide feedback and improve teacher practice Classroom Teachers November2018 – May 2019 All instructional Staff Teachers will reflect on the experience of having a consistent critical friend observe and provide feedback on practice. All teachers In collaboration with LDC teachers will participate in by-weekly analysis of student work to identify students' needs and to determine next instructional steps 3rd - 5th grade teachers Jan to June 2019 November 2018 - June 2019 All instructional Staff All instructional staff 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. During meetings with parents about their specific child or children, all teachers supporting the child/children will collectively with the families to be able to provide a broader support for the student and families. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Using daily common planning, professional development learning, and other professional work time for collaboration among staff; using the parent engagement time to meet with parent and families. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A Title III, Part A PTA Funded X In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring 2018-19 CEP 23  Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By 31st January 2019 all teachers will have collaborated with, observed, and provided meaningful feedback to their critical "peer" friend a minimum of two times, as measured by the inter-visitation reflection guide and meeting notes. At least 50% of the teachers will be proficient in cluster 1 as measured by the Danielson Framework for Teaching, as teachers have the opportunity to meet during daily common preps and during the professional learning times after schoo. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Indicators for the Hallmarks of Advance Literacy practices, rubric for Danielson’s Framework for Teaching: Six Clusters Supporting High Level Learning; rubric for Learning-focused Conversations: The Continuum for Interaction,The Number Fluency Assessments, the grade level reading comprehension rubric and the rubric for ELL strategies will be used to determine students' academic growth. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 24  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths  The principal is an instructional leader who uses evidence based system and structures to examine and improve critical individual and school wide practices: daily common plan time for grade bands (k-2, 3 - 5); She is trained in Thinking Maps to support effective implementation school wide; utilizing out of classroom teachers to provide daily RtI support for struggling students (2.3);  Based on the 2016 -2017 School Quality Review and the 2017 – 2018 School Quality Snapshot, the school leader demonstrates effective leadership, creates and environment that facilitates trust and ensures rigorous instruction is being provided.  Based on the 2017 Framework for Great Schools, our school meets the target in effective school leadership and trust, thereby making the teachers more receptive to feedback provided and proposed changes in teacher instructional practices. Area of Focus  Although our school is approaching the target for student achievement, as measured by the School Quality Snapshot, our students continue to struggle with reading comprehension, which is evident in the low percentage of students meeting grade level expectations in literacy as measured by the NY State ELA test. Hence to support student literacy development, consistent use of Thinking Maps will be used to help students engage in close reading in order to develop their reading comprehension skills; an emphasis on developing early phonics and phonemic awareness skills in grades K - 2nd and among our ELLs and students with disabilities though more explicit instruction will be provided; and, more thoughtful, consistent and strategic small group instruction will be provided. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. September 2018 - June 2019, school leaders will provide teachers with regular and timely cycles of observation, providing focused, specific and timely leading to an increase in overall teacher effectiveness as evidenced by ADVANCE MOTP ratings. 2018-19 CEP 25  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Providing demonstration lessons and content-focused coaching as well as needs-based professional learning opportunities in literacy, mathematics, advance literacy hallmarks, and Thinking Maps. Analyzing assessment data (including sub-group data) and samples of student work in order to make instructional decisions for individuals and small groups and to determine targeted professional learning supports. Allocate additional staff to specifically address areas that have been identified through assessment data as being in the greatest need. For example, targeted RtI support in literacy All teachers All teachers Sept. 2018 to April 2019 Sept 2018 to June, 2019 Administrators , teacher leaders Administrators, teacher leaders RtI Teachers Oct 2018 to Administrators June 2019 Developing teacher leadership capacity through critical “peer support” friend. All teachers Oct 2018 -Jan 2019 All teachers Reviewing student assessment data to note students’ progress and identify next steps All teachers Sept 2018 – June 2019 Administrators, teachers Participate in initial planning, mid-year, and summative conferences, reflecting on teaching practice and progress towards professional learning goals. All teachers Sept 2018 – June 2019 Administrators 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Monthly meetings (Breakfast with the Principal) that are held the first Fridays of every month beginning in October 2018, and School Leadership Team (SLT) meetings, which are held the second Mondays of every month , will be used to inform parents of strategies being implemented to support effective school leadership and to promote parent leadership. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Weekly professional learning, other professional learning times and daily prep times. 2018-19 CEP 26  Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By 31 st January 2019, all teachers will have received at least 2 evaluative observations and feedback as measured by the Danielson Framework and recorded using the ADVANCE system; all teachers will also receive at least 2 formative observations and feedback based on school wide learning walks; all teachers would have participated in initial planning and goal setting conferences. Student work will be analyzed during grade level meetings to identify their progress and determine next steps for teachers and students, and to plan meaningful and differentiated instructional practices in order to improve student learning outcomes. By 31st January 2019, all teacher leaders will have facilitated one round of professional learning sessions for their peers. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. ADVANCE observation feedback, in house formative observation sheets based on the QR rubric, various student assessment data; goal setting and reflection sheets. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 27  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths  PS 382 has always had a high parent attendance rate at parent teacher conferences, with more than 85 % of our parents attending the fall and spring conferences during the 2017 – 2018 school year.  PS 382 hosts a monthly Breakfast with the Principal on the 1st Friday of every month to give parents the opportunity to visit our school, ask questions and share concerns, as well as provide updates and status of our school in all areas: attendance, academic services, extra curricula activities (6.2) (6.5)  Our school partnership with the Morris Heights Community Center provides on-site medical and social services for students. (6.4)  The Good Shepherd’s After-school program on site provides arts and sports enrichment for more than 50 per cent our students at the end of the school day and during the summer vacation. (6.4)  Our partnership with Fan4Kids (a grant funded by Councilman Cabrera) provides health and fitness workshops for students and their families during and after school (6.4)  Our partnership with Roberto Clemente State park provides bi-weekly chess lessons for 3rd - 5th grade students.  Our partnership with Asphalt Green provides recess enhancement support for 4 days each week  Through the "Swim for Life" program, our second grade receive swimming instruction for 15 weeks each semester.  Our partnership with the Smile Dental Program provide free, in house dental care for all students.  During the 2017 - 2018 school year, more than 50 % our parents signed up for and actively use Class Dojo to regularly communicate with their child's teacher. Challenges  While parents actively engage in activities and events that directly include or impact their own child(ren), they are less likely to participate in information or strategy workshops(6.3) Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, home-school engagement will increase through use of the school's digital learning platforms, increasing the school's rating on the NYDoE Learning Environment Survey: Strong Family-Community Ties from 2.74 to 2.85. 2018-19 CEP 28  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Continue hosting monthly Breakfast with the Principal meetings for parents on the first Friday of every month. All parents October 2018– May 2019 Fan4Kids and ArtsConnection Events All parents October Monthly grade level workshops for parents on the use of digital resources ( MyON; ST Math) to support students learning in the home Parents by grade levels 2018– May 2019 November 2018– May 2019 Principal, Parent Coordinator Principal, Parent Coordinator Classroom & Cluster teachers Interest Inventory for parents to ascertain specific topics of interest and areas in which they need support; feedback forms All parents Sept 2017; Jan 2018 Principal, Parent Coordinator 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Morris Heights Health Center; Good Shepherd Services, Roberto Clemente State Park, New York Parks Dept, Fan4Kids. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Parent engagement funds will be used to provide resources necessary for workshops. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 2018-19 CEP 29  Outreach to parents via multiple methods: Class Dojo, school calendar and letter; invitations for individual conference will be used to invite parents to attend workshops on the use of digital resources.. By February 2019, all classroom teachers would have met with at least 50 % of their students' parents to provide support on using the available digital resources that will enhance their children's learning. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Sign in sheets; parent interest inventory; feedback sheets; digital record information Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 30  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Students performing at least 2 reading levels below the current grade level benchmark in literacy. For 3 rd – 5 th grade students: results from the NY State ELA Test ELLsat the beginning stages of learning the Englishlanguage after being in our school for more than one year Students not meeting grade level expectations based on NFA data For 3 rd – 5 th grade students: results from the NY State Math Test Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Students independently use laptops to complete the differentiated task. Small group instruction When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) At various times throughout the school day based on the students’ grade. Three to five times weekly. Small group instruction Four times each week Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) FastForWord computer-based literacy intervention program Literacy intervention using Fountas & Pinnell Literacy Intervention System BLAST Phonics Program RtI math support Small group support ST Math Math – computer based differentiated program Websites that are NCTM aligned, such as Thinkingbocks.com Small or whole group, as needed Individual activity based on student’s ability During the school day During the school day During the school day; students are also encouraged to try the activities at home, if they have access to a computer 2018-19 CEP 31  Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) End of unit assessment; for 4 th grade students: results from the 4 th grade science test Unit assessments; conferring notes Information from parents, school staff, and other agencies such as CPS/ACS Additional instruction/activities as needed, provided by the science cluster Small or whole group, based on assessment data During the school day Small group Once per week Small Group Individually or with siblings Individually or small group During the school day During the school day During the school day Re-teaching provided by classroom teacher Grief counseling Students with open ACS cases meet with their case worker periodically; the caseworker meets with our school counselor to discuss ways in which the school can also support the child in all areas to help meet the academic expectations. The school’s social worker works with the school psychologist and the school counselor in providing supports for the student and his/her family. School counselor meets with students whose social development often impedes his/her academic progress. She teaches 2018-19 CEP 32  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 83 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population.  Students living in temporary housing are provided the school uniform and consumable resources needed to be successful learners.  To support their social emotional development, with the consent of their parents or guardians, they participate in the Adopt A Child program, where school staff “adopt a child/children, meet with child/children weekly to have lunch, play games, work on projects, or the like.The students remain with their “adoptive” teacher as long as they remain in the school. The Adopt A Child program allows the most needy students to foster a relationship with at least one staff member with whom he/she can trust.  At risk counseling are provided to students to help cope with their daily stress based on student need; referrals are made to outside agencies, such as Good Shepherd Services, to provide life skills support to families,as needed.  Homework assistance before and after school.  Consistent use of digital RtI resources such as ST Math, Fast ForWord, MyON, and Math Mats, that allow for access to educational resources outside of school to help maintain educational consistency. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). NA 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 33  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 CEP 34  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. All instructional staff members are highly qualified based on the 2017 BEDS. When teachers are needed potential candidates who have been vetted by NYC DoE - Human Resources dept are invited to interviewed. Members representing different constituents in our school participate in the interview, including an analysis of student data and writing a lesson plan. If possible, the candidate provides a demonstration lesson. The different components are rated before a decision regarding hiring is made. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). .  Consistent professional development support is provided to all instructional staff in the following ways: Administrative and collegial support in weekly grade meetings where teachers plan instructional units, review assessment data and student work, plan differentiated lessons; review professional resources; provide demonstration lessons and plan lab sites in different content areas.  Other classroom teachers, who, in addition to teaching art, physical education, science, and technology,  provide RtI support to students identified of needing such services. Specialty teachers meet every two weeks, with the administrators to learn and discuss strategies for RtI support, review and discuss student progress in RtI groups based on observations and conferences, make changes as necessary.  Teachers also participate in off site professional development based on areas of need, interest or expertise. For example, our teachers who would like to initiate the use of Google Classroom in our school have attended the requisite training sessions and are now supporting colleagues in implementing Google Classrooms in their instruction.  To develop their understanding of the Danielson Framework, new teacher meet weekly with assistant principal using the PD Module provided by the DoE Office of Teacher Effectiveness. 2018-19 CEP 35  Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). PS 382 does not currently enroll preschool students. For kindergarten students, however, parents and children are invited to an orientation meeting at the beginning of the school year where they remain with the students for the half day, visiting the classrooms and participating in the daily routines. Early childhood parents are invited to many activities with their child throughout the school year. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction.  Student work samples, including results from NY State tests, are used to identify the patterns and trends in student academic performance. These data are then used at the school and grade levels to determine the the units and sequence of study, types of assessments needed, and areas for professional development.  Patterns and trends in student work samples also help teachers to identify key changes that are needed to their instructional practices to ensure all students are able to access the curricula.  All teachers consistently participate in weekly on site professional development sessions. Some of the meetings involve collaboratively planning units of study and creating assessments and rubrics, aligned to those specific units. Assessments are created based on the CCLS. Once tasks are complete teachers norm the work, identifying different levels of instructional support that are needed 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the 2018-19 CEP 36  consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 290,950 43,876 12,494 0 2,042,766 X X X N/A N/A Column B Section Reference(s) 5A, 5B, 5C 5C 5A N/A 5A, 5C 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2018-19 CEP 37  2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 38  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. PS 382X, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. PS 382X will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 2018-19 CEP 39  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 2018-19 CEP 40  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Elementary and Secondary Education Act (ESSA); ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) PS 382X: Elementary School for Math, Science & Technology in compliance with the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for 2018-19 CEP 41  improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff 2018-19 CEP 42  Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); 2018-19 CEP 43  ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. PS 382: Elementary School for Math, Science & Technology Family Contract The Citywide Standards of Discipline and Intervention Measures issued by the New York City Department of Education is the governing guide for students’ rights, responsibilities and behavior. The NYC Family guide includes parental rights 2018-19 CEP 44  and responsibilities. Upon enrollment at PS 382, you will be given a copy of each. Please review with your child(ren) as we expect strict adherence to these guidelines. This contract between PS 382: Elementary School for Math, Science & Technology and our families reflect our commitment to developing positive relationships, accepting responsibilities for our actions and respecting each other and the environment. As a parent/guardian at PS 382 I AGREE to the following responsibilities:  I will follow and uphold the NYC DoE’s discipline code & PS 382’s policies and procedures (see attached).  I will make sure my child comes to school on time, in uniform, tidy and ready to learn. I will pick up my child promptly at dismissal.  I will assist my child with homework assignments; I will make sure homework is legible, clean and submitted when it is due.  I will be courteous and respectful when interacting with all members of the school community – teachers, administrators, support staff, and other parents/guardians.  I will work with my child to support the behavioral expectations required by the school. As a student at PS 382 I AGREE to following responsibilities:  I will come to school daily, in uniform, on time, and ready to learn.  I will follow the rules of my class and the school.  I will not use any parts of my body or any of my words to cause harm to my classmates, teachers, parents or anyone in my school.  I will take my class work and homework seriously; I will work hard to complete all my assignments.  I will respect my environment by not littering and not defacing or destroying school property. I understand that I must agree to all the terms of the contract in order for my child to attend PS 382. I also understand that if we do not follow the terms of the contract my child may be ineligible to attend PS 382: Elementary for Math, Science & Technology. Child’s Name:_____________________________________ Grade:_______________________________ Teacher:_____________________________________________________________________________________ Child’s Signature:_________________________________________Date:_________________________________ Parent/Guardian’s Name & Signature:______________________________________________________________ 2018-19 CEP 45  Parent/Guardian’s Name & Signature:______________________________________________________________ Dr. Avon Connell-Cowell, Principal:__________________________________________ Date:________________________________________________________________ 2018-19 CEP 46  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP 47  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: P.S. 382X enrolls 284 students. We currently have 101 English Language Learners (ELLs) in grades K-5, which represents 35% of our school’s population. Based on this year’s human resources and budget, this year’s program will cater to students in grades 1-5. Overall, ELLs in all grades have made progress on the New York State English as a Second Language Achievement Test (NYSESLAT). On the New York State English Language Arts and Mathematics assessments, however, our ELLs have predominantly scored a level 1 or 2. These scores have qualified our students to receive academic intervention services. Based on these data as well as school generated data (from F&P Benchmark Assessment Kit and NYC Performance tasks), the ENL teachers in conjunction with the classroom teachers determined that the ELLs in these grades would best be served with a direct instruction supplemental program focused on literacy and language. The direct instruction supplemental programs for ELLs will be offered in English and facilitated by an ENL certified teacher. Each program will be offered in a small group format. The program for each group will have a cap of 15 specifically selected students. The program is tentatively scheduled to begin during the week of 29th October 2018 and until the week of 20th May 2019. Permission slips will be sent home to parents in both English and Spanish. Additionally, parents will be called, notifying them of their child's possibility in attending the program. The program for grades 1 and 2 students will meet on Thursdays from 3:00 P.M. to 5:00 P.M., and will consists of no more than 15 students. The program is tentatively scheduled to begin during the week of the 29th October 2018 and will run until the week of 20th May 2019 for a total of 26 sessions. Targeted students are those who achieved the transitioning and expanding levels of English proficiency on the NYSESLAT. The NYSESLAT data show low scores on the writing modality and low to low-moderate scores on the reading modality, indicating that the ELLs in this grade span are still developing proficiency in reading and writing. Students will engage in additional opportunities for text interactions through close reading activities and generate responses to text-based prompts. The required supplies for this program are classroom access to www.readinga-z.com and www.raz-kids.com, printing paper, laser printer toner, and writing materials (paper, pencils, pens). These resources will be funded by the OTPS allocation that is part of the Title 3 application. Student attendance will be maintained on a school generated attendance sheet. Permission slips will be sent home to parents in both English and Spanish. Additionally, parents will receive a phone call to notify them of their child's possibility in attending the program. These parental consent forms will be kept in each student's own cumulative record and a log of phone calls will be kept in a notebook in the main office. The program for grades 3 and 4 students will meet on Thursdays from 3:00 P.M. to 5:00 P.M., and will include no more than 15 students . The program is tentatively scheduled to begin during week of 29th October 2018 and will run until the week of 20th May 2019 for a total of 26 sessions. The students targeted for this program are those who achieved the transitioning and expanding levels of English proficiency on the NYSESLAT. Based on the prior school year’s collected data and the NYSESLAT results, the students in this grade span have demonstrated that they are still developing their writing skills, with specific struggles in organization, complexity 2018-19 CEP 48  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information of language, and mechanics. By studying traditional literature, such as fairy tales and folktales, in combination with their non-fiction studies during regular school hours, students will develop a greater manipulation of characterization, setting, and point of view. The required supplies for this program are copies of traditional literature from various world cultures, printing paper, laser printer toner, and writing materials (paper, pencils, pens). These resources will be funded by the OTPS allocation that is part of the Title 3 application. Student attendance will be maintained on a school generated attendance sheet. Permission slips will be sent home to parents in both English and Spanish. Additionally, parents will receive a phone call to notify them of their child's possibility in attending the program. These parental consent forms will be kept in each student's own cumulative record and a log of phone calls will be kept in a notebook in the main office. The program for grades 3 to 5 students will meet on Tuesdays and Wednesdays from 7:30 A.M. to 8:30 A.M. , and will have no more than 15 students. The program start date is tentatively scheduled to begin during the week of 29th October 2018 and will run until the week of 20th May 2019 for a total of 46 sessions. The students targeted for this program are those who are classified as entering to transitioning levels of English proficiency on the NYSESLAT. Our ELLs at these levels of English proficiency have struggles communicating in speaking and writing. This program will integrate the use of art prints, art production, and the 5th grade NYC Social Studies Scope and Sequence. They will use visual prompts to generate discussion, build vocabulary, and produce extended narrative and informational writing pieces. This program will require art prints, art materials (paints, paper, and other coloring media), writing materials (notebooks, pencils, pens), photo paper, and color ink. These resources will be funded by the OTPS allocation that is part of the Title 3 application as well as resources that are already available at the school. Student attendance will be maintained on a school generated attendance sheet. Attendance will be taken by the teacher who is facilitating the program. Permission slips will be sent home to parents in both English and Spanish. Additionally, parents will receive a phone call to notify them of their child's possibility in attending the program. These parental consent forms will be kept in each student's own cumulative record and a log of phone calls will be kept in a notebook in the main office. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: With the full implementation of the CR-Part 154 mandate, there is an increased push for the collaboration and integration of ENL pedagogy with general education. Furthermore, P.S. 382 has a school-wide goal of increasing academic success for its ELL population. As such, each grade team will be partnered with a TESOL certified pedagogue. The TESOL certified pedagogues will work with the grade teams to review the units of study in the core content areas and modify the units to allow multiple points of entry for ELLs at all levels of English proficiency. Meetings will occur, minimally, once a month on Mondays during the allotted professional development time or on Tuesdays as part of other professional work (as per UFT contract). The 2018-19 CEP 49  Part C: Professional Development topics to be addressed at these meetings will vary in accordance to the needs of the students, knowledge base of the staff, and the content of the units being modified. Possible topics include: Targets of Measurements, efficient use of Thinking Maps to guide ELLs’ comprehension and writing, writing effective language objectives, how to use sentence frames/starters, and ways to integrate role-playing to enhance speaking. As these meetings are within the regular school day or teacher mandated hours, funds from Title 3 will not need to be allocated. By providing these forms of professional development, the goal is to increase teacher capacity and efficacy in working with ELLs. As this plan is dependent on peer support and the development of a teacher collaborative network, there will be no cost attached to the Title 3 application. Agendas with their attached sign-in sheets will be on file in the school’s professional development binder. ENL teachers will attend monthly ELL meetings hosted by the Bronx Field Services Center's ENL personnel as well as meetings that are shared through District 10. As these meetings are offered throughout the year at various dates and times (which occurs during normal school hours), a detailed list of the meetings for the school year cannot be provided. These meetings are facilitated by TESOL certified pedagogues, pedagogues who have a teaching certification with a bilingual extension, and pedagogues who may also possess certification in School Building Leader, School District Leader, or both. The topics of these meetings, however, can be provided. The first series of meetings will be about Integrated English as a New Language, how to co-plan, and how instruction is different from Stand-alone English as a New Language program. These PDs are offered at no cost to the Title 3 allocation for the school. Additional meetings that are or will be attended will revolve around topics of CR-Part 154 and other ELL compliance matters, and extending instruction ELL instruction. At the school level, "ESL PD Now" will be utilized by the Title 3 teachers. This PD series covers a wide range of ELL related topics. Licenses for this online based service will be provided by Title 3 funds. The involved teachers will meet together in one of the school classrooms once a month on Mondays, during the UFT contract designated professional development time, to partake in the interactive webinar. Agendas will be maintained in the Professional Development binder that is located in the main office. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Homework, or more specifically, how parents can help their children complete homework, continues to be a concern. The teachers involved with the Title 3 program will hold meetings for parents on homework support for their children These meetings will be held once every 2 or 3 months. The time periods for each grade's literacy and math units vary. As such, a set schedule cannot be provided as it is dependent on the transition between the school's literacy and math units. Other offerings that are being scheduled include: Hispanic Heritage month celebration, book-of-the-month club (once per week for 8 weeks), home science activities (once a semester), and 2018-19 CEP 50  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities home arts and crafts activities (once a semester). These meetings will be facilitated by a variety of people who include the parent coordinator and instructional staff. These meetings will be offered on Tuesdays during the UFT contract designated parental engagement time to last no more than 1 hour. As the school is part of a campus, there is adult ENL class, which is held on Tuesdays and Wednesdays, from 6:00 p.m. to 9:00 p.m. Parents will be notified of these meetings through three methods: school’s monthly calendar (Sent home with each child at the end of the prior month or beginning of each month), attendance at the monthly Breakfast with the Principal (first Friday of each month beginning October), and through flyers that are posted on the school’s doors at least 2 days before the scheduled meeting, and Class Dojo. All notifications are in English and Spanish. The meetings are conducted in English and Spanish. Typically either the Parent Coordinator or a Spanish speaking aide is in attendance to translate. Our parents and guardians who have a language other than English or Spanish often speak English as an additional language. They still retain their right to have a translator at meetings. Provided they make a request prior to the meeting, the school will obtain interpreter(s) for the requested language(s). Funds will be allocated for refreshments. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. 2018-19 CEP 51 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Other TOTAL 2018-19 CEP 52  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 10 School Name Elementary School for Math, Science & Te Borough Bronx School Number 382 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Avon Connell-Cowell, PhD Coach NA ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Madonna Lee Teacher/Subject Area Michael Strochansky Teacher/Subject Area type here Related-Service Provider NA Superintendent NA Assistant Principal Michael Dong Coach NA School Counselor NA Parent NA Parent Coordinator Nordely Ramos Field Support Center Staff Member NA Other (Name and Title) NA C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 2 1 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 284 2018-19 CEP 53 Total number of ELLs 101 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 35.56%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 2 4 3 0 0 0 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Multiple tools are used to assess students’ progress in literacy. Schoolwide, Fountas and Pinnell Literacy Assessment System and Generation Reading Reading Comprehension rubrics are used to measure student’s independent & instructional reading levels. In 3rd - 5th grades, the PROBE assessment is also used to assess students' reading comprehension, while in K - 2nd grades, BLAST assessments are used to identify students' phonics, phonemic awareness, and early reading skills. An add-on component, created by a Generation Ready consultant, is a reading strategies checklist, which looks at students’ use of reading strategies (predicting, questioning, visualizing, summarizing, and thinking aloud). Students writing are also assessed using a rubric, which measures students demonstrated abilities in ideas & voice, organization, language features, revision, and conventions. Assessments specific to K-2 students are checklists of emergent reader characteristics, alphabet letter & sound recognition, and sight word recognition. These diagnostic tools are used at least 4 times a year. and centers that are necessary to assist students’ learning and growth are created based on the assessment results. Based on these available data, although students are generally reading below grade level independently, they still make growth. 2018-19 CEP 54  2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? These data are collected and further analyzed at grade level teams to form small group/guided instructional targets, and interventions. Data are analyzed monthly to determine students' progress and determine instructional approaches. ENL teachers consistently collaborate with the grade teachers to ensure language and content objectives are being met. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? The success of the school’s English Language Learner (ELL) programming is evaluated primarily using the New York State English as a Second Language Achievement Test(NYSESLAT results. The results of the NYSESLAT are analyzed to identify the percentage of students who test proficient and those who were able to advance their proficiency level within their respective grade span. New York State English Language Arts (ELA) and Math assessment results are also used in determining the success of ELL instruction.An additional tool we use are the school’s data collected from the Fountas & Pinnell Literacy Assessment System. It is used to determine students' progress in English reading comprehension and meaning making. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Push in small group instructional support. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] In an RtI framework, there are 3 tiers of instructional support. Tier 1 is a strong core instruction in which all ELLs participate. ELLs are assessed in literacy periodically using the different literacy assessment tools mentioned previously. The results of these assessments allow staff to identify students’ advancement in word reading, fluency, and reading comprehension. The results are used to form student groups for guided reading and targeted skill instruction, determine small group instructional foci, determine whole group language foci, and types of questions to ask in daily instruction. Results are also used to design appropriate literacy tasks and literacy center activities. Spelling and vocabulary are assessed through a sight word recognition task or an assessment from Wordly Wise, our vocabulary program. These data coupled with informal observations gathered from classroom interactions are used to design literacy center activities and individualized word/vocabulary lists. Data on students’ writing are gathered from their writing unit’s final product as well as observations made through individual student conferences. While data gathered during the process of the task is used immediately to provide feedback to students on how to improve their writing for the particular unit, the final products provide insight on how instruction can proceed for the following units of study. Immediate feedback follows the individual student conferences and the instruction is adjusted for the students through these conferences. For example, through the conference, students may be redirected to enhance their writing by adding relevant details that communicate their desired visual and sensory image. These data also inform guided writing groups and help to develop writing foci. As a whole, including the final product, these data inform instruction for future writing units. Data are used to develop whole group writing lesson objectives and tasks. The Number Fluency Assessment (NFA) is used to determine students’ growth in mathematical areas: counting, numeration, addition and subtraction, and multiplication and division. Results from the NFA help staff to create math center activities and plan small group instructional support.. The RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs acknowledges, “In serving ELLs, the first focus should be on improving the quality of core instruction and making sure that most students have ongoing, high-quality opportunities to learn and are succeeding.” While we continue to modify and improve Tier 1 instruction for ELLs, the above mentioned literacy data are used to determine where ELLs need additional assistance. Based on the gathered data, ELLs may receive additional small group instruction where they work with a designated RtI educator on the focus skill/task or engage in Scilearn’s Fast ForWord differentiated online programs. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Including the New York State Identification Test for English Language Learners (NYSITELL) results of the current year’s newly admitted students, there are 21, 14, 23, 40, and 3 ELLs at the Entering, Emerging, Transitioning, Expanding, and Commanding levels of English proficiency, respectively. From Kindergarten to Grade 5, there are a larger number of ELLs at the Emerging and 2018-19 CEP 55  Transitioning levels of English proficiency combined than there are at the Entering level. The number of students at the Emerging and Transitioning levels are similar to the number of students at the Expanding level. Looking at the raw score breakdown, reading and writing continue to be the area in need of additional instruction for our ELLs. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Emails are sent to the teachers regarding the number of students on each level and grade, and required number of minutes for ENL services per level. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Kindergarten-Grade 2 ELLs are grouped heterogeneously and are pulled out to receive ENL instruction and the TESOL licensed teacher pushes in to their classrooms to co-teach with the classroom teacher to provide Integrated ENL instruction. Grade 3 ELLs are grouped heterogeneously and are pulled out for both ENL and Integrated ENL instruction by a dual licensed Common Branches and TESOL licensed teacher. Grade 4 ELLs are self-contained and receive both ENL and Integrated ENL instruction from a dually certified Common Branches and TESOL licensed teacher. Grade 5 ELLs are grouped heterogeneously and are pulled out for ENL instruction provided by a TESOL licensed teacher. Grade 5 ELLs receive Integrated ENL instruction from a dual licensed Common Branches and TESOL licensed teacher. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? As per the new CR-Part 154 regulations, students tested at the Entering level of English proficiency are required to receive 180 minutes each of ENL and Integrated instruction. Students at the Emerging level of English proficiency are required to receive 90 minutes of ENL and 180 minutes of Integrated instruction, with 90 minutes of flexible instruction that can be devoted to ENL or Integrated instruction. Students at the Transitioning level of English proficiency are required to receive 90 minutes each of ENL and Integrated Instruction. Students at the Expanding level of English proficiency are required to receive 180 minutes of Integrated instruction. Students at the Commanding level of English proficiency are required to receive 90 minutes of Integrated instruction. Regardless of grade, ELLs will receive the minimum number of required instructional minutes in both ENL and Integrated instruction. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Content area instruction is typically delivered by the students' classroom teacher with support from an out of classroom ENL teacher, when appropriate. The content is made more accessible to the ELLs through the use of Thinking Maps, visuals & artifacts, and hands-on activities that allow for more collaboration and communication. Content area instruction is supplemented by a science, social studies, and math lending library, social studies classroom libraries, use of various 2018-19 CEP 56  technologies such as the SMARTBoard and Macbooks, and the science, technology, and social studies cluster teachers. English is the primary language of instruction. Students' home language, if Spanish, is used minimally and only in instances that would facilitate their comprehension in academic and social situations. Regarding Newcomers with an SP OTELE code, there are additional resources that are available. There are Spanish-English and picture dictionaries available to be used. Typically, they are paired with a Spanish bilingual student in the classroom (who is comfortable with Spanish and English) to assist them and the classroom teacher (in the situations where the teacher does not understand Spanish) in giving directions and completing tasks. One of the major instructional shifts of the Next Generation Standards is a greater integration of advance literacy hallmarks and and as such, developing a balance between the use of informational and literary texts in instruction. To meet this demand, ELA units are designed around science, social studies, or ELA. While reading units typically focus on reading skills/strategies and are applied/practiced using texts that are aligned with the unit's topic/theme, writing units have an end product of either a narrative, argumentative, or informational piece. Additional to the final work product, the writing process is outlined in the standards as Production and Distribution of Writing and Research to Build and Present Knowledge. Through common meeting time, students engage in practices that attend to the speaking and listening standards. Built into the ELA instructional block is a time for word study where students learn and practice sight words and vocabulary, and receive phonics instruction, where necessary. Math instruction incorporates several programs and resources, including TERC investigations, Math in the City, Cognitive Guided Inquiry and engageNY , all of which are aligned to the Math Next Generation Learning Standards. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Aside from the use of the Spanish Lab-R, we do not currently evaluate our ELLs in their native language. One of the goals is to acculturate our ELLs to American culture and the American education system where English is the dominant language of communication. Language heavy subjects, especially literacy, are always assessed using English language assessments. Additionally it is inconsistent to assess an ELL's ability to comprehend an English text if we use a language other than English. The school does employ a math benchmark, which can be administered in Spanish. The staff, however, is made aware of the difference between an ELL's ability to communicate in English vs. what knowledge and skills they actually possess. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status SIFE and Newcomer (first time in a U.S. school, from another country, and in grades 3-5) students will, in addition to receiving the required number of ENL and Integrated instructional minutes, will be pulled out by a TESOL certified teacher for an additional 120 minutes to accelerate their language acquisition. Considering that many students in Kindergarten, Grade 1, and Grade 2 are considered as Newcomer students, they will receive the minimum number of instructional minutes as mandated by CR-Part 154. However, due to the developmental levels of these young students, instruction is thematic and within the themes, students receive tasks to complete that is catered to both their grade, unit of study, and English language level. SIFE and newcomer groups are purposefully smaller when being instructed in the ENL block by the ENL teacher and the groups are composed primarily of Entering and Emerging students. Developing ELLs are grouped according to their literacy need and receive small group instruction with their classroom teacher. When working with the ENL teacher, these ELLs will receive direct instruction in grammar, syntax, and vocabulary. Long term ELLs will be provided with additional small group instruction. Former ELLs will be provided testing accommodations up to 2 years after testing commanding. In addition, they will remain with the ENL teacher in terms of Integrated ENL instruction. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? 2018-19 CEP 57  Curriculum units across content areas are planned during common planning periods at each grade level. Since this curriculum planning is guided by a coach but done by teacher, units are not only aligned to standards but also designed to target grade and class specific needs and strengths. During these common planning periods, teachers are also able to create rubrics for writing and reading units, for both teacher and student reference. Based on abilities and current rates of progress, rubrics can be differentiated to suit the tiered levels of work being produced by students. Students are consistently assessed in reading, writing, and math, with priority given to ELLs and SWDs, in order to closely monitor their progress and areas of need. Teachers across the grade and the content areas examine data gathered from assessments to group students with shared needs and cooperatively strategize how to best meet those needs. These needs are addressed in our center based classroom approach, in which different groups of students collaborate on varying tasks simultaneously. This allows ELLs to spend time focusing on practicing familiarized skills independently or cooperatively while still receiving small group, specialized instruction from the teacher. Furthermore, the school is currently utilizing the SIOP model for lesson planning. The Sheltered Instruction Observation Protocol (SIOP) model includes the use of content objectives as well as language objectives. ELLs are also taught to annotate while reading in order to actively engage with texts. ELLs learn how to access content specific vocabulary by using cognates, and by analyzing prefixes, root words, and suffixes to decipher the meaning of unknown words. Familiarizing ELLs with content-specific vocabulary allows them access to more difficult texts. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Within the classroom, materials are used to make ELLs more independent and to support academic content. Differentiated dictionary and word reference books such as dictionaries, picture dictionaries, and glossaries are available to aid students in their independent work. All classrooms are equipped with listening centers so that students can match oral language to printed text. Many classrooms have labeled objects and areas to help students familiarize themselves with common words and vocabulary. Word study lessons are planned around specific classroom or student needs, whether to explore vocabulary, language, spelling, or grammar conventions. Most classrooms have SMARTBoards, which provide an audio, visual, or hands-on tool for teaching and reference. ELL-SWDs are mainstreamed and receive instruction in reading, writing, math, or any combination of the three, when appropriate, in a general education setting unless otherwise specified in their IEP. During their periods of ENL and Integrated instruction, ELL-SWDs are grouped with ELLs from general education classrooms and receive instruction according to their NYSESLAT proficiency level. Finally, ELL-SWDs are invited to participate in all the school’s extracurricular activities. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. ELLs may receive instruction through targeted intervention programs in English in ELA (additional guided reading, Foutas and Pinnell Intervention Reading System, double dose BLAST, Fast ForWord) and Math (Additional small group instruction, Mathematics in the City, STMath). As determined by the literacy data collected from various assessment tools, ELLs have many of the same literacy challenges as their non-LEP peers. Through dedicated RtI periods, students are grouped according to their challenge most in need of improvement and a team of pedagogues determines the most appropriate support to utilize. Double dose FUNdations is used with lower grade students who need additional instruction in phonics, decoding, and sight word recognition. The Fountas and Pinnell Intervention Reading System and additional guided reading groups are use to assist students with developing reading strategies and skills to generate meaning from texts. Fast ForWord is used for students who need an intervention in language/sound distinctions, vocabulary building, improving memory, sight word recognition, and reading comprehension. Data collected by the Number Fluency Assessment is used to determine students’ capabilities in numeration, counting, addition and subtraction, and multiplication and division. Students who are deemed as needing improvement in any of these areas receive additional small group instruction in the specific math area by their classroom teacher. The math curriculum is supplemented by Mathematics in the City. Furthermore, all students in need of improvement in the different math areas have access to STMath, which is a web-based individualized math program. There aren’t any separate intervention programs for social studies and science. These two content areas are integrated into literacy instruction. Any interventions that we may use to address ELA challenges also support the understanding of content in social studies and science. An additional support available to ELLs is that the science teacher runs small groups. 2018-19 CEP 58  9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Besides scheduling and group structuring as per the new instructional mandates, we are currently not considering any new programs. We have reapplied for a grant to bring in an arts organization to work with ELLs in all grades. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? NA 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. A student’s ELL status does not create automatic inclusion or exclusion to programs offered in the school, with the exception of programs funded by Title III. ELLs are split heterogeneously into the different classes in Kindergarten through Grade 3 ELLs are grouped into a single class for grades 3, 4, and 5. Each class has equal access to all school facilities as well as participation in school run events such as assemblies, book fairs, and library visits. The extracurricular program that all students have been invited to, including ELLs, is an after-school program run by the community based organization Good Shepherds. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. The following materials that are available to all staff include: Rigby ELL Assessment kit, Fountas and Pinnell Benchmark Assessment System, BLAST phonics program, Fountas & Pinnell Guided Reading Program: non-fiction focus, fiction focus, and content areas, Making Meaning, Rosen Real Life Readers, Language Proficiency Kits, Comprehension Strategies Kit, Exploring Writing, Newbridge content area big book library & guided reading sets, interactive content-area big books, Primary Sources Kits, Fast ForrWord program, MyON, Skybrary, STMath program audio books, access to many websites including www.mesenglish.com, www.readinga-z.com, pebblego.com, www.starfall.com, www.brainpop.com, www.eslflashcards.com. Furthermore, each classroom is equipped with a SMARTBoard and ELMO projection device, which allow for more technology-based interactive lessons. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? In addition to bilingual peers and adults, Spanish native language support is given with bilingual dictionaries and content area glossaries. While it is not fully accurate, to ensure students comprehend the gist of a task, Google translate is used. At this time, native language support for speakers of low incidence language such as Mandingo and Sonike, is not provided for at this time. Student speakers of these low incidence languages have developed into the Expanding level of English language proficiency and are proving to be more English dominant. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Due to the limited English proficiency of the Newcomers, many materials need to be modified to support their understanding of subject matter. Consequently, where applicable, Newcomers in grades 2 and up create different literacy products than their more English-dominant peers. Newcomers also receive targeted instruction from the classroom teacher and ENL teacher to build English vocabulary with sight words and academic vocabulary that is essential to each subject area. There is a great use of manipulatives and visuals in all areas. Tasks are typically broken down and ELLs in need of additional support are pulled into groups (all ELLs or a mix of ELLs and non-LEP students) for small, guided group work. The following materials that are available to all staff include: Rigby ELL Assessment kit, Fountas and Pinnell Benchmark Assessment System, Fountas & Pinnell Guided Reading Program: non-fiction focus, fiction focus, and content areas, BLAST, Making Meaning, Rosen Real Life Readers, Language Proficiency Kits, Comprehension Strategies Kit, Exploring Writing, Newbridge content area big book library & guided reading sets, interactive content-area big books, Primary Sources Kits, Fast ForWord program, STMath program, books on tape, access to many websites including www.mesenglish.com, www.readinga-z.com, pebblego.com, www.starfall.com, www.brainpop.com, www.eslflashcards.com. Furthermore, each classroom is equipped with a SMARTBoard and most classrooms have an ELMO projection device, which allows for more technology-based interactive lessons. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? 2018-19 CEP 59  Common school spaces, such as the auditorium, cafeteria, play yards, and gymnasium are shared among the schools in the building. To ensure equity, a schedule has been made to which all 3 schools adhere. In case of a school having an event, a reservation for the required space is made and placed on a calendar to which all 3 schools have access. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Activities for newly enrolled ELLs are not held before the beginning of the school year. While the school building might be open, the facilities are still in the process of being renovated and maintained. During the school year, parents are invited to attend any upcoming school activities. Parents are notified of school activities via a copy of the school calendar, flyers that are sent home and posted on the school doors, Class Dojo, an electronic medium used to communicate with parents, and attendance at the Breakfast with the Principal that is held on the first Friday of each month. All new parents are provided with a copy of the family handbook and important school-related information and resources. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? The school does not offer language electives. The school offers ELA, Mathematics, Science, Social Studies, Physical Education and Health, Technology, and Visual Arts. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? All classroom-based instructors receive at least 2 hours of professional development weekly in literacy and math. Current sessions include unit planning, student work analysis, assessment and data analysis, and planning differentiated lessons. School administrators facilitate these sessions. In addition to the PD offered at the school, faculty is encouraged to apply to other professional development courses and programs offered by higher education and informal education institutions. Moreover, our school seeks ways to maximize its professional capacity. Hence, each faculty member develops professional learning goals within the Charlotte Danielson Framework. Through meetings with the principal and colleagues, individual learning plans are created with short-term goals and a time-line that allows for the pedagogue to work towards achieving their self-identified professional learning goal. Due to the individual nature of each staff member's professional development goal, it would be infeasible to list them here. In short, many staff members are working at goals in Danielson's Framework Domain 3: Instruction. The focus of the school continues to be developing the teaching and learning capacity of faculty in assisting the instruction of ELLs, incorporating the hallmarks of advance literacy. So, PD offerings will be focused on the use of Thinking Maps The monthly faculty conference also provides another arena by which professional development is delivered to all staff. At these meetings, any professional development given often covers topics that are pertinent to all, such as access to SESIS, anti-bullying identification and processing procedures. The science teacher is on hand to consult with any staff requiring assistance in science instructional techniques. The guidance counselor currently provides guidance instruction to classes. The weekly professional development in literacy and math have typically focused on furthering faculty's understanding of the standards as well as working to align instruction to the Common Core Learning Standards. As part of the professional 2018-19 CEP 60  development block on Mondays, all teachers will be split into smaller groups (K-2, 3-5, subject matter experts). Each group will be rotated amongst teacher experts and school administration to facilitate the development of content mastery and to assist with lesson/unit design. All staff will also receive the weekly email from the Office of English Language Learners about the available learning opportunities that can assist them in working with ELLs. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Through professional development in our school, all teachers will fulfill their required professional development hours. As stated, all teachers will meet with school administrators to facilitate the development of content mastery and to assist with lesson/unit design. Since lessons and units are designed with the use of the SIOP template, lessons and units will be looked at for inclusion of language objectives and appropriate language modifications. ENL teachers will fulfill their mandated hours through professional development in school in addition to learning opportunities offered/advertised by the Office of English Language Learners. The in house professional development for ENL teachers will review laws and policies that govern the instruction of ELLs as well as language acquisition in alignment with core content area instruction. Records of all professional development held at school will be in the form of agendas and attendance sheets. Out house offerings will be recorded with certificates of attendance from the professional development provider. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Per the new changes, ENL teachers will have annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs during the parent engagement time that is set by the New York City Department of Education. These meetings will be scheduled on Tuesday afternoons between 3:00 and 3:30 P.M.. Teachers will discuss the language development progress and assessment results with the parents. Letters to setup these meetings with a range of dates will be sent out to parents. In the event that a face to face meeting cannot be arranged, the ENL teachers will conduct a tele-conference with the parent at a more convenient date and time. Once the tele-conference is completed, a summary of the conversation will be written into a letter to be sent to the parent. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. All parents are invited to Breakfast with the Principal, a monthly event. At this event, parents are informed of the various events and activities in our school, as well as ask questions or share their concerns. In the first month of school, we host Curriculum Night where parents can come and meet their child or children’s new classroom teacher and learn about the services that are offered through the school. Parents will also be provided information about the school’s curriculum and be informed about the academic, social, and behavioral expectations for all students at each particular grade level. Parents are invited to attend their child’s publishing parties at least 3 times a year. Other offerings that will be made available dependent on parental interest would be monthly arts and crafts with their child events, science events, and literacy workshops. Over 50% of our parents communicate with their child's teacher One of the largest concerns that parents of ELLs have expressed involves homework help. The school provides parent engagement workshop that assist parents in building their capacity in understanding how to help their child. The guidance counselor meets with all Grade 5 classes for 2 hours a week and holds meetings for parents to inform them about their choice in middle schools. Furthermore, parents are allowed the option to make appointments with the parent coordinator to complete their child’s middle school application. Directories are provided to parents to assist them with their child’s middle school choices. Additionally, if there is an open house for a middle school, parents are notified of the open house through flyers posted on school doors and copies of the flyers are sent home. 2018-19 CEP 61  Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. The school continues to experience a decrease in the funding, and with the changes in CR Part 154, the school has had to be creative in ensuring that ELLs are provided their mandated services. 2018-19 CEP 62 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Avon Connell-Cowell, PhD, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 63  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Elementary School for Math,Sci School DBN: 10X382 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Title Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) Avon Connell-Cowell, PhD Principal Michael Dong Assistant Principal Nordely Ramos Parent Coordinator Madonna Lee ENL/Bilingual Teacher NA Parent Michael Strochansky Teacher/Subject Area Hiralda De Oleo Teacher/Subject Area NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member NA Other NA Other NA Other NA 06/28/18 06/28/18 06/28/18 06/28/18 NA 06/28/18 NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA 2018-19 CEP 64  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 10X382 School Name: Elementary School for Math, Science Superintendent: Maribel Hulla The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this Madonna Lee Teacher Hiralda Michael Nordely De Oleo Dong Ramos Paraprofessional Assistant Principal Parent Coordinator conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No No No No No No No Yes No * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. The Home Language Identification was used to determine parents and students’ language needs. Once the surveys were received they were sorted into the types of languages represented in our school and the grades in which the different languages were represented. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 2018-19 CEP 65  Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral French English Spanish Twi Bengal 1 138 149 1 1 .3 47.58 51.37 .3 .3 2 128 158 1 1 .6 44.13 54.48 .3 .3 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. English and Spanish Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families The Family Handbook; NYC DoE Discipline Code; PBIS Matrix of Expected Behaviors; Cell Phone Policy; September or upon registration to our school Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. All documents are currently translated in Spanish, which is our most dominant non-English language. Families of students who do not speak English, a summary of the school documents are provided. The NYC DoE's discipline code is made available electronically in the language of their choice. Monthly letters and calendars September - June Translated in Spanish DoE letters and other parent information sent electronically to the principal; photo consent form September - June; as frequently as is received by the school Usually available from the DoE's website in a variety of languages Permission slips for trips; notices of school events; flyers; September - June Translated in Spanish; content summarized to parents. Based on the length of time available between the notice and the event, translation is requested from the DoE Translation and Interpretation Unit 2018-19 CEP 66  2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Weekly Parent Engagement Events October - May Breakfast with the Principal Monthly Meetings October - June Parent Teacher Conference/ Curriculum Night September, November, March, May interpretation service(s)? School staff interprets Spanish; meetings with parents requiring different interpretations are usually scheduled in order to be able to accommodate the families. Spanish interpretation is provided by the parent coordinator, paraprofessional or school aides School staff interprets in Spanish; meetings with parents requiring different interpretations are usually scheduled in order to be able to accommodate the families. School Shows/Events November - May School staff interprets in Spanish IEP meetings September - June Disciplinary Conferences September - June SLT meetings September -June School staff interprets in Spanish; meetings with parents requiring different interpretations are usually scheduled in order to be able to accommodate the families. School staff interprets in Spanish; meetings with parents requiring different interpretations are usually scheduled in order to be able to accommodate the families. Spanish interpretation, which is the only required, is provided during the meeting. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Spanish speaking parents are called by a school staff member; families of parent speaking other languages other than English and Spanish have been asked to provide at least one English speaker with whom the are comfortable that may be contacted in the event of an emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. 2018-19 CEP 67  Information regarding CR A- 633 are provided to staff during the first professional development session in September 2018. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) The Welcome Poster indicating all the DOE languages will be displayed in the bulletin board right outside the main office. This location allows all visitors, including parents, to see that interpretation services are available. Copies of the Bill of Parent Rights and Responsibilities were sent home in September. In case parents require an additional copy, extras are located in the main office. Also located in the main office will be copies of the parents’ Guide to Language Access and the Language ID Guide. Regarding languages other than Spanish, parents were informed that it would be necessary to make an appointment so that interpretation services can be arranged prior to their arrival. Parents are reminded of these services when notices are sent home and when they attend any of the school’s monthly activities and meetings. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Feedback from parents regarding the quality and availability of services will be collected when Breakfast with the Principal, School Leadership Team meetings, and Parent Association meetings are held. These will occur at least once a month and be in the form of an oral report. Near the end of the year, a parent survey will be used to solicit parent input for the upcoming school year. 2018-19 CEP 68 
