2018-19 SCHOOL COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (SCEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 10X386 School Name: SCHOOL FOR ENVIRONMENTAL CITIZENSHIP Principal: LYNNANN FOX 2018-19 SCEP-FL 1  School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Section 4: SCEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information School for Environmental Citizenship 10X386 321000010386 Pre-Kindergarten through Grade 5 125 East 181 Street, Bronx, NY 10453 718-563-3292 School Number (DBN): 718-563-3453 Phone Number: LynnannFox Fax: lfox2@schools.nyc.gov Email Address: School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: LynnannFox Bessie Chance N/A Lynnann Fox N/A N/A N/A N/A District Information Geographical District: 10 Superintendent’s Office Address: MaribelHulla Superintendent: One Fordham Plaza, Bronx, New York 10458 MHulla@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-741-5852 Phone Number: 718-741-7098 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 3  FSC: Bronx Executive Director’s Office Address: Jose Ruiz Executive Director: 1 FordhamPlaza Bronx, NY 10458 and 1230 ZeregaAvenue Bronx, NY 10462 JRuiz2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-828-7776 Phone Number: 718-828-6280 Fax: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the SCEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Lynnann Fox Bessie Chance Elizabeth Ramirez N/A N/A N/A N/A Barbara Brooks AriadnaMateo *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher 2018-19 SCEP-FL 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Deborah Ogendengbe Member/ Teacher XochitlCasanova PorfiriaMontalvo Gloria Ortega Irma Pablo N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 SCEP-FL 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) is a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. The process of developing and implementing the SCEP is aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding SCEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department has established programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students supports to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and SCEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint for continuous improvement that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to increase student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 7  In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five (5) goals and action plans that align with the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. Accountability Tools and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is informed by the New York State Education Department’s (NYSED) Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) Tenets, the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Rubric, School Quality Guide and other quantitative and qualitative data tools. NYSED’s Six DTSDE Tenets To strengthen the existing system, the NYSED has developed a tool that captures the best practices from each of the current tools called the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness. This new tool encompasses multiple instruments such as interviews, classroom observations and surveys. The protocol will begin with a clear and cogent statement of the optimal conditions of an effective school and the instruments comprising the protocol will measure how close or far away a particular school is to the optimal conditions identified. Once reviewed, the school and district will create a strategic plan to address the areas in need of improvement. All current Priority and Focus Schools and Focus Districts must use the tool; districts that are required to submit District Comprehensive Improvement Plans and Comprehensive Educational Plans also will use the tool. The DTSDE protocol includes a rubric, which identifies clear and coherent expectations of the optimal conditions of an effective school and school district across the following six tenets:  Tenet 1: District Leadership and Capacity  Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions  Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support  Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions  Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health, and  Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement 2018-19 SCEP-FL 8  NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 2017-18 Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) I. II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Structures for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the SCEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the SCEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. Next Steps for SCEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 9   Step 3: In Part 1A of the Section 5: Needs Assessment indicate the Statement of Practice (SOP) from the DTSDE Tenets that will be addressed in the action plan. Schools that received an Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) School Review should use the recommendations from the review to select their SOPs. Schools that did not undergo an IIT review should select SOPs informed by the major findings/recommendations from your most recent Quality Review (QR) or Central-led Review (CLR), and other qualitative and quantitative data.  Step 4: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 5: Build consensus around activities, strategies and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 6: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 7: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 10  Section 4: SCEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? The School for Environmental Citizenship is a member of a “Community of Learners.” The school strives to ensure that all students achieve at high levels. The school aims to create a literate, nurturing, child-centered environment while teaching students about the global community. The school is committed to providing programs that reflect developmentally appropriate learning strategies through an interdisciplinary approach. P.S. 386 fosters collaborative relationships through which both students and adults are encouraged to take risks, respect diversity, support higher level thinking skills, and maintain high standards. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. The School for Environmental Citizenship, P.S. 386 is an elementary school that serves students and their families from the University Heights community of the Bronx from pre-kindergarten through grade 5. The school is collocated in the former P.S. 79 building and shares this space with P.S. 382 and M.S. 447. There are 587 students enrolled at the school. The school population is comprised of 13% Black, 85% Hispanic and 1% White. The student body includes 40% English Language Learners, 18% Students with Disabilities and 26% Students in Temporary Housing. Males account for 52% of students enrolled and females account for 48%. The average rate of attendance at the school is 92.8%. Last year, P.S. 386 received valuable feedback after a 2-day Quality Review. The reviewer suggested that the school develops a theory of action that integrates social emotional learning into all aspects of the instructional day. Around the same time, a group of teachers and administrators attended a 3-day professional development series offered by the Learner-Centered Initiative, devoted to supporting the whole student. In response to this feedback, as well as results from detailed student surveys, administrators researched different approaches to social emotional learning and found resources to best support our students’ needs. In this research, they found a book titled A Mindset for Learning: Teaching the Traits of Joyful, Independent Growth by Christine Hertz and Kristi Mraz (a former Teachers College Staff Developer). The stances of a “growth mindset” directly aligned with our curriculum, and from there, the school formed a team to study the book and roll out many of its suggested practices. Finally, the Initiative Support Team was created, and many of the school’s staff members spent the summer working on our theory of action that integrated social emotional learning into instruction. The work has continued throughout the duration of this school year, and the team will continue to work on developing their strategic plan to address our students’ needs in the years to come. The school believes that student learning evolves from the instruction of great teachers. To ensure that the school hires the most effective teachers, P.S. 386 has developed a Hiring Committee that screens and selects the best teaching candidates. The committee is comprised of various stakeholders, including teachers, staff developers, secretaries, and a business manager. The Hiring Committee has a designed a multi-step process for hiring which includes an initial telephone interview screening, an in-person panel interview, demonstration lesson, and final interview with administration. The process has allowed the school to recruit and select the most desirable candidates to meet the needs of the school community. Traditionally, the committee has interviewed over 100 candidates per school year, for approximately 5-10 positions per school year. Since its foundation, the school has been committed to increasing student achievement through providing teachers and staff with a wealth of professional development opportunities to enhance their content knowledge and pedagogical approaches to their subjects. The school partners with Teachers College Reading and Writing Project for 2018-19 SCEP-FL 11  both one-day workshops as well as week-long institutes in which teachers learn how to plan and implement instruction related to the units of study, with a keen focus on small group, targeted instruction for all subgroups. The school continues to work closely with its Universal Literacy Coach and in 2017, the school transitioned one classroom teacher to the role of Staff Developer to provide further support for our staff and students. In the 2018-2019 school year, the school will support an additional classroom teacher who has qualified to become a Peer Collaborative Teacher. In addition in 2017, the school began a partnership with Metamorphosis Teaching Learning Communities. Through this partnership, teachers attend series of trainings devoted to expanding conceptual understanding of mathematics, conferring with students, assessment of mathematics, and developing rich mathematical tasks. In addition, one coach from Metamorphosis provides in-school professional development sessions for K-5 teachers 25 times per year. P.S. 386 is dedicated to ensuring students participate in engaging learning opportunities beyond the traditional classroom experience. The school has established and will continue its partnership with the City Parks Foundations for experiential learning sessions and projects that encourage second and third grade students to explore the city’s urban ecosystem. In addition, the school will also continue its partnership with Bronx Arts. This organization enhances students’ experiences in the Arts through violin instruction and theater productions. Immersion in the Arts is further encouraged at P.S. 386 through its participation in the Cool Culture program, which allows income-eligible families to revel in New York City’s cultural institutions for free, which leads to greater literacy and learning experiences. To provide further enrichment and athletic opportunities for students, the school has restructured its daily schedule, as well as its early morning and after school programs to incorporate more sports and arts experiences. Students in grades 3-5 may select from a wealth of experiences such as track with New York Road Runners, basketball with Harlem Magic, or soccer with America Scores. In addition, students have the opportunity to participate in teacher created programs such as Fashion and Design or Robotics. During the school day, students work with coaches from Asphalt Green in structured recess activities that incorporate fitness routines and structured group play. Furthermore, the school has been designated as a Move-to-Improve All Star School. One physical education teacher has been trained through the Move-to-Improve program, and he has turn-keyed the training to the staff so that they may incorporate movement and physical education into their daily routines in the classroom. During the 2017-2018 school year, the school’s STEM teacher brainstormed ways to incorporate more student voice in the school decision making process. In October, he initiated the development of the school’s first Student Council. Teachers nominated students to run for election, students developed campaigns, and students voted for class representatives and various cabinet positions. The Student Council meets monthly with the Principal and voices their concerns and ideas for the improvement of the school. In addition, the Student Council had the opportunity to meet with New York City Council Member Fernando Cabrera, observe one of his Council meetings, and share their ideas for the improvement of schools within our local community. The Student Council at the School for Environmental Citizenship will continue in the years to come. To support the families of its students, the school created a Parent Engagement Team in 2014, and it has continued to evolve in the present day. The team plans and implements monthly family workshops and Family Fun Nights, and 2018-19 SCEP-FL 12  both a Mothers Club and Fathers Club have been created. Teachers have consistently volunteered their time and services to stay afterschool and work with the parents on ways to support their students at home both academically as well as socially and emotionally. In addition, families are invited to Honors Night, which recognizes the achievements of our highest performing students. Families are also invited to Student of the Month breakfasts that highlight the academic efforts of one student per class. Furthermore, parents attend monthly “Chat and Chews” with the administrative team to collaborate on school initiatives, clarify information with questions, and provide feedback for school improvement. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. The student body is comprised of 18% Students with Disabilities 26% Students in Temporary Housing 99% Economically Disadvantaged 40% English Language Learners The school’s large population of English Language Learners needs the most support in native language development and new language acquisition and literacy. These students are serviced by 3 full-time ENL teachers in a push in/pull out model, and by classroom teachers certified in ESL. The school’s staff developer has also provided extensive professional development to all classroom teachers in embedding pedagogical practices that support English Language Learners into all Teachers College Reading and Writing lessons. English Language Learners are further supported by classroom teachers through small group plans that detail 6 weeks cycles of targeted instruction in specific skills/strategies in reading and writing. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. The element of the Framework for Great Schools in which the school has made the most progress over the past year is Collaborative Teachers. The school has focused on building capacity within the school and worked to support teacher teams with in-house staff developers and coaches. In addition to the work of teachers collaborating around student work and assessment in grade team meetings, teachers have collaborated to design and implement new early morning and after school programs. Furthermore, the school has cultivated a strong Initiative Support Team to further develop the school’s response to supporting the social emotional development of students. The school’s key areas of focus for the 2018-2019 school year are Rigorous Instruction and Strong Family and Community Ties. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 13  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 10X386 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 598 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 36 36 25 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 8 6 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 99.0% % Attendance Rate 97.0% % Reduced Lunch 33.6% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.0% 85.3% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 1.3% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 4.81 0% 13% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 18.9% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 52% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No No Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups SWD, Black Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities N/A NO N/A NO NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A NO N/A N/A NO High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 48 48 93.1% 2.3% 17.2% 12.9% 0.5% 0.0% 4 2% 7.5 15.2% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No Yes YSH N/A N/A NO NO YSH N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 14  Economically Disadvantaged N/A ALL STUDENTS N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 15  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 3 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 3.2 The school leader ensures and supports the quality implementation of a systematic plan of rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of students. Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction (DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and address student achievement needs. The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. 3.3 3.4 3.5 SOP(s) Addressed X X N/A X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths: Since 2010, the school has been using the Teachers College Reading and Writing Project units of study. Each year, teachers attend various professional development sessions and institutes held at Teachers College directly aligned to the units of study and to making curricular adjustments based on special populations and student needs. The school uses GoMath as a resource for math instruction, and in 2017, the school partnered with Metamorphosis Learning Communities to support increasing both teacher and student conceptual understanding in math. Through the partnership, Metamorphosis has provided 25 on site coaching days as well as various 3-4 session collaborative institutes to support the teachers. Since 2016, the school has partnered with our Universal Literacy Coach to support teachers in grades K-2 in planning and implementing units of study. In 2017, the school hired a former teacher from the school as a Staff Developer to work 2018-19 SCEP-FL 16  with grades 3-5 in literacy and K-5 in mathematics. Both coaches support teachers in analyzing assessments and making curricular adjustments. Our Instructional focus for the 2016-2017 and 2017-2018 school years was aligned to planning for small groups. Teachers attended an 8 week cycle of learning geared towards planning for small group guided reading and strategy groups to increase student achievement in literacy. For the 2017-2018 school year we extended our instructional focus to include small group math and writing groups. School leaders have aligned the master schedule so that teachers have the opportunity to meet for designated, formal Common Planning time once per week for one full period. In addition, the schedule has been created to provide informal time for teachers on the same grade team to meet during common preps and lunch periods. Needs: Although teachers are working to create small group plans in reading, writing, and math, many of the plans are created in isolation. Teachers need more support in using systematic protocols to analyze assessments and adjust the curriculum. In addition, the school needs a systematic approach for monitoring the effectiveness of the curricular adjustments. Priority: The school will develop clear, consistent, school-wide protocols for Data Driven Instruction, including analyzing assessment results and student work products to make curricular adjustments and progress monitoring. Specifically, the needs of ELLs and students with disabilities will be addressed. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. From September 2018 through June 2019, teachers will intentionally organize instructional groups to address student learning needs and provide differentiated instruction, resulting in an at least 5% increase in proficiency on New York State Education Department ELA and Math assessments. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 17  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Universal Literacy Coach will provide support in the form of professional development for teachers in grades K-2 on subtopics of using Running Records to analyze students' reading needs and form groups, using conferences to analyze needs and form small groups, and providing effective Guided Reading and Strategy lessons to improve student learning in reading. Teachers will choose and attend staff development conference days at Teachers College for professional development sessions related to unit design and small group instruction in reading and writing. All information will be turn keyed to staff members. Consultants from District Public will work with administrators and teachers to develop customized data collection tools and systems to analyze student performance in Math and ELA Administrators will conduct informal and formal observations and provide feedback and suggestions for strategies to move teacher practice in Component IE of the Danielson Framework for teaching Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) K-2 Teachers All teachers K-5 Administrators and all K-5 teachers Weekly from September 2018-June 2019 Universal Literacy Coach, Assistant Principals Weekly from September 2018-June 2019 Teachers College Staff Developers, Assistant Principals 10 Sessions between October 2018 - June 2019 Consultants from District Public, Administrators 2018-19 SCEP-FL 18  as well as collect lesson plans for review and feedback related to the component. The school will use a push in team teaching and pull out model for ELL instruction. Through this model, the students will receive the support of an additional teacher during content instruction. Weekly from October 2018 - June 2019 All teachers K-5 All Administrators In unit plans, teachers will continue to make curricular adjustments to support language development of ELLS. In lesson plans and practice, teachers will scaffold questions and provide language prompts for all subgroups in their classrooms. All Teachers September 2018-June 2019 Teachers, Administrators 2018-19 SCEP-FL 19  Three teachers will provide Professional Development on the SIOP model Staff developer will provide continuous cycles of professional development related to Advanced Literacy. Our Special Education Coordinator will continue to work closely with teachers and paraprofessionals to provide support with implementation of IEP’s Month Chat and Chew with the Principal and Administrative Team All Parents Monthly Parent Workshops Monthly meetings with our Parent Learning Leaders Monthly Father's Group. Monthly Newsletters Three progress reports annually in addition to three report cards annually Daily Rosetta Stone Classes for parents. September 2018-June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, Parent Coordinator All Teachers September 2018-June 2019 Teachers, Administrators, Guidance Counselor Adult ESL Classes After School Hours Weekly Grade Team Meetings Vertical Planning Meetings Professional Development Team Monthly Breakfast with the Principal Instructional Support Team Initiative Support Team 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will be invited to attend after school events with their children to target parental understanding of major concepts in math, science and literacy. After school family workshops will happen once per month. The workshops will be hosted by teachers, administrators and parents. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 20  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Schedule adjustments will be made to provide for extra meeting periods for teachers when they are working with staff developers. Substitute teachers will be hired to cover teachers’ programs when they are out of the building for professional development sessions. Additional strategic schedule adjustments will be made to allow for team teaching periods in all classrooms with high populations of ELLs. Advanced Literacy text for all teachers. Teachers College Reading and Writing Project Package District Public Full time Universal Literacy Coach One full time Staff Developer Professional Development provided by Exemplars Professional Development provided by Curriculum Associates Professional Development provided by Metamorphosis Annual staff retreat Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA X P/F Set-aside 21st Century C4E 2018-19 SCEP-FL 21  X Title I 1003(a) Title III PTA Funded SIG Grant School Achievement Other Funding Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, teachers' ability to intentionally organize instructional groups to address the learning needs of various groups of students will be strengthened as the percentage of observations rated effective or higher in Component 1E (Designing Coherent Instruction - Observation) of the Danielson Framework for Teaching will increase from 65% to 68% as measured by informal and formal observations. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The school will use the ADVANCE system as a tool to track teacher progress in Component 1E. The school will run reports specific to Component 1E in November, February, and June. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 22  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 5 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 5.2 The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. 5.3 The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students. 5.4 All school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health supports tied to the school’s vision. 5.5 The school leader and student support staff work together with teachers to establish structures to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental health needs. X X X X SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Strengths Since 2009, the school has been implementing a PBIS program school-wide. Since 2013, there has been a more heightened awareness of the benefits of PBIS among staff, parents, and students. As part of the Mindset for Learning initiative, staff and students receive recognition and certificates for having and showing characteristics of a "Growth Mindset," which are given out during periodic assemblies. In 2015, the school began instituting Parent Chat and Chews with Administration. During these meetings, school administrators alert families to upcoming events, school-wide programs/needs, and community happenings. In addition, families have the opportunity to address any questions or concerns directly with the Principal and staff. Students demonstrating positive behavior and academic perseverance are celebrated at monthly Student of the Month breakfasts with their families. In 2016, one teacher was certified in Life-Space Crisis Intervention and one administrator was received training in supporting students who have been experiencing trauma in their lives. In 2015, the Guidance Counselor was issued a certificate for completing training in the At-risk for Middle School online program and has also received certification as a trained member of Youth Mental Health First Aid USA in conjunction with ThriveNYC and the National Council for Behavioral Health in 2017. Both of these programs provide extensive training on recognizing signs of psychological distress and helping connect students and 2018-19 SCEP-FL 23  their families to support services. The Guidance Counselor has also been trained by the Welcoming Schools program to become an Out for Safe Schools "Safe Space Ambassador," which is a new role being implemented in schools to support the LGBTQ community This role has been extended to three other staff members who will actively support the safe space initiative. In 2015-2016, the school expanded the basketball program. Both boys and girls were invited to participate in the program this year. The school partnered with the Harlem Magic basketball team to help develop a sense of teamwork and inter-personal skills among boys and girls through interactive sports play. In Pre-K, teachers and students participated the Teddy Bear Project, which provides empowering support for students in dealing with troubles. Teachers receive training and support in inviting and containing social emotional health in the classroom. The school also recognizes the need to incorporate more student voice in school decision making. Therefore, in 2017-2018, one teacher from the school will lead a Student Council, consisting of representatives from each 3rd, 4th, and 5th grade class. In addition, the school will create an Initiative Support Team to develop a systematic approach to enabling students to identify and utilize stances that promote a growth mindset for learning. Need Although many levels of social-emotional supports are embedded in the school community throughout the school year, we have noticed that there are quite a few students in our school in need of further support. In Spring 2017, the school participated in District 10's grant with Learner Centered Initiatives. Through this grant, our 4th and 5th grade students participated in a survey related to their social-emotional learning needs. Focus groups of 1st and 2nd grade students were also studied. The results of the survey and focus groups revealed that students are feeling supported academically by their teachers, but they need more social-emotional support. We also have identified the need to teach students how to utilize self-awareness and self-management techniques to identify their feelings and work towards more positive approaches to dealing with trauma and challenges. The school's 2016-2017 Quality Review identified supporting students social-emotional health as an area of focus. Additionally, during the 2016-2017 school year, the school identified the need for an alternative lunch program for students who were repeatedly demonstrating difficulty socializing positively in the lunch room. Priority Our students who face the most social emotional and academic challenges respond well to the supports provided by interactive sports play and mentoring from the Harlem Magic coaches. We plan to begin the Harlem Magic basketball program earlier this school year to support their needs. In addition, we applied to the Year 2 Comfort Dog Pilot Program through the Office of School Counseling. Our Initiative Support Team will use the professional text "A Mindset for Learning" to teach students and teachers to use empathy, persistence, optimism, flexibility, and resilience as they face challenges with a growth mindset. The multiple levels of social-emotional support will reducing the number of behavior-related incidents reported in OORS. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools –Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 24  By implementing a Social Emotional Curriculum, the total number of behavior related reports filed in the Online Occurrence Reporting System will decrease by 10% by June 2019, reflecting an improvement in the social-emotional health of our students. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 25  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  The school will continue its PBIS programs. The Girls and Boys Basketball Teams (in collaboration with Harlem Magic) will continue. A Student Council will be created to give students more voice in their learning. The Initiative Support Team will conduct a book study of Kristne Mraz' A Mindset for Learning and turn-key all learning to support teachers and students in understanding the growth mindset. The school will participate in the Year 2 Comfort Dog Pilot Program. An Alternative Lunch Program will continue, where students eat lunch in different locations with the support of adults and structured play activities. Students with disabilities and other high-need student subrgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited,SIFE, STH) will be supported through mandated and at risk counseling and FBA/BIPs. Students and families will receive further support through collaboration with Morris Heights Health Clinic's on-site social worker. Parent Chat and Chew Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Pre-K - 5th grade families, students, teachers September 2018-June 2019 Teachers, Principal, Assistant Principals, Guidance Counselor Pre-K through 5th grade students with disabilities September 2018-June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, Guidance Counselor, SBST, School Psychologist, Parent Coordinator, MHHC Social Worker and Medical Staff Pre-K through 5th Grade Families September-June Principal, AP A bi-monthly Initiative Support Team meeting will commence. To build trust, teachers, parents, paraprofessionals, and school aides will be invited discuss the social-emotional needs of specific students. As a team, we will develop a specific plan for supporting the students in school and at home, and schedule follow-up meetings to monitor progress and make adjustments as needed. Pre-K through 5th grade teachers, paraprofessionals, parents, school aides September 2018-June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, Guidance Counselor 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 26  Consistent communication to families will be implemented through Monthly Principal Chat and Chew conferences discussing new initiatives in the building, bullying workshops addressing noticing signs and steps to intervention, staff and parent GRP/BRT workshops to address building safety procedure/curriculum and response to crisis. Parent Learning Leaders will continue to support school safety measures. Parent training will be provided to support families dealing with trauma. Families will be invited to Friday assemblies to celebrate students demonstrating the key stances of a growth mindset. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. PBIS/Growth Mindset incentives Celebration breakfasts with families and Parent Chat and Chews School Retreat Initiative Support Team meeting resources Comfort Dog Pilot Program resources Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By implementing a Positive Behavioral Intervention System the total number of behavior related reports filed in the Online Occurrence Reporting System will decrease by 10% by June 2019, reflecting an improvement in the Social-Emotional Health of our students. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. OORS reporting system Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 27  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 4 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 4.2 School and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. SOP(s) Addressed X 4.3 Teachers provide coherent, and appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards N/A (CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. 4.4 Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences and tailored to the strengths and needs of all students. N/A 4.5 Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, and progress monitoring). Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. N/A 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths: The teachers in grades K-5 systematically collect data. In math, teachers implement pre and post assessments before and after each chapter in GoMath. In reading, teachers conduct Fountas and Pinnell Running Records and the independent reading level data is collected in September, November, January, March, and June. In writing, teachers use the Writing Learning Progressions (Rubric) to collect student writing data in the form of pre and post "on-demand" writing assessments for each writing genre (Narrative, Informational, and Argument). Students use checklists to monitor their learning across subject areas. In addition, teachers implement i-Ready diagnostics in October and February. During grade team meeting teacher teams follow a protocol to look at student work samples and select assessments to identify learning trends, and prioritize needs across the grade. Needs: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 28  Although assessments are systematically implemented and data is collected, teachers need support in the systematic analysis of the data and the use of the data to continuously inform instruction and planning across all subject areas. Teacher leaders and coaches support teachers’ use of instructional practices and strategies that are aligned to plans to provide instructional interventions to students. Teachers are using select data sources to plan for adjusting student groupings and instructional strategies, however a stronger systematic approach is needed to improve achievement. As a school we will need to continue strengthening the systematic way we track student progress, and ensure that our instructional interventions are working in reading, writing and math. Priority: Teachers need professional development in understanding the relationships between formative and summative data and to how better align plans to provide instructional interventions to students. Teachers need support of a schoolwide protocol to strategically and systematically analyzing formative and summative assessment data in reading, writing, and math. School leaders need to continue to strengthen systems, develop a schoolwide protocol to analyze student work, and strategies to support teachers in identifying students' needs and ensuring our instructional interventions are effective in reading, math and writing. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, teachers' ability to inform planning based on formative and summative assessment data will be strengthened as the percentage of observations rated effective in Component 3d of the Danielson Framework for Teaching will increase from 52% to 62% as measured by informal and formal observations. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 29  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Assistant Principals, the Universal Literacy Coach and the Staff Developer, will attend a Coaching Institute through Teachers College and Metamorphosis Math to support teachers in developing schoolwide protocols to analyze assessment results/student work to inform planning and instruction. Teachers will choose and attend staff development conference days at Metamorphosis Math and Teachers College for professional development sessions related to using assessment data to drive instruction. All information will be turn keyed to staff members. Teachers will choose and attend staff development days through District 10 and the Field Support Center related to Danielson Component 3d. Teachers will receive professional development from a team at i-Ready to integrate the results from the diagnostics into instruction. Assistant Principals, Literacy Coach All teachers PK-5 All teachers PK-5 All teachers grades 1-5 Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) 7 Sessions from October 2018- June 2019 Teachers College, Assistant Principals, Literacy Coach, Principal September 2018 - June 2019 Assistant Principals, teachers, Principal Administration, teachers September 2018 - June 2019 October 2018 2018-19 SCEP-FL 30  Consultants from District Public will work with administrators and teachers to develop customized data collection tools and systems to analyze student performance in Math and ELA Administrators and teachers K-5 Administrators will conduct informal and formal observations and provide feedback and suggestions for strategies to move teacher practice in Component 3D of the Danielson Framework for teaching. Grade Team Leaders Administrators will participate in common planning meetings to support teachers in implementing new systems, protocols and strategies to support the use of formative assessments to drive instruction. A Professional Development Team consisting of a representative sample of teachers, Staff Developer, Universal Literacy Coach and paraprofessionals in the building will meet two times per month to plan for Monday professional development sessions based on teachers’ needs, plan for agenda items for monthly faculty conferences to increase communication with staff to Administrators and teacher PK-5 Administrators 10 sessions between October 2018 and June 2019 Teachers, Administration Consultants from District Public, Administrators Administrators Weekly October 2018-2019 At the end of each session in the cycle with grade team leaders 2018-19 SCEP-FL 31  build trust, reflect on the plans’ effectiveness, and provide next steps. A Professional Development Schedule for outside professional development sessions will be created, as well as a schedule for Monday professional development sessions. This will increase the effectiveness of communication in the building. In addition to the overall schedules, administrators will write “Weekly Happenings” memos to remind teachers and paraprofessionals of their professional development presentations. A full time Universal Literacy Coach, Staff Developer will assist teachers in developing effective practices in Danielson Component 3d. All Pk-5 teachers and administrators PD Team, teachers All teachers, paraprofessionals, staff PK - 5 The administrative team, Universal Literacy Coach, Staff Developer, and professional development team will select a schoolwide formative assessment monitor student progress across content areas, research electronic data assessment tool, and support the schoolwide implementation of the tool. Initiative Support Team consisting of teachers, Staff Developer, Universal Literacy Coach and Assistant Principals in the building will meet once per week after school to develop a schoolwide theory of action that will drive instructional supports that All staff members All teachers K-2 Weekly Monthly Meetings Weekly Administrators Administrators PD team, administrators, Universal Literacy Coach, Staff Developer 2018-19 SCEP-FL 32  address the academic, and social,emotional needs to all students. All teachers K-5 All students K-5 Weekly Weekly October 2018 PD team, Universal Literacy Coach, Staff Developer, administrators, Assistant Principal Universal Literacy Coach, Staff Developer, administrators September 2018-June 2019 The administrative team, Universal Literacy Coach, Staff Developer, and 2018-19 SCEP-FL 33  In lesson plans and teacher practice, teachers will monitor student progress towards meeting language goals. All Teachers Three teachers will provide Professional Development on the SIOP model Our Special Education Coordinator works closely with teachers and paraprofessionals to provide support with implementation of IEP’s Month Chat and Chew with the Principal and Administrative Team All Parents Monthly Parent Workshops Monthly Newsletters Three Progress Reports Annually Weekly Grade Team Common Planning Meetings All Teachers Professional Development Team Monthly Breakfast with the Principal 3b – Parent and Family Engagement professional development team Initiative Support Team Teachers and Administrators September 2018-June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, Teachers, Parent Coordinator September 2018-June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. During the 2018-2019 school year parents will be invited to attend monthly academic workshops/ events hosted by administrators, teacher, and parents. Workshops will provide parents with guidance on how to better support their children at home in the areas of literacy, math, and science. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Teacher’s College Reading and Writing Project Package 2018-19 SCEP-FL 34  Metamorphosis Math Coaching sessions, and workshops District Public Consultants i-Ready Consultant Schedule adjustments will be made to provide for extra meeting periods for teachers when they are working with staff developers. Substitute teachers will be hired to cover teachers’ programs when they are out of the building for professional development sessions. Two full time Academic Intervention Teachers One full time Literacy Coach Three full time English as a New Language Teachers Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, teachers' ability to inform planning based on formative and summative assessment data will be strengthened as the percentage of observations rated effective in Component 3d of the Danielson Framework for Teaching will increase from 52% to 62% as measured by informal and formal observations. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 35  Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The school will use the ADVANCE system as a tool to track teacher progress in Component 3d. The school will run reports specific to Component 3d in November, February, and June. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 36  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 2 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 2.2 The school leader ensures that the school community shares the Specific, Measurable, Ambitious, Results-oriented, and Timely (SMART) goals/mission and long-term vision inclusive of core values that address the priorities outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP). Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital resources. 2.3 2.4 The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district's Annual Professional Performance Review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. 2.5 Leaders effectively use evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve critical individual and school-wide practices as defined in the SCEP (student achievement, curriculum and teacher practices; leadership development; community/family engagement; and student social and emotional developmental health). x x x x SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. To articulate the school’s vision and instructional goals for the 2017-2018 school year, school leaders have made strategic decisions around ways to communicate with all stakeholders in the school community. In collaboration with the professional development team, school leaders have will six week professional learning cycles enabling teachers to increase the achievement of all students while eliminating achievement gaps. School leaders have strategically divided the supervision responsibilities to maximize opportunities for pedagogical improvement and increases in student achievement. In 2017-2018, all eligible teachers will receive 4 or more observations (formal and informal) with actionable feedback aligned with the school’s instructional focus (using small group instruction to target specific learning needs) and vision. Data from observations is used to inform professional development and school organizational decisions. Teachers assess student progress across all grades using the Fountas and Pinnell Reading Benchmark Assessment system at least 6 times per school year, as well as pre and post chapter and unit assessments in math, reading, writing, and science. Teachers also utilize mid unit check points to inform instruction. Teachers meet in grade teams and vertical planning teams to analyze student data and to create small groups for targeted instruction based on the Common Core 2018-19 SCEP-FL 37  Learning Standards. Fountas and Pinnell Reading data is tracked school wide and administrators identify trends within and across grades. In 2014, school administrators analyzed running record data against state test results and identified that many students within the building are not matched to correct independent reading levels, and therefore did not achieve proficiency on state exams. As a result, school administrators are continuously working with teachers and staff developers to properly match students to independent texts. In 2016, school administrators analyzed running record data again and recognized that most students are now correctly matched to independent reading text. School administrators identified a need for for continuous school wide professional development focused on norming, administering and analyzing running records to ensure a cohesive assessment practice. New Fountas and Pinnell reading assessment kits with more rigorous assessment text have been purchased school wide. The school partners with a Universal Literacy Coach with a focus on K-2 reading and writing instruction. In addition, the school has hired a full time literacy coach to support teachers in enhancing students' literacy skills, providing staff development to strengthen teachers pedagogy in literacy. Two Academic Intervention Service providers and two Reading Rescue tutors were hired to support struggling readers. In 2016-2017, two administrators attended an 8-day Coach Group with Teachers College. During the sessions, administrators learned how to support teachers in implementing units of study and Readers and Writers Workshops. One administrator conducted a 6-week professional development series for all classroom and instructional support teachers on using assessment data to form small groups for reading instruction. Jennifer Serravallo's Teaching Reading in Small Groups book and The Reading Strategies book were used to support the professional development series. Teachers learned how to use a planning tool to plan cycles of 4-5 weeks of small group instruction in reading targeted at their students' needs. In 2017-2018, the planning tool will be expanded to support teachers in creating small group plans across writing and math as well. In 2016-2017, teachers reported that they identified large gaps in phonics instruction in their classrooms while using the Fundations program. As a result, the implementation of the Fundations program in grades K-2 in the 2017-2018 school year will be improved as all K-2 students will be grouped based on independent reading level and Fundations diagnostic assessment for the first 30 minutes of the day. Therefore, all students will receive phonics instruction targeted to their specific needs. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART– Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, administrators will provide professional learning opportunities and meaningful observation feedback to teachers improving on instructional practice resulting in a 5% increase in proficiency of students in grades 3-5 on the NYS English Language Arts Examination. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 38 Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) September 2018-June 2019 Teachers in grades K-5, Related Service Providers, ENL Teachers Two Teachers College Staff Developers,Universal Literacy Coach, Staff Developer, Administrators Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Teachers will choose and attend staff development conference days at Teachers College for professional development sessions. Administrators will participate in grade team meetings to support teachers in planning for units and lessons based on student data. Administrators will conduct informal and formal observations and provide feedback and suggestions for strategies to move teacher practice in Component IE of the Danielson Framework for teaching as well as collect lesson plans and small group plans for review and actionable feedback. A Professional Development Team consisting of a representative sample of teachers and paraprofessionals in the building will meet two times per month to plan for Monday professional development sessions based on teachers’ needs, plan for agenda items for monthly faculty conferences to increase communication with staff to build trust, reflect on the plans’ effectiveness, and provide next steps. To support the academic achievement and language acquisition of English Language Learners in our school 15% of the general education teachers’ professional development and 50% of the Teachers of English to Speakers of Other Languages(TESOL) certified teachers professional development sessions will focus on oral language development and literacy development. The school will provide teachers with the Ready program and i-Ready web based program to further enhance literacy skills and supplement the Teachers College Reading and Writing Project curriculum. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 39 Teachers, Administrators, Teaching Artists from Bronx Arts Ensemble, paraprofessionals, Harlem Magic Basketball program The school has purchased the Fundations program to support phonics skill acquisition in the lower grades. The goal is for this program to provide the foundation for literacy development as the students progress to the upper grades. Students will be grouped for Fundations instruction based on independent reading level and Fundations initial diagnostic assessment. In Spring 2017, the school purchased Summer Reading book bags with independent reading books and summer enrichment activities for all K-2 students to prevent any regression in reading achievement. All after school instructional support programs will be held in eleven week cycles and will be aligned to the school's small group instructional focus. Students will be invited to the following programs: All Students October 2018-June 2019 ENL students from kindergarten to grade five will be invited to the ELL Academy targeting literacy instruction and language acquisition. Students will be instructed in small groups for 1 hour, followed by 1 hour of enrichment (art, dance, music, sports) Fourth grade students will be invited to the Science Academy to provide the students with supplemental support to enhance students’ proficiency in science exploration, science vocabulary, and knowledge of fourth grade science content. Students will be instructed in small groups for 1 hour, followed by 1 hour of enrichment (art, dance, music, sports) Students will be invited to the 3 – 5 Tutoring Academy. The program will combine the I-Ready Reading and Math web based, individualized program with the NY Ready program to support the student’s academic needs. Students will be instructed in small groups for 1 hour, followed by 1 hour of enrichment (art, dance, music, sports) Students in kindergarten, first grade, and second grade will be invited to the K-2 Academy to provide students with additional intensive support to help prepare the students for the next grade. Students will be instructed in small groups for 1 hour, followed by 1 hour of enrichment (art, dance, music, sports) 3 RTI teachers will provide targeted instruction to the lowest third of the school, including ELLs and SWDs. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 40  Students with Disabilities in 12:1:1 programs will receive literacy instruction using the Superkids program in addition the the Teachers College Writing Units of Study. The Superkids program provides strong foundational reading skill work for students. Monthly Chat and Chew All Families Comprehensive Calendar will be disseminated in August 2018 outlining all educational due dates. All staff members September 2018-June 2019 Administration, Parents August 2018 Administrators, Professional Development Team 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Monthly Chat and Chew with the Principal and Administrative Team Monthly Parent Workshops Monthly Newsletters Three Progress Reports Annually Parents will be invited to view instruction during quarterly Instructional Rounds Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Schedule adjustments will be made to provide for extra meeting periods for teachers when they are working with staff developers from Teachers College and coaches. Universal Literacy Coach Staff Developer Superkids literacy program curriculum 2018-19 SCEP-FL 41  Fundations consumable materials i-Ready Program site license Harlem Magic basketball expenses Bronx Arts Ensemble Grant Professional Development Texts: The Writing Strategies Book, Conferring with Readers Substitute teachers will be hired to cover teachers’ programs when they are out of the building for professional development sessions. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2019, the percentage of students reading at or above grade level as measured by the Fountas and Pinnell Reading Benchmark Assessment System will increase by 5% Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The Fountas and Pinnell independent reading level tracker will be used to assess reading progress students make toward meeting the above mentioned goal. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 42  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 6 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 6.2 The school leader ensures that regular communication with students and families fosters their X SOP(s) Addressed high expectations for student academic achievement. 6.3 The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders so that student strength and needs are identified and used to augment learning. 6.4 The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to support student success. 6.5 The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school community members centered on student learning and success and encourages and empowers families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their children. x Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strength: Increase the number of parents participating in weekly parent engagement sessions with teachers to discuss student’s academic performance. Increase the number of parents attending monthly parent workshops. Increase the number of parents attending Parent’s Association meetings. Increase the number of parents attending Parent Teacher Conferences Priority Needs: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 43  Based on the 2016-2017 Quality Review, the recommendations given to our school were to continue to develop systems to that communicate high expectations to students and parents and provide all stakeholders with feedback about student progress in order to further promote student achievement. In an effort to strengthen the level of parental collaboration and engagement our school has embarked on our second year of Dads Take Your Child to School Day event in September. This school year both our mother’s club and father’s club events became a collaborative effort among the schools on the Creston Campus, M.S. 447 and P.S. 382. This year the Dads Change the World Father’s Group, and Mother’s Power Circle Mother's Club meetings were primarily focused on mental and physical wellness and family financial fitness. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. September 2018 through June 2019, 10X386 will strengthen family and community ties through monthly standards-based academic workshops as evidenced by an increase in the New York City Department of Education Learning Environment Survey: Strong Family-Community Ties from 2.65 to 2.85. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 44 Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Starting September 2018 Ending June 2019 Parents/guardians, parent coordinator, classroom teachers, guidance counselor, administrators and school support staff will help implement all activities. All parents of students school wide including but not limited to: parents of students with disabilities, English Language learners, and students in the lowest one third in academic standing. Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Below are the workshops, meetings, and school wide events implemented to foster parent engagement. Annual Dads Take Your Child to School Day Annual Moms Take Your Child To School Day Annual Continuing Education Fair Annual Clothing Drive Annual Carnival Monthly Dads Change The world- Father's Club Meeting Bi-monthly Sister Circle- Mother ’s Club- Joint Parent's Club Meetings Topics: Financial Fitness, Health and Wellness, Stress Management, and Parent Appreciation Parent Teacher Conferences will be held 5 times a year. Bimonthly Family Fun Night Events 2018-19 SCEP-FL 45  Monthly Parent Chat and Chew- Breakfast and Discussion Adult English as a Second Language Classes Rosetta Stone Program Parent's Association sponsored Candy Grams We are maximizing our Weekly Parent Engagement sessions by inviting parents to one to one meeting with their child’s teacher to discuss student progress, concerns and strategies on how to help students at home. The focus of the Parent Engagement Committee will address the concerns and needs of the parents of our school community. Here we discuss and create action plans to address parental concerns. Parent’s Continuing Education Fair will continue to be a campus wide event held in April to offer parents an opportunity to continue their education. Area colleges, Continuing Education programs from CUNY schools, transitional programs, trade schools, and military organizations will be invited to present at the fair. Families from all three schools from the Creston Campus were invited to attend the education fair. All parents of students school wide including but not limited to: parents of students with disabilities, English Language learners, and students in the lowest one third in academic standing. We will be embarking on our third year of Parent Chat and Chew meetings with the Principal. The purpose of the Parent Chat and Chew is to allow parents to come together with the administration team to discuss concerns and review school wide goals. We offer parents with Limited English proficiency, English As A Second Language Classes. Learning English will support parents in feeling comfortable in participating in their child's education, increase student achievement of our English Language Learners, empower parents to make decisions for their children and increase parent involvement in the overall school community. The Bronx Adult Learning Center will be offering the adult ESL classes called September 2018-June 2019 Parents/guardians, parent coordinator, classroom teachers, guidance counselor, administrators and school support staff will help implement all activities. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 46  English for Speakers of Other Languages at our school at no cost to te school. The Rosetta Stone program will be offered to support language learning for parents during the school day. Family Engagement Team Month Chat and Chew with the Principal and Administrative Team All parents September 2018-June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, Teachers, Parent Coordinator, School Leadership Team, Parent’s Association Monthly Parent Workshops Monthly Family Fun Nights Monthly Newsletters Three Progress Reports Annually Annual Learning Environment Survey Father Club- Dad’s Change The World Mother’s Club- Mother's Power Circle Dad’s Take Your Child To School Day School Leadership Team Parent’s Association Monthly Professional Learning Opportunities for families to support their child's and the schools academic success. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement All parents September 2018-June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, Teachers, Parent Coordinator, School Leadership Team, Parent’s Association If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Cool Culture, Urban Advantage, Bronx Adult Learning Center ESL Classes, Good Shephard Services, Morris Heights Health Clinic Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Workshop Presenters Guest Speakers 2018-19 SCEP-FL 47  Copies of books for parent groups Copies of parent support pamphlets Teacher and Staff Per session at Family Fun Nights (Math Nights) Professional Books Speakers: Workshops Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, there will be a 5% increase in the number of parents at school meetings, teams, and parent clubs designed to foster a transparent and collaborative family-school community. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The percentage of parent participation will be calculated and tracked by using the sign in sheets at all parent events and meetings. All academic based workshops will be tracked using the sign in sheets to calculate gains. The percentage will be calculated and tracked monthly by the parent coordinator. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 48  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) F&P (Independent Reading Levels) Lowest Third: K-5 Lowest Third NYS ELA Scores 3-5 Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Reading Rescue Small Group First and Second Grade 1:1 Computer Based Leveled Literacy Intervention (LLI) Lowest Third School Wide: Easy CB Wordly Wise Recipe for Reading Proficiency Levels on New York State English as a Second Language Achievement Test Preventing Academic Failure (PAF) New York Ready Test Prep i-Ready Rosetta Stone i-Ready Small Group New York Ready Test Prep 1:1 Use of Math Games Computer Based Mathematics Lowest Third School Wide: Easy CBM Math Lowest Third NYS Math Scores 3-5 Lowest Third School Wide: End of Unit Assessments Math Manipulatives When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) During the School Day After School Programs Saturday Academy Before School Summer School 2018 During the School Day After School Programs Saturday Academy 2018-19 SCEP-FL 49  Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) All Third and Fourth Grade English Language Learners Lowest Third: School Wide K-5 Lack of production and motivation; demonstrating frequent behaviors that disrupt instruction or impede learning process; drop in academic performance personal/family issues or cases 3rd grade to 5 th grade boys that have a difficult time with making friends and making good choices 3-5 grade girls that need additional social emotional support and structure Fourth grade students that need additional support in developingtolerance Science Test Prep Materials Guided Reading and Book Clubs Grades K-5 Regular “check-ins” and at-risk individual, group or family sessions, class observations, peer mediation, referrals to mental health agency Social Emotional Support and learning Interpersonal Skills, learning to work as a team Social Emotional Support and learning Interpersonal Skills, learning to work as a teamSocial Social Emotional Support and socializing toengage in self expression through exposure to AfticanCulture and dance to develop tolerance Groups of 8-12 students with an experienced teacher Small Group 1:1 Small Group Counseling After School Boys basketball Team After School Saturday Academy During the School Day during AIS times Weekly to monthly on an as needed basis according to the individual clients and on the caseload. Meets once a week for 20 Weeks After School Girls basketball Team Meets once a week for 10 weeks After School African Dance Team Once a week for 20 weeks 2018-19 SCEP-FL 50  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. We currently have a combined total of 153 students living in "family safe havens" (shelters), doubled-up with relatives or neighbors and also in foster care. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 51  Academic Intervention Services are offered to students that are below grade level standards. Before and After/School tutoring is offered to students that are below grade level expectations. We provide our students in temporary housing with school uniforms (khaki pants and polo shits), a book bag, school supplies and hygiene kits. In addition we will provide our students with coats, hats, scarves and gloves. We support these students and their families with any and all school trips and senior dues. We provide the parents with support with health and daily concerns such as, glasses, prescriptions, metro cards, food pantry's, dentist information, and referrals to mental health facilities. Our school attendance team that monitors these students closely and provides outreach to their families. Provide the parents with coping, health and wellness workshops. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 52 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 53  Section 8: Title I Program Information Directions:  All schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. A teacher led hiring committee was formed during the 2015 school year. All teachers were encouraged to apply. Additionally each staff member interested in the position went through an interview process. Six teachers were selected to be a part of the hiring committee based on their high scores that aligned with the mission and vision of the School for Environmental Citizenship and how we believe students learn best. All prospective teachers go through a three step hiring process. Initially, the candidate is interviewed by the teacher led hiring team. If the majority of the team scores the candidate with high scores, the candidate is invited to the second step of the process; a thirty minute demo lesson. During the demo lesson, members of the hiring committee and the school administrative team are present. The observers use the Danielson Framework as a tool to gauge teacher effectiveness. Members of the hiring committee and the administrative team have an additional meeting to review low inference data on the candidate. If the hiring committee and the administrative team are om agreement, the candidate is invited to a third interview, led by the administrative team. In order to ensure that staff are considered Highly Qualified, they are involved in the following programs within the P.S. 386 community: • Teachers have set annual goals using the Danielson Framework as a tool • Teachers are observed formally and informally using the competencies of the Danielson Framework • Teachers are trained in the TCRWP curriculum which is aligned to the Common Core Standards. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 54  • Teachers meet once a week with a focus such as: looking at student work, looking at data, evidence, and next steps, common lessons, and best practices. • Teachers receive, attend, and conduct professional development sessions. • Teachers create monthly newsletters. • Teachers implement behavioral and reward systems within their classrooms. • Teachers maintain progress reports and establish relationships with parents. • Teachers track student growth through monitoring of student behavior. • Teachers differentiate the learning of students so that students are comfortable with learning in the classroom. • Teachers participate in meetings with administrators to discuss their instructional practices • Teachers visit other classrooms within the school community to learn best practices 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the strategies and activities for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, staff, and paraprofessionals that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Teacher’s College Reading and Writing Project Coaches meet with our teachers and plan for upcoming units of study. We have hired a math consultant that collaborates with our teachers on aligning and tracking math data to the Common Core Learning Standards. Our teachers attend workshops hosted by Teacher’s College Reading Writing Project, Bronx Field Support Center and the Office of English Language Learners. A Professional Development Team consisting of a representative sample of teachers and paraprofessionals in the building will meet two times per month to plan for Monday professional development sessions based on teachers’ needs, plan for agenda items for monthly faculty conferences to increase communication with staff to build trust, reflect on the plans’ effectiveness, and provide next steps. We staff a full time Staff Developer to support teachers with pedagogy, planning, engagement and implementation of curriculum to increase student achievement. Professional Development opportunities are offered to our staff based on need and interest. We offer in house Professional Learning Cycles for our teachers. Cycles of learning are aligned to our instructional focus. Teachers are encourage to seek out Professional Development opportunities that will increase their content and skill set. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 55  We have been assigned a full time Universal Literacy Coach that works directly with our K-2 teachers to provided targeted support to increase student achievement. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/information, early intervention services, etc.). • Parent involvement activities, including Family Fun Nights, Parents as Readers, class participation and workshops on best practices for early childhood students, transitioning from pre-school and attendance awareness. • Kindergarten orientation • Early screening • Progress Reports and Report Cards • In-school transition activities between Pre-K and Kindergarten teachers • Aligned resources • Field Trips 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Teacher Teams have autonomy to create grade wide assessments such as projects, discussions, and/or presentations for any given unit. Teacher teams work collaboratively to align and adjust any and all assessments to the Common Core Learning Standards. Lesson and unit plans are adjusted accordingly to add new assessments. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 56  Professional development will be offered to teachers on how to use the Problem Solving Rubric from Exemplars. This tool is used to determine what level (novice, apprentice, practitioner, expert) the children are able to problem solve in mathematics. Teacher Team meeting time is utilized to analyze student data to make instructional adjustments to increase student achievement. Furthermore, teachers are provided with professional development opportunities as a result of student data. Grade team leaders meet once a month for grade team planning and vertical planning to align assessments and curriculum across the school. School wide protocols will be used to analyze student work. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds enables, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (SCEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Title I Part A (Basic) Title I School Improvement 1003(a) Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funds Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Local N/A 16, 979 82,208 52,356 N/A N/A 3,759,391 N/A X X N/A N/A N/A X Column B Section Reference(s) N/A 5A, 5C, 6 5A, 5B, 5C, 5D, 5E N/A N/A N/A 5A, 5B, 5C, 5D, 5E 2018-19 SCEP-FL 57  1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I School Improvement 1003(a): To support implementation of school improvement activities identified through the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) reviews or a school review with district oversight and included in the DCIP/SCEP.  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: To support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs.  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 58   Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan.  Title I Priority and Focus School Parent Engagement Set-aside: Additional set-aside is to enable greater and  more meaningful parent participation in the education of their children. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process, including Title I 1003(g) SIG funds: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 59  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. P.S. 386, the School for Environmental Citizenship, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students P.S. 386, the School for Environmental Citizenship will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 60  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 61  ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before October 31 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 62 School-Parent Compact (SPC)  P.S. 386, the School for Environmental Citizenship , in compliance with the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences five times during the school year during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to October 31st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 63  ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities 2018-19 SCEP-FL 64  ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 65  ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 66  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): K 6 1 7 2 8 3 9 4 10 5 11 12 2018-19 SCEP-FL 67  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: Rational, subgroups and grade levels of students to served: Rationale: The School for Environmental Citizenship services 196 English Language Learners and 10 Former English Language Learners in grades K-5. Based on the results of the 2016 - 2017 and 2017 - 2018, English Language Arts and Math Test, we found that our English Language Learners needed addition support in understanding mathematical concepts and content. According to the 2016 - 2017, English Language Arts exam results 45% of our fourth grade ELL students scored a level 2 and 55% of our fourth grade ELL students scored a level 1 on the English Language Arts test. Based on data from the 2016 - 2017 Math test 5% of our fifth grade ELLs scored a level 3, 10% scored a level 2 and 85% scored a level 1 on the test. (We are currently awaiting our 2017 - 2018 state ELA and Math exam results.) The Title III funding will be utilized towards our Morning Reading and Math Academy for English Language Learners in grades 3-5. The program will provide students with supplemental support to enhance students’ proficiency in grade level reading and math concepts. In addition, a student’s reading and math content will be aligned to the New York State Next Generation English Language Arts and Math Learning Standards for each grade level. In looking at the NYSESLAT data of our English Language Learners, we noticed that our students required content area support especially in the areas of reading and writing. In an effort to maintain small group size, each instructional group for the program will not exceed 10 students. Subgroups and Grade Levels of Students To Be Served During the fall session, the program will support Entering and Emerging level students. 5% of next years 3rd Grade ELLs are at the Entering level while 26% are at the Emerging level. 0% of next years 4th Grade ELLs are at the Entering level while 14% are at the Emerging level. 5% of next years 5th Grade ELLs are at the Entering level & 26% are at the Emerging level. During the spring session, the program will support Transitioning and Expanding level students. 45% of next years 3rd Grade ELLs are at the Entering level while 21% are at the Emerging level. 43% of next years 4th Grade ELLs are at the Transitioning level while 31% are at the Expanding level. 29% of next years 5th Grade ELLs are at the Transitioning level & 42% are at the Expanding level. (We are currently awaiting our 2017 - 2018 NYSESLAT test results.) Schedule and Duration: The Morning Reading and Math Academy for English Language Learners in grades 3-5. will run for two separate sessions. The fall session will begin on October 9, 2018 and end on December 2018-19 SCEP-FL 68  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information 20, 2018. The fall session will be on Tuesdays, Wednesdays, Thursdays and Fridays from 7:30 am-8:10 am. Entering & Emerging level students will be invited to the fall session. The spring session will begin on January 8, 2019 and end on April 17, 2019. The spring session will be on Tuesdays, Wednesdays,Thursdays, and Fridays from 7:30 am-8:10 am. Transitioning and Expanding level students will be invited to the spring session. Two days a week instruction will be dedicated to math curriculum and the other two days a week will be dedicated to ELA curriculum. The four modalities, reading, writing, listening and speaking will be interwoven into all reading and math lessons. During each session students will receive direct whole group instruction on specific concepts and objectives , small group instruction tailored to address students' areas of need, and engage in independent practice to meet students' individual needs and assess learning. Language of Instruction: The language of instruction will be English, however students will receive home language support as needed. # and types of certified teachers: The Morning Reading and Math Academy for English Language Learners in grades 3-5 will consist of 3 certified ESL and/or Bilingual Teachers in addition to 3 common branch teachers.. Types of Materials: In the Morning Reading and Math Academy for English Language Learners in grades 3-5, students will be using iReady reading and math software to provide students with individualized reading and math support during the independent practice portion of the program. The Leveled Literacy Intervention program will used during small group reading instruction. Metamorphosis math specific grade level math concepts and objective will be taught during whole and small group math instruction. Daily attendance will be taken by the teacher. Attendance sheets will be placed in the Morning Reading and Math Academy for English Language Learners binder. In addition, copies of parent notification letters will be placed in the binder. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Rational: Teachers participating in the Reading and Math Academy for ELLs will be meeting on Wednesdays twice a month to engage in an professional learning cycle focused on improving mathematical conceptual understanding and instruction, that will improve teacher 2018-19 SCEP-FL 69  Part C: Professional Development outcomes and impact student outcomes. Title III funding will be used to pay the teachers during the professional development sessions. Professional Learning Cycle Attendance sheets and copies of agendas will be placed in the Reading and Math Academy for ELLs binder. Teachers to receive training: Ms. Mateo, Ms. Chance, Ms. Salvatierra, Mr. Jimenez, Ms. Gallo, and Ms. Coogan Schedule and duration: The teachers will meet twice a month on Wednesdays from 2:45 p.m. - 3:15 p.m. for the duration of the program. Topics to be covered: The professional learning cycle sessions will build teachers content and pedagogical knowledge in math concepts. Teachers will learn to better focus their lessons on the big ideas, structures, and/or essential questions relevant to the grade level math concepts. Teachers will gain a deeper understanding of those ideas and structures and learn to make them accessible to students. Teachers will receive support on continued assessment and making lesson adjustments. Name of provider: Awilda Jimenez, Staff developer Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Cool Culture Rational: Cool Culture has partnered with 90 of NYC’s best-loved museums, gardens, zoos and historic houses to provide the Cool Culture Family Pass to eligible Cool Culture families. The Family Pass helps parents, grandparents and caregivers to give their children cultural experiences that cultivate a love of learning, at no cost to the families. Cool Culture provides free, general admission to 90 cultural institutions including museums, botanical gardens, zoos and more! Families receive personalized Cool Culture Family Pass with free, unlimited admission for 5 people to 90 cultural institutions. Families also receive a free subscription to Family Time and e-Family Time for Universal Pre-Kindergarten and Kindergarten Families. The Cool Culture pass gives families access to Cool Culture Connection Audio Tours. A portion of the Title III Immigrant funds will be used to pay for the cost of the Cool Culture Passes. Subgroups and grade levels of students to be served: Pre-Kindergarten and kindergarten children 2018-19 SCEP-FL 70  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Schedule and duration: Parents have unlimited use of the Cool Culture Pass to until October 31, 2019. Families have unlimited access to 90 cultural institutions around the city of New York including art centers, museums, zoos, historic houses and cultural events. Language of instruction: Museums and attraction tours will be given in English and Spanish where available. How parents will be notified of these activities: Letters and flyers will be used to notify parents about the Cool Culture Passes and program. Urban Advantage Rational: Urban Advantage is designed to improve Science, Technology, Engineering, and Math (STEM) literacy among elementary school students and to equip teachers of grades 3, 4, and 5 with the tools, skills, and techniques to engage students effectively in STEM learning. The program offers a greater emphasis on the role of literacy in the science classroom and investigations in the form of whole class explorations of science. In an effort to cultivate ideas of science projects, and a love of science exploration the program offers students, and families vouchers for free trips to their partner institutions. Family field trips and family science night, inquiry based science events at partner institutions are organized by the school's Parent Coordinator on holidays and weekends offered as well. Urban Advantage offers free general admission to families to the following Urban Advantage partner institutions; American Museum of Natural History, the New York Botanical Gardens, the New York Hall of Science, the Wildlife Conservation Society's Bronx Zoo, the Brooklyn Botanical Gardens, Staten Island Zoo, and the New York Aquarium. Families receive complimentary admission to eight Urban Advantage science museums and gardens for up to four family members per visit. Urban Advantage Students and their families may will also participate in School Community Field Trips, organized by our school’s Parent Coordinator. These trips are scheduled for non-school days, and include free bus transportation to and from our Urban Advantage science museums, and city gardens. Subgroups and grade levels of students to be served: Third, fourth, and fifth grade students will participate in the Urban Advantage program Schedule and duration: Families will receive general admission vouchers for five family members to eight Urban Advantage partner institutions until June 30, 2019. Additionally families will be able to participate in School Community Field Trips and Science Night events at Urban Advantage science museums, and gardens. Language of instruction: Museum, and garden ours will be given in English and Spanish where available. How parents will be notified of these activities: Letters and flyers will be used to notify parents about the Urban Advantage admissions vouchers and the school community field trips for families. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 71 Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) N/A  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 72  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 10 School Name School for Environmental Citizenship Borough Bronx School Number 386 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Lynnann Fox Coach Awilda Jimenez ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Regina Rodriguez Teacher/Subject Area Ahmed Salama/ENL Teacher/Subject Area Melvin Jimenez/ENL Related-Service Provider Sarah Ismail Superintendent Maribel Hulla Assistant Principal Ayisha Wade Coach Regina Rodriguez School Counselor Sujaya Walker Parent Cassandra Parent Coordinator Joe Anna Morales Field Support Center Staff Member Florentino Rosa Other (Name and Title) C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 5 0 1 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 3 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 1 6 1 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] D. Student Demographics 2018-19 SCEP-FL 73  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 516 Total number of ELLs 206 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 39.92% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 2 3 4 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Our school uses the Fountas and Pinnell Benchmark Assessment System to assess the literacy skills of all students. According to the September 2017, Fountas ad Pinnell Assessment data 2% of our ELLs are reading above the grade level benchmark, 21% ELL students are reading on the grade level benchmark, 9% of students are approaching the grade level benchmark and 68% of students are reading below the grade level benchmark. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 2018-19 SCEP-FL 74  We use the Fountas and Pinnell Benchmark Assessment System to determine student's independent and instructional reading levels five times a year, during the months of September, November, January, March and June. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? The success of our ELL program is evaluated through student performance. We use NYSESLAT, NYS ELA, and NYS Math exam results. In addition, we use data from the Fountas & Pinnell Running Records. NYSESLAT Data Patterns: When comparing the NYSESLAT data from the 2016 and 2017 school year, the students performing at an Entering Level students reduced by 1% in the 2017, Emerging Level students reduced by 2%, Transitioning Level reduced by 8% in the 2017 school year. According to the 2016, NYSESLAT 25% of our school's ELL students were performing on the Expanding proficiency Level, while in 2017, 36% of students were performing at the Expanding proficiency Level, thus increasing by 11%. NYSESLAT Data Patterns-1st Grade- The results of the 2017 NYSESLAT show that 61% of our ELLs are at the Expanding level. During the previous year, most of these students were either at the EnteringLevel or EmergingLevel. 12% of our 1st Grade ELLs are at the Transitioning Level, 15% are at the Emerging Level, 12% are at the Entering Level and 3% are at the Commanding Level. 2nd Grade- The results of the 2017 NYSESLAT show that the majority of our 2nd grade ELLs are at the Transitioning Level. Many of our Emerging ELLs that took the NYSESLAT in May had the most difficulty with Reading and Writing and this was reflected in their overall proficiency level. 5% of our ELLs are at the Entering Level, 29%, are at the Emerging Level, 45% are at the Transitioning Level, 21% are at the Expanding Level and 5% at the Commanding Level. 3rd Grade- The results of the 2017 NYSESLAT show that 46% of our ELLs are at the Transistioning Level. 6% of our ELLs are at the Entering Level, 17% of our ELLs are at the Emerging Level, 31% of our ELLs are at the Expanding Level, and 11% are at the Commanding Level. 4th Grade- The results of the 2017 NYSESLAT show that 5% are at the Entering Level, 29% are at the Emerging Level, 37% are at the Transitioning Level, 29% are at the Expanding Level, and 5% are at the Commanding Level. 5th Grade- The results of the 2017 NYSESLAT show that, 25% are at the Emerging Level, 33% are at the Transitioning Level, 42% are at the Expanding Level, 5% are at the Commanding Level. We do not have students at the Entering Level. When comparing the NYSESLAT data from the 2016 and 2017 school year, focusing on progress by modality, the average scale score for the listening was 60 in both the 2016 and 2017 school years. The average scale score for the listening modality increased from 70, to 75, 57, was the average scale score for reading modality for both 2016, and 2017, while the average scale score for the modality of writing decreased from 53, in 2016, to 52, in 2017. NYSITELL Data Patterns- During this school year, a majority of our new admits in all grades scored at the Entering Level. The rest of the new admits scored at either Emerging and Expanding level. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Our school uses data to determine whether a child is Tier I, Tier II, or Tier III. Students who are Tier III are receiving At-Risk SETSS, small group support or 1:1 RTI support. Students who are Tier II are receiving RTI services in small groups with our RTI providers. Students who are Tier I use the iReady program for Reading and Math. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Our school uses data to determine whether a child is Tier I, Tier II, or Tier III. Students who are Tier III are receiving At-Risk SETSS, Reading Recovery (1 st Grade), or 1:1 RTI support. Students who are Tier II are receiving RTI services in small groups with our RTI providers. Students who are Tier I use the iReady program for Reading and Math. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 75  6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Our school uses the NYSESLAT data to determine instructional groups during ELL instruction for our students in 1st-5th grade. NYSITELL data is used to determine instructional groups for our Kindergarten students as well as our new admits in grades 1-5. This data is found through RLAT reports. The data from the NYSESLAT, New York State ELA, Math, and Science is used to assist classroom teachers and ELL providers with determining the students' academic needs in the different content areas. NYSESLAT Data Patterns: When comparing the NYSESLAT data from the 2016 and 2017 school year, the students performing at an Entering Level students reduced by 1% in the 2017, Emerging Level students reduced by 2%, Transitioning Level reduced by 8% in the 2017 school year. According to the 2016, NYSESLAT 25% of our school's ELL students were performing on the Expanding proficiency Level, while in 2017, 36% of students were performing at the Expanding proficiency Level, thus increasing by 11%. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? At the beginning of the school year, classroom teachers and ELL providers are provided with the ELL instructional levels of their students based on the NYSITELL or the NYSESLAT. In addition, our 4th and 5th grade teachers are provided with the performance levels from the New York State ELA, Math, and Science at the beginning of the school year. Updates are provided throughout the school year if there's a change in enrollment. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Our ELLs are placed in classrooms with students of different proficiency levels. Our ELLs-SWDs will be placed in classes based on what is mandated on their IEP. Below is breakdown per grade:Kindergarten and 1st Grade- All ELLs who do not have an IEP and are not in the bilingual class will be in one class with a General Education teacher. One of our ENL providers will push-in during the Literacy time 4 periods a week. These sessions will service all ELLs regardless of proficiency level. For ELLs who are Entering or Emerging, these students will be pulled out for 180 minutes a week to receive stand-alone ENL instruction. ELLs in ICT or 12:1:1 Self-Contained classes will receive push-in and pull-out instruction. One of the ENL teachers will push-in during Literacy time for all ELLs regardless of proficiency level 4 periods each week. For ELLs who are Entering or Emerging, these students will be pulled out for 180 minutes a week to receive stand-alone ENL instruction. 2nd Grade, 3rd Grade, 4th Grade, 5th Grade- All ELLs who do not have an IEP will be placed in general education classrooms. Each class will have a group of ELLs with mixed proficiency levels. One of our ENL providers will push-in during the Literacy time 4 periods a week. These sessions will service all ELLs regardless of proficiency level. For ELLs who are Entering or Emerging, these students will be pulled out for 180 minutes a week to receive stand-alone ENL 2018-19 SCEP-FL 76  instruction. ELLs in the ICT class or 12:1:1 Self-Contained classes will receive push-in and pull-out instruction. One of the ENL teachers will push-in during Literacy time for all ELLs regardless of proficiency level 4 periods each week. For ELLs who are Entering or Emerging, these students will be pulled out for 180 minutes a week to receive stand-alone ENL instruction. b. TBE program. If applicable. Not applicable. c. DL program. If applicable. Not applicable. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Freestanding ENL Program: ELLs will receive 180 minutes a week of Integrated ENL in ENL/ELA regardless of their proficiency level. F-ELLs will receive 90 minutes a week of Integrated ENL in ENL/ELA. Entering and Emerging ELLs will receive 180 minutes a week of Stand-Alone ENL in addition to the 180 minutes of Integrated ENL. TBE Program: All Entering and Emerging students will receive 180 minutes of stand-alone ENL instruction each week. All students regardless of level will receive at least 4 periods of Integrated ENL/ELA every week. Math and Science will be taught in Spanish to all students regardless of proficiency level. Home Language arts instruction will be provided daily. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Freestanding ENL Program: Content area instruction is driven by student data collected by various assessment tools. The ENL program at our school is content based. Classroom teachers and ENL teachers plan their instruction cooperatively with emphasis on students’ linguistics and cognitive needs. As an intrinsic part of ELL instruction, context plays a vital role in making content comprehensible for English Language Learners. Through cooperative planning, student data, carefully selected materials, and age and level appropriate texts, student learning is geared toward meaningful activities that connect their learning to real life. Our teachers use content area programs which are aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards. For reading and writing, we use the Teachers College Reading and Writing Program. Fountas and Pinnell’s Leveled Literacy Intervention Program is used to support students reading below grade level. For Word Study, our teachers use Wilson’s Fundations. Houghton Mifflin Harcourt's Go Math is used for Math. This program has different components for ELLs such as bilingual math boards, bilingual glossaries, and an ELL activity guide. The FOSS program is used for Science.This program provides online components, many visual aids, and materials in Spanish. Native Language materials for the languages represented in PS 386 are available within classroom libraries and in the ESL classroom. Native Language materials continue to be added as funds become available. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? All new students whose native language is Spanish are given the Spanish LAB to test the level of proficiency in Spanish. In addition, students in the bilingual program will be assessed in reading using the Fountas and Pinnell's "Sistema de evaluación de la lectura." 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status 2018-19 SCEP-FL 77  a. Our SIFE student will be in the ICT class with a certified TESOL teacher. They will be invited to our after-school program and/or ELL Saturday program (pending funding).b. Newcomers are provided services according to CR Part 154.2. Entering and Emerging students receive at least 360 minutes of ENL/ELA a week while Transitioning and Expanding students receive at least 180 minutes a week. They receive content-based instruction according to both their grade and proficiency levels. All Newcomers are invited to after-school and/or ELL Saturday programs depending on funding. c. Developing English Language Learners receive instruction in Literacy and ENL to meet their needs. Students are encouraged to use graphic organizers and word walls to focus on vocabulary closely connected to content areas. All Developing ELLs are invited to after-school and/or ELL Saturday programs depending on funding. d. We currently don't have any long term ELLs.e. Former ELLs will be provided testing accommodations up to 2 years after testing proficient. In addition, former ELLs will remain in an ENL class or receive instruction from an ENL provider for 90 minutes a week. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? In cooperation with the classroom teacher, all English Language Learners-Students with Disabilities receive content based instruction. They receive their mandated number of instructional ENL minutes per week based on their proficiency level. The focus in the pull-out sessions is to develop student’s content area vocabulary as well as more individualized practice on content concepts. Using a variety of manipulatives, books, visual aids, and audio/video aids, the ENL providers help make content comprehensible for learners. To help improve reading and writing for all students including ELLs and SWDs, our school is continuing to use Teachers College program. The ENL providers also use the Fountas and Pinnell Leveled Literacy Intervention program for those ELLs-SWDs who are reading below grade level. In order to ensure that all ELL-SWDs receive their mandated services, the Special Education Coordinator and the ENL teachers review all IEPs to see which services the students are supposed to receive. We also note if a child's IEP indicates that he/she needs ENL instruction. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? During Grade Team meetings, teachers of ELL-SWDs discuss student progress. A student’s IEP is reviewed. If a student needs a change in program, it will be changed to what is best for the student. Based on last school year’s ELA and Math scores, we discovered that most of our ELL-SWDs were in the lowest third group. These students will be receiving additional academic support in order to improve. Scheduling takes place through consultation between classroom teachers and service providers to avoid scheduling conflicts. ELL-SWDs receive instruction within the classroom alongside monolingual and general education students within the least restrictive environment. We have ELL-SWDs in ICT and Self-Contained classes in various grades. When reviewing a student's IEP, administrators, teachers, and parents/guardians discuss which program is best for the student. If a student benefits from a smaller class, then Self-Contained is recommended. If a student would benefit from having 2 teachers in the classroom with general education students, then ICT is recommended. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. To determine whether a student is in need of intervention, our RTI providers administer a variety of assessments from Florida Center for Reading Research. Based on the assessments, if it is determined that the child needs intervention, they are placed in a group with students who have the same needs. Our school uses a variety of targeted intervention programs for students including ELLs. The Fountas and Pinnell Leveled Literacy Intervention System is used with ELLs who are reading significantly below grade level. Preventing Academic Failure is used for Reading and Spelling. Reading Rescue is used with our 1st graders who require 1:1 instruction in Reading. Each of the programs mentioned above are offered for 6 weeks. An evaluation is given after 6 weeks to determine whether a student still requires RTI. If so, they will get RTI for another 6 weeks. The computer based program i-Ready provides personalized instruction in both Math and ELA for students based on their areas of need. Based on the results of the diagnotic assessment, personalized student instruction is used to target students individual areas of need. The Full Options Science System, (FOSS) program, provides hands-on learning and observation lessons which support 2018-19 SCEP-FL 78  language development for our ELL students. Foss resource books, student pages and assessments in both English and Spanish are used to provided ELL students intervention in science. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? During the 2016-2017 school year, we started our school's first bilingual program in Kindergarten. Our goal for the next year is to have the bilingual teachers and ENL providers collaborate better in order to provide more effective instruction for our ELLs. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? We will not be discontinuing any programs/services for ELLs. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All ELLs are invited to all school programs. We will continue to have academic After-School/Saturday programs. These programs will run for 6 weeks at a time. In addition, we hope to continue our partnership with Bronx Arts Ensemble where students had the opportunity to learn how to play the violin, participate in a play or a musical. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Each classroom is equipped with a Smart Board where teachers can provide interactive lessons for all students including ELLs. In addition, laptops are available for students to use for the program iReady and other educational websites. In our school library and in classrooms, students have access to books in English and Spanish. In every classroom, there are word walls (including content specific word walls) and dictionaries in English and Spanish. For content areas, students are provided with bilingual glossaries. They also have access to visual aids and manipulatives they can use in their classroom. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? For our newcomer students, translations are provided when necessary. Bilingual dictionaries are available for all students. For students that are in a class where the teacher doesn’t speak the native language, students are paired with a buddy who speaks the same language and can provide translation when necessary. Some of our ELLs-SWDs have a Bilingual Alternate Placement Paraprofessional to provide additional language support in the classroom. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. The required services support all ELLs. Resources correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. We focus on the student's age to service and support ELLs with academic activities. When grouping, we group students by grade and age. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? We share our building with P.S. 382 and M.S. 447. We work with teachers of the ENL teams from each school with support that may be needed, such as home language resources or assessments. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). We don’t have any activities for newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. If a parent enrolls their child during the school year, we provide school tours at a parent’s request. We also invite them to any upcoming school activities. In addition, all parents of newly enrolled students are given a welcome folder consisting of the family handbook, important school-related information, and resources. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Currently we don’t offer language electives. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 79  18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Not applicable. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? The teachers and paraprofessionals in our school will attend workshops guided by professional reading in six week cycles. All professional development sessions will focus on best practices for ELL instruction in our school during our Monday during te allotted Professional Development time. Below is a list of topics that will be focused on during our Professional Development Series. The school wide Professional development will focus on: *Adapting the Teacher College reading and writing units for English Language Learners * Teaching reading in small groups guided by the text The Reading Strategies Book by Jennifer Serravallo * Mathematical Mindset by Jo Boaler *Number Talks by Sherry Parrish The small group book studies for focus on the following professional text: * How To Reach The Hard To Teach by Jana Echevarría and Nancy Frey *What Great Teachers Do Differently by Tod Whitaker *Mindset For Learning by Kristine Mraz Teachers are notified of upcoming professional development through the weekly e-mail from the Office of English Language Learners. These workshops have included Math and Literacy in relation to the Common Core Learning Standards. In addition, the Teachers College Reading and Writing Project offers workshops for teachers of ELLs. Throughout the year, teachers will be attending workshops offered by the OELL, Teachers College, and our network 606. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. The guidance counselor informs teachers of the middle school process including requirements for specialized schools. To make the transition from elementary to middle school easier for our fifth grade ELLs, parents are provided with the opportunity to come to school workshops that discuss the Middle School Choice process as well as the procedures for applying to middle school. All parents and Spanish speaking children are informed of bilingual programs of study in their zone and are guided to select the bilingual program of study in their chosen schools on the applications. Directories and open house flyers and invitations are also given out in both English and Spanish and other languages if requested. Our guidance counselor has received professional development on the middle school application process. She has shared her information with administrators and school staff. The professional development sessions will be delivered in six week learning cycles. To address the professional development mandates for all teachers, the teachers will participate in professional learning cycles guided by the books, Mathematical Mindset and Number Talks. Through these book studies teachers will acquire best practices for math instruction, deepening the understanding of mathematical concepts, planning math discussion by integrating mathematical language and 2018-19 SCEP-FL 80  vocabulary in content instruction for all learners. English as New Language teacher's professional development mandates will be fulfilled by participating in a professional development cycle guided by the text, Strategies For Success With English Language Learners. Teachers will learn to apply differentiation principles, scaffolds and strategies to respond to the needs of all learners. The ENL professional development cycles explained in detail in the our school-wide professional development plan. The Professional development agendas, sign-in sheets and materials are stored in the Professional development binder in the Principal's office. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? ENL providers will have annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs during the parent engagement time on Tueday afternoons. Teachers will discuss student progress as well as assessment results. These meetings will be offered in the parents preferred language. Language Line will be used if oral interpretation is necessary and no interpreter is available. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. All parents including our ELL parents are invited to all family events including Family Fun Night, Evening Parent Workshops, and Honors Night. In addition, we have a monthly Chat and Chew with the Principal, Parent Association Meetings, Mother's Club, and Father's Club. In addition, evening ESL classes are offered for our parents. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. The data is current as of June 20, 2017. The data reflects the grade the students will be in during the 2017-2018 school year. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 81 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Lynnann Fox, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 82  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: School for Environmental Citiz School DBN: 10X386 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Lynnann Fox Title Principal Ayisha Wade Assistant Principal VACANCY Parent Coordinator Regina Rodriguez ENL/Bilingual Teacher Cassandra Parent Ahmed Salama Teacher/Subject Area Melvin Jimenez Teacher/Subject Area Lisa Sacks Awilda Jimenez Coach Coach Sujaya Walker School Counselor Maribel Hulla Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 6/30/17 6/30/17 00/00/00 6/30/17 6/30/17 6/30/17 6/30/17 6/30/17 6/30/17 6/30/17 6/30/17 2018-19 SCEP-FL 83  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 10X386 School Name: School for EnvironmentalCitizenship Superintendent: Maribel Hulla The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Regina Rodriguez ENL Teacher Yes on 11/22/2016 Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. An intake interview is conducted by one of our certified teachers with each family during student registration. During this interview, parents complete the Home Language Identification Survey. The Home Language Identification Survey indicates the languages spoken at home and which language(s) parents prefer to receive notifications. This information is entered on ATS. The "Parents Preferred Language Report" and "Adult Information Report" on ATS provides the languages our parents prefer to receive notifications. This helps us to determine how to best serve the students and families of our community. It also allows us to gather information about the translation needs of our families. Our Parent Coordinator with the support of the Language Access Coordinator continues to communicate with families of students already enrolled to ensure up-to-date information regarding translation and interpretation needs. Student emergency contact cards are available in English, Spanish, Arabic, Bengali, Chinese and French. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 84  Parents complete these forms in their preferred language at least twice a year to ensure we have updated contact information for our families. Monthly calendars, grade level newsletters, parent letters, and notices about events are sent home in English and Spanish to maintain the school-home connection. We will use the Translation & Interpretation Unit to assist with sending parent notices for our other preferred languages. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral 3 2 1 227 3 1 7 453 1 Arabic Bengali Chinese English French Hausa Soninke Spanish Turkish Data as of October 3, 2018 0.43 0.29 0.14 32.52 0.43 0.14 1 64.9 0.14 3 2 1 216 3 1 7 464 1 0.43 0.29 0.14 30.95 0.43 0.14 1 66.48 0.14 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Not applicable as of October 3, 2018. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Grade Level Newsletters The 1st of every month 2018-2019 Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. All monthly grade newsletters are due to administration 10 days prior to dissemination. Once the newsletters are approved, they are translated by 2018-19 SCEP-FL 85  Family Handbook September 2018 Letters to Families Ongoing 2018-2019 Individualized Education Plan Ongoing 2018-2019 Report Cards November 2018, March 2019, June 2019 Progress Reports January 2019, May 2019 in house staff in Spanish. For other preferred languages, we use the Translation & Interpretation Unit for assistance. The family handbook will be disseminated during the first week of school. It is translated in Spanish by the Language Access Coordinator. For other preferred languages, we use the Translation & Interpretation Unit. All letters to families are written in English and Spanish. For other preferred languages, we use the Translation & Interpretation Unit. Individualized Education Plans are translated into Spanish by our Language Access Coordinator using the template provided the Translation and Interpretation Unit. Classroom teachers are provided with translations of comments that can be used for report cards. Parents are also provided with a template of the report card in Spanish, Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, or French to help assist them with understanding their child's report card. The progress report template is available in English and Spanish. Classroom teachers are provided with translations of comments that can be used for progress reports. For other preferred languages, we use the Translation & Interpretation Unit for assistance. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Parent Teacher Conferences September 2018, November 2018, March 2019, May 2019 interpretation service(s)? Bilingual staff members support our families during Parent Teacher Conferences. We use Language Line for support for languages other that English, Spanish, and Arabic. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 86  Chat and Chew with the Principal October 2018, November 2018, December 2018, January 2019, March 2019, April 2019, May 2019 Family Fun Night November 2018, December 2018, February 2019 During the Chat and Chew with the Principal, bilingual staff members provides interpretation for our families in Spanish and Arabic. During the Family Fun Night, bilingual staff members support our families in Spanish and Arabic. Student of the Month Breakfast October 2018, November 2018, December 2018, January 2019, February 2019, March 2019, April 2019, May 2019, June 2019 During the monthly Student of the Month Breakfast, bilingual staff members provides interpretation for our families in Spanish and Arabic. Honors Night May 2019 School Carnival June 2019 During our Honors Night, bilingual staff members provides interpretation for our families in Spanish and Arabic. During the School Carnival, bilingual staff members support our families in Spanish and Arabic. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. In the event of an emergency, all of our families will be notified of the emergency in their preferred language through our Robo Call automated phone system. This Robo Call system is available in English, Spanish, Chinese, and French. For languages not covered through our Robo Call system, we will use Language Line for over the phone interpretation and call the families individually. Teachers who are not on the school grounds and need to communicate with parents in a language other than English for an emergency, will use the Language Line for over the phone interpretation. Bilingual speaking staff members will be able to assist parents on the phone and in person in English, Spanish, and Arabic in case of emergency. We will use Language Line for other languages. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Chancellor's Regulation A-663 is reviewed by our entire staff during our first meeting of the school year. Our Language Access Coordinator assists teachers and staff members throughout the school year with tools and strategies for translation and interpretation services for our families. For example, how to make a three way call to include an interpreter from Language Line. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 87  Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) The Bill of Parent Rights and Responsibilities, which includes information regarding translation and interpretation services, is distributed to families. Parents also receive a "Parent's Guide to Language Access" brochure available in the 9 covered languages which parents can bring with them to school informing staff of which language they need support in. In addition, signs notifying parents of translation services will be posted prominently in the main office. All documentation can be found on the Translation and Interpretation's Unit's Intranet page. For the languages not covered by the Translation and Interpretation Unit, we will reach out to a Department of Education vendor that can provide translation services and/or reach out to a Community Based Organization. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Parents will receive a satisfaction survey towards the beginning of the school year to evaluate the translation and interpretation services offered at our school. We will use the survey results to improve the translation and interpretation services for our families. Parents will be able to fill this out on paper or electronically. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 88 
