2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 12X388 School Name: PAN AMERICAN INTERNATIONAL HIGH SCHOOL AT MONROE Principal: BRIDGIT CLAIRE BYE 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Pan American International High School at Monroe 321200011388 9-12 1300 Boynton Ave, Bronx, NY 10472 School Number (DBN): 12X388 (718) 991-7238 Phone Number: (718) 991-7872 Fax: BridgitBye bbye@school.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Email Address: Bridgit Bye Samantha Adams Miguelina Sheppard Mary Pollack NiurkaTapia Garileny Avelino DereckHernandez n/a District Information Geographical District: 12 Kathy Rehfield-Pelles Superintendent: Superintendent’s Office Address: 335 Adams Street, Brooklyn NY 11201 Superintendent’s Email Address: krehfield@schools.nyc.gov (718) 923-5145 Phone Number: (718)923-5102 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 CEP 3  Affinity FSC: Executive Director: Alexandra Anormaliza Executive Director’s Office Address: 131 Livingston Street, Brooklyn NY 11201 Executive Director’s Email Address: aanorma@schools.nyc.gov (718)935-5941 Phone Number: (718)935-5618 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) BridgitC. Bye Samantha Adams MiguelinaSheppard YuniorPayano NiurkaTapia GarilenyAvelino DereckHernandez Isabel Arias Juan Garcia Elizabeth Polanco *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/ Parent 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Mary Pollack Matthew Breines Member/ AP Member/Staff Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Section 4: CEP Overview As a member school of the Internationals Network for Public Schools (INPS), the school follows a pedagogical model to support the needs of English Language Learners (ELLs). The school is organized around five principles: 2018-19 CEP 9   Heterogeneity and collaboration. Our students work in mixed-ability groups, and 9th and 10th grade classes are combined. Students have meaningful opportunities to read, write, speak and hear English across the curriculum.  Experiential learning. Instructional units, which are thematically and interdisciplinary aligned, are organized   around the completion of projects. Project-based learning gives students the opportunity to engage in authentic language tasks and take ownership of their learning. Language and content integration. To support the needs of our ELL population, all of our classes teach English as a New Language (ENL) and content. Units are both vertically aligned by grade level and planned on an interdisciplinary basis. Localized autonomy. PAIHS at Monroe teachers work in teams to plan, write, and reflect on curriculum that meets the needs of our student population. Teachers are empowered to make choices to design a curriculum that meets the needs of ELLs, promotes student engagement and academic rigor, and is relevant to the academic and backgrounds of students. In addition, teachers take significant leadership roles and “wear many hats.” The leaders of each instructional team and discipline (content area) team meet weekly with other school leaders as the Leadership Team, and this way all teachers have a voice in school policy decisions. This has promoted a culture of trust, collaboration, shared accountability, and continuous leadership. This year, we have also expanded teacher support so that we have three full-time coaching positions to help support teachers in the development and implementation of interdisciplinary curriculum.  One learning model for all. As we ask our students to work collaboratively in teams, teachers also work collaboratively in teams. As our students complete a portfolio, our teachers also complete a portfolio. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Pan American International High School at Monroe (PAIHS at Monroe) is a small high school that exclusively serves recently arrived immigrants from Spanish-Speaking countries. PAIHS at Monroe has 467 students in grades 9 to 12, 99% of whom are classified as English language learners, and 100% of whom are Latino. 100% of our students are eligible for free lunch. 18% of our students are overage and under-credited. Consistent with our principles of localized autonomy and one learning model for all, our school has a Department of Education Progressive Redesign Opportunity Schools for Excellence (PROSE) option for teacher evaluations. Sixty percent of the teacher evaluation is determined through a combination of peer observations, administrative observations, and a final portfolio where teachers reflect on their practice. Through the portfolio process, teachers have an opportunity to reflect on the achievement of annual goals. We ask teachers to look at student data and then use Danielson to create annual goals. Through our PROSE teacher evaluation option, teachers follow up on and engage with these goals throughout the year through peer observations and teacher portfolios. Every year, each teacher completes four peer observations thus embedding peer observations and peer feedback into the culture of the school. The Danielson Framework is the basis for these peer observations including the peer feedback and conversations about teaching which follow the peer observation process. Teachers then complete an extensive teacher portfolio at the end of the year assessing their effectiveness in the completion of their goals. This portfolio includes a written self-reflection and an oral “defense” with a panel that includes the principal, teacher-leaders, and purposefully chosen peers. This way, the implementation of the Danielson Framework is bottom-up and ongoing rather than a top-down mandate. This results in the use of the Danielson Framework as a mechanism for continuous teacher improvement. Along with other schools in the Internationals Network for Public Schools, our school has received an ELL waiver from the New York State Department of Education for alternative assessments. As part of the Internationals ELL Waiver, students complete graduation portfolios in English, Science, Social Studies, Math, and Native Language Arts (Spanish) 2018-19 CEP 10  in lieu of the social studies and science Regents exams. Students are graded according to a rubric which was jointly developed with other schools included in the waiver. We offer ongoing professional development both in school and outside of school to support teachers in understanding the rubric as well as in mentoring and supporting students so that they can do graduation-worthy work in all content areas. Our school offers a variety of supports for students ranging from a two hour after-school program, before-school academic support, a four-hour Saturday program, and an extensive summer program. Even though our enrollment is only 467 students, we typically have approximately 200 students who participate in after-school academic support each day (Monday to Thursday); 130 students who typically attend Saturday school; and summer school enrollment of approximately 200. We also have a team of highly-trained teachers that teach the majority of our SLIFE students in the 9th and 10th grades during the regular school day. This allows us to provide them with additional academic support. Most importantly, our pedagogical model allows us to provide students with the support to access challenging content and learn, regardless of their prior educational background or academic level. Our schools data demonstrates the effectiveness of these supports, despite having a challenging student population. We have a four-year graduation rate of over 80%, and our most recent school quality guide shows we have been exceeding the target both in terms of our credit accumulation and our Regents pass rate. We project to maintain a graduation rate near or over 80%. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Our school serves a high-need population which is not only entirely composed of ELLs, but which 36% are SLIFE and over 60 students are unaccompanied minors. Against this backdrop, the school provides extensive academic and social support so that our students can graduate college-ready within four years. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. In the past year, we focused most extensively on the areas of rigorous instruction and teacher collaboration in the areas of language and skill outcomes acquisition, as well as the incorporation of trauma-based lessons in the advisory program. We made progress on all three of these goals. We did so by continuing to improve the interdisciplinary connections within curriculum to further support our students in acquiring the language and context necessary to meet the Common Core learning standards. In addition, we ensured that teachers’ schedules were aligned for collaborative planning and that continual coaching and PD were targeted to support this collaboration. In particular, we were successful in fostering continued aligned learning outcomes and instruction within the 9th and 10th grade humanities classes and spread this success in the element of Collaborative Teachers to the 11th and 12th grade classes, and increased the collaboration between math and science teachers. We remained stable and strong within the areas of rigorous instruction and supportive environment through intensive coaching and a professional development focus on the incorporation of language and skills outcomes into each unit. Additionally, all teachers and staff attended a series of professional development workshops focused on trauma informed instruction. In the coming year, we plan to collaborate on interdisciplinary units of study with school-wide outcomes and indicators and begin to focus on project and experiential based learning; incorporate circles in the advisory lesson and learning circles within the classroom; develop units of study which demonstrate interdisciplinary and vertical alignment in outcomes; provide staff with a variety of professional developments focused on differentiation and experiential based projects, both inside and outside of the building; and host multiple orientations and workshops for parents and students throughout the school year. 2018-19 CEP 11  2018-19 CEP 12  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 12X388 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 478 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 3 3 12 9 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 9 4 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 94.0% % Attendance Rate 98.1% % Reduced Lunch 84.1% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.2% 99.6% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 0.0% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 10.25 0% 34% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 68% 1% 73.1% 0.0% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A NO N/A N/A NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES N/A N/A YES No N/A N/A 1 5 86.3% 1.7% 2.3% 0.2% 0.0% 0.2% 0 17% 5.5 N/A N/A 91% 0% 89.8% 7% N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A YSH NO N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A YES YES 2018-19 CEP 13  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. PAIHS at Monroe has developed and implemented an instructional program that is rigorous, Common Core-aligned, and responsive to the needs of ELLs. We received a score of well-developed on all three strands of the instructional core in our most recent quality review. The quality review noted that,“The school’s emphasis on project-based and collaborative learning supports acquisition of language for its population which is 100% recently-arrived non-English-speaking immigrants.” We are continually reflective in our practice. The School Quality Review (SQR) also indicated that “One example of this ongoing reflection process is in the movement from stand-alone courses with distinct discipline emphases to the complete alignment of social studies, English and Spanish curricula so that the same topics are taught simultaneously, underscoring specific language objectives. Students attribute this reinforcement as helping them to be “always focused” and improving their comprehension.” Finally, the most recent quality review indicated that our instructional outcomes were a result of our efforts to improve curriculum, noting that, “Thus, the school’s commitment to continuously review and amend curriculum facilitates strategic emphasis in integration of instructional shifts, resulting in coherence across grades and content areas.” Our school’s strengths as they relate to rigorous instruction come from our collaborative model and our dedication to consistently improving instruction. Teachers design, share, and revise curriculum in instructional and discipline teams. To assess the effectiveness of our curriculum and instruction, teachers collaborate in teams to evaluate student work. The feedback gathered is used to drive curriculum development. To support this instructional focus, teachers regularly attend PD (offered by outside providers as well as developed in-house) designed to ensure rigorous instruction that is meaningful for ELL students and supports both language acquisition and content knowledge. In keeping with the core Internationals principles discussed in the overview, students work in groups to develop language through four modalities of reading, writing, speaking and listening. Group projects develop higher-order thinking skills. PAIHS at Monroe has had its seventh graduating class in the 2017-2018 school year. Each year, our graduation rate remains constant, near or above 80%, and far higher than the city rate for ELLs. The most recent Framework for Great 2018-19 CEP 14  Schools report indicates that our student achievement rating is Exceeding Target; our 4-year graduation rate is 79%, where the comparison group has a 4-year graduation rate of 60 percent; and our College Readiness Index is 68%, where the comparison group has a college readiness index of 28%. Though our population remains 100% recently-arrived immigrants, 99% of whom are classified as ELLs, over 60 of our students are unaccompanied minors. Additionally, 36% of our school population is now SLIFE, and 18% of our school population is overage. We have a portfolio culture that we have cultivated since inception, which helps create a supportive environment for our students. This culture requires that student feel safe enough to present their work to their peers. We have tracked portfolio data since inception, and we have used this to continually modify our instruction to better support our students and their language learning needs. We have also have offered, and continue to offer, significant professional development to ensure that all units are aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards and support the needs of ELLs. We are additionally developing PD workshops within the school both to deepen portfolio culture and to support the Common Core Learning Standards. The Regents partial ELL waiver has only strengthened this culture. In 2018-2019, we will continue to have two full-time Assistant Principals and two-part time curriculum coaches to support these efforts by working with teachers to craft outcomes and support interdisciplinary connections. In the 2017-2018 school year, as part of our work to support rigorous instruction, we partnered with the NYC Writing Project to implement a six-part professional development series so teachers can better implement literacy across all subject areas . These PD's were co-facilitated by our two part-time instructional coaches who were able to plan around the specific needs of our students and teachers. In addition, administrators and teachers developed a series of professional developments on trauma based instruction giving our teachers more strategies to address the needs of our particular student population. As part of this trauma based PD, a group of administrators and teachers attended outside Restorative Circles PD's which will, in turn, develop more strategies for teachers to incorporate within the advisory curriculum as well as in their classrooms. In the 2018-2019 school year, we want to build off of this work to better meet the needs of our students. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. In order to develop a bank of school wide outcomes, all teachers will create and implement a minimum of 5 outcomes with indicators per unit (5 units per school year), by June of 2019. 2018-19 CEP 15  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Build in collaborative planning sessions and professional development for full-time curriculum coaches. Curriculum coaches Plan and implement PD around outcomes, indicators, and feedback, paying careful attention to include strategies to address the needs of ELLs, SLIFE students, and low-literacy students. All staff Schedule common planning times for teachers in discipline and interdisciplinary groups during the school week All teachers Summer 2018 to June 2019 Summer 2018 to Spring 2019 September 2018 to June 2019 Collect and provide feedback to draft unit map templates during common planning times All teachers Summer 2018 to Spring 2019 Principal, APs, Internationals Network Curriculum Coach PAIHS at Monroe Instructional Coaches, Internationals Network Instructional Coach, PD Coordinator Discipline team leaders, Instructional coaches, Internationals Instructional Coach, New York City Writing Project teacher-consultant, Humanities coach, Math-Science coach. All instructional coaches Schedule and hold regular discipline leader meetings All discipline leaders September 2018 to June 2019 Principal, all instructional coaches Conduct classroom visits and observation cycles to support colleagues in implementation All teachers September 2018 to June 2019 All teachers (peer observation), all coaches, administrators 3b – Parent and Family Engagement 2018-19 CEP 16  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We will conduct a series of parent workshops and use the parent ENL classes to educate families about our curriculum and learning model and to help students to understand how to support their students at home between September 2018 and June 2019. This initiative will be coordinated by the Parent Coordinator, utilizing the the Adult ENL teachers and instructional coaches. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  We will budget money to pay the Internationals Network for Public Schools (INPS) for extra coaching and PD. We will also budget for the full-time instructional coaches, a F-status instructional coach who visits once per week, and a teacher-consultant from the New York City Writing Project.  We will budget money for per session to support curriculum writing and collaborative planning beyond what happens in the normal school day.  We will ensure the schedule supports weekly discipline team meetings, weekly interdisciplinary (humanities and math-science) meetings, and two-and-a-half hours of in-house professional development each month.  We will budget money for after-school leadership meetings so that discipline and instructional team leaders can work collaboratively to share successes, identify challenges, and work collaboratively to better support teachers.  We will budget money for coverages when teachers are participating in Mastery Collaborative and Learning Partners Program events during the school day. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A X C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, we expect 85% of teachers to have submitted two unit maps utilizing school-wide outcomes and indicators developed through Mastery Collaborative and the Learning Partners Program. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Teacher curriculum binders will reflect the submission of these curriculum maps. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 17  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? In the area of school environment and safety, PAIHS at Monroe continues to maintain an excellent school culture. We also have significant strength in the area of student collaboration as a result of our shared, project-based instructional model based off of the Internationals framework. Finally, our school continues to support the social and emotional growth of students in various ways, including a four-year advisory system, a team-based structure that enables teachers, guidance counselors, and administrators to identify and responds to the needs of students. Additionally, we provide individual counseling for the significant number of unaccompanied minors, SLIFE, and overage students provided by our school social worker and guidance team. All of our students are ELLs or former ELLs. In addition, a significant part of our school population is SLIFE or has significant literacy gaps, and these students need additional support. A comprehensive assessment of the support that our school provides to ELLs, low-literacy students, and students with special needs indicates that we have structures in place to meet these needs. All classes have extensive, built-in scaffolding and differentiation; we have a dedicated team with special expertise for SLIFE students; and SETSS services are provided for students who need additional learning supports. Our most recent quality review indicates that our collaborative instructional model supports the needs of our students. The reviewer noted that “the school’s emphasis on project-based and collaborative learning supports acquisition of language for its population which is 100% recently-arrived non-English speaking immigrants. The school makes intentional choices to focus on vocabulary development, non-fiction and complex text, evidence-based writing as well as oral presentation, demonstrating close attention to Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) and instructional needs. The introduction of a college level science course this year provides rigor for advanced students as they grapple with lengthy college level complex text and design a college level research project.” The school has created a climate that encourages ELLs to work collaboratively, and our learning model uses peer support to that student can access cognitively demanding tasks in a second language. Indeed, the most recent Framework for Great Schools Report indicates a 96% positive responses in the area of supportive environment compared with the citywide average of 70%. This year, we are working to sustain and further develop this culture. All of our teachers participate in extensive PD through the Internationals Network for Public Schools, which is designed to ensure that teachers in all content areas 2018-19 CEP 18  deliver instruction that meets the language and content needs of students. In addition, all teachers are receiving ongoing PD provided by the New York City Writing Project to increase college readiness through developing writing skills. Our most recent school quality guide indicates that our students have been very successful on the Regents Exam (the weighted English pass rate is at the top of the target range, and our weighted Math Regents pass rate is exceeding the target). As our data indicates, we have an especially high number of unaccompanied minors--indeed, the highest number of unaccompanied minors of any school within the Internationals Network. Most of these students come from a traumatic background and have extensive social and emotional needs, as both our interactions with students and interviews with the school social worker have demonstrated. As part of our multi-pronged approach to supporting unaccompanied minors and other students who have had traumatic experiences, we plan to supplement our existing advisory curriculum with learning circles targeting social and emotional issues to support these students . Since all teachers are advisory teachers, this is a way to expand the web of support that we offer to our students. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all teachers will incorporate circles into the advisory curriculum - at least one circle per week - to address equity and the social and emotional needs of our students. 2018-19 CEP 19  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). During summer planning days and at the beginning the school year, a select group of teachers, administrators, and INPS will meet to assess needs and develop a curriculum map that includes restorative circles and trauma-based lessons that address the social and emotional needs of students. The select group of teachers will plan lessons that all teachers can implement during advisory, including at least one lesson or a series lessons which incorporate circles that focus on socio-emotional needs. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All teachers Summer 2018 A select group of teachers and administrators All teachers September 2018 to May 2019 Select group of teachers and administrators Teachers will implement lessons and provide feedback to the select group of teachers on student engagement. Students The select group of teachers will revise and adapt curriculum as needed. All teachers All teachers September 2018 to May 2019 September 2018 to May 2019 Select group of teachers and administrators 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. We will conduct a series of parent workshops and use the parent ENL classes to educate families about our curriculum and learning model and to help students to understand how to support their students at home between September 2018 and June 2019. This initiative will be coordinated by the Parent Coordinator, utilizing the the Adult ENL teachers and instructional coaches. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  We will use per session funds to support three pre-service PD days to support curriculum planning.  We will set aside funds in the budget to continue to pay for advisory curriculum planning, and outside professional development.  We will set aside time during the schedule for the select group of teachers to meet. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 2018-19 CEP 20  X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, administrators and coaches will have provided targeted feedback to teachers on the development and implementation of circles within the first two units of their annual curriculum. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The advisory curriculum binders will indicate this. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 21  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Within our school we have a distributed leadership structure, providing all teachers with multiple opportunities to become leaders. These leaders meet in the leadership team to discuss classroom, student, and school needs. Information from these meetings is shared by leaders to the rest of the faculty through instructional team meetings, discipline meetings, and in-house professional developments. Faculty members also bring questions, concerns, and feedback to these teacher leaders, who will, in turn, share it with the leadership team. Our most recent quality review indicates that our school is well-developed in terms of scheduling professional collaboration and for the purpose of increasing student achievement and enhancing the role of teachers in decision making (Danielson 4.2). Specifically, the evaluator wrote, “Both supervisors and teachers put in many extra hours and assume multiple roles for the benefit of students. For example, the United Federation of Teachers (UFT) delegate teacher also assumes responsibility for being the lead in planning school professional development. Such strong distributive leadership empowers teachers to assume responsibility for collectively improving student outcomes.” Teachers demonstrate a strong commitment to the success and improvement of their classroom by:  Planning for and teaching an extensive after-school and Saturday school program, which provides students with additional academic support as well as multiple opportunities to demonstrate proficiency.  Conducting peer-observations using the Danielson Rubric to inform and improve instruction.  Using data to inform instruction, including the collection of unit baseline assessments; post-assessments; weekly quizzes; interim assessments, graded according to a common content-area rubric and tracked across four years; baseline assessments, midterms, and final exams; and portfolio presentations and graduation portfolios. In addition, faculty members regularly attend, turnkey, and implement professional development workshops to address specific needs within our school. The Capacity Framework Element for collaborative teachers focuses on professional development, attention to student data, and the continuous improvement of practice. PAIHS at Monroe’s strengths include a culture among the faculty that supports continuous professional development and a shared commitment to the continuous improvement of teacher practice. In addition, we have systems in place for tracking student data and using that data to improve instruction. We need to maintain and support this culture, as professional development and improvement of instruction are continuous processes. As a priority need, and to build off of our initiatives in the past years with the 2018-19 CEP 22  humanities, as well as the math and science departments, we would like to develop time within the schedule and protocols that support the design of curricula to increase connections and alignment within and between disciplines. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. In order to further our success with interdisciplinary alignment in the 2017-2018 school year, all interdisciplinary and discipline teams will meet weekly to develop units of study that demonstrate both interdisciplinary and vertical alignment in outcomes by June 2019. 2018-19 CEP 23  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Weekly instructional and discipline team meetings to plan and revise curriculum. All teachers September 2018 to June 2019 Instructional team leaders and discipline leaders Weekly leadership meetings (Discipline Leaders) to discuss progress within the specific disciplines and to disseminate necessary information. All teachers, discipline leaders September 2018 to June 2019 Discipline leaders, principal, and instructional coaches Collaboration between special education teacher and disciplinary teachers to scaffold and differentiate curriculum to fit the needs of ALL students, both in and out of SETSS classes. Professional Development designed and offered by the Internationals Network for Public Schools (INPS) in collaboration with our school, focused on project and experiential based learning as well as planning and developing curriculum and interdisciplinary projects. and administration special education coordinator, all teachers All teachers September 2018 to June 2019 Instructional coaches, special education coordinator September 2018 to June 2019 Internationals Network, professional development coordinator, instructional coaches, all teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We will conduct a series of parent workshops and use the parent ENL classes to educate families about our curriculum and learning model and to help students to understand how to support their students at home between September 2018 and June 2019. This initiative will be coordinated by the Parent Coordinator, utilizing the the Adult ENL teachers and instructional coaches. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2018-19 CEP 24   We will allocate per session funds for after school leadership and planning meetings.  We will ensure that all teachers will be scheduled for at least one weekly discipline meeting.  We will ensure that all teachers will be scheduled for at least two weekly interdisciplinary meetings.  We will allocate money for 2 teachers who will begin the Emerging Teacher Leaders program. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, administrators will have received a minimum of 12 agendas from each team leader with minutes to describe the purpose and content of the weekly meetings. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Teacher curriculum binders will indicate completion of the benchmark and goal. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 25  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. At PAIHS, our school has a distributed leadership structure. The majority of teachers take on significant leadership roles within the school. Our most recent quality review notes that “school administration describes distributive leadership as the school’s most promising practice. Both supervisors and teachers put in many extra hours and assume multiple roles for the benefit of students. For example, the United Federation of Teachers (UFT) delegate teacher also assumes responsibility for being the lead in planning school professional development. Such strong distributive leadership empowers teachers to assume responsibility for collectively improving student outcomes.” Our school provides all teachers with multiple opportunities to collaborate. At the teacher level, we work in teams that meet weekly within the school day to plan within a discipline team, on an interdisciplinary basis, and as humanities and science/math teams. Each team has a team leader and with the distributed leadership structure that we have, requires teachers to meet weekly to discuss school needs. This structure provides faculty members bring questions, concerns, and feedback to these teacher leaders, who will—in turn—share it with the leadership team. The Leadership Team is the key decision-making body for the school, and teachers and administrators discuss and reach consensus on all key decisions. Through the team structure, all teachers have a voice in school decision-making. As a result of the shared leadership structure, the faculty has significant buy-in as to the school’s continual improvement. School leaders encourage a culture of collaboration and support to improve instruction. The quality review also notes that, “Consistent supervisory support and the use of the school’s framework for evaluating teacher practice paved the way for a smooth transition in adopting Danielson’s Framework for Teaching (DFT).” Teachers receive written reports from supervisors and peers evaluating their practice against the DFT rubric, accurately assessing practice and informing next pedagogical moves. The practice of peer-to-peer feedback is well established, with the principal steering teachers to visit particular colleagues during monthly collegial visits, based on observed needs. Teachers give detailed low inference feedback to peers. They include direct quotes, rate each other on the Danielson rubric and provide suggestions for next steps by illuminating both good and developing pedagogy. For example, comments in peer observation reports incorporate explicit reference to identification of specific questions that exemplify reflective practice as well as less effective questions. Suggestions included monitoring delivery of questions, student response, and use of wait time to ensure students have adequate time to reflect and fully respond as well as opportunities to pose higher order thinking by encouraging students to craft their own questions. 2018-19 CEP 26  Because of this collective accountability, the school has received a score of 4.76, exceeding the target, in the Effective School Leadership category of the 2017 Framework for Great Schools report. Within this area, 99% of our survey responses are positive, as opposed to 85% in the citywide average. This year, the principal intends to strengthen both leadership and instructional capacity across the school by continuing with two full-time Assistant Principals. The principal will provide intensive professional development to the Assistant Principals and instructional coaches in order to support the coaches’ work with teachers around interdisciplinary alignment, developing learning outcomes, creating scaffolded and differentiated units of study, and student engagement, and assessment. This investment in school leadership will help nurture and sustain the systems that have led to our success thus far. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. The principal will work with the assistant principals and curriculum coaches to provide a series of professional developments focused on differentiation and experiential based projects which will be used in a minimum of one unit of study across all disciplines by June 2019. 2018-19 CEP 27  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? The principal will meet with the Assistant Principals at the beginning of the year to review data, assess needs, establish priorities, and set goals. The principal and the Assistant Principals will meet at least twice monthly to review teacher progress and discuss needs as they arise The Assistant Principals will meet together at least once per week to collaborative discuss teacher progress and staff development needs. The Assistant Principals will visit classrooms and meet with teachers regularly throughout the school year to observe teachers, give feedback, and provide individualized support with curriculum, teaching, and assessment. Assistant Principals Assistant Principals Assistant Principals Teachers The Assistant Principals will work with teachers and teacher teams to help plan and revise interdisciplinary units of study. Teachers We will conduct a series of parent workshops and use the parent ENL classes to educate families about our curriculum and learning model and to help students to understand how to support their students at home. Parents Principal August and September, 2018 September 2018 to June 2019 September 2018 to June 2019 September 2018 to June 2019 September 2018 to June 2019 September 2018 to June 2019 Principal Assistant Principals Assistant Principals Assistant Principals Adult ENL teachers, parent coordinator, instructional coaches, administrators. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We will conduct a series of parent workshops and use the parent ENL classes to educate families about our curriculum and learning model and to help students to understand how to support their students at home between September 2018 and June 2019. This initiative will be coordinated by the Parent Coordinator, utilizing the the Adult ENL teachers and instructional coaches. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 2018-19 CEP 28  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  We will budget money for two full-time Assistant Principals and two part-time instructional coaches.  We will ensure that the schedule has multiple spaces for collaborative planning within the school day where instructional coaches and Assistant Principals can work with teacher teams. These will include interdisciplinary meetings, discipline team meetings, and new teacher meetings.  We will budget money for per session so that Assistant Principals and instructional coaches can work with teachers on curriculum writing and collaborative planning beyond what happens in the normal school day.  We will budget money for after-school leadership meetings so that the principal can support the Assistant Principals and instructional coaches and other teacher-leaders to share successes, identify challenges, and work collaboratively to better support teachers. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, Assistant Principals and instructional coaches will have provided feedback and support on two integrated units of study. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Curriculum binders will serve as the instrument of measure used to assess progress. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 29  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. As newcomers to this country, our students must learn English and navigate a new culture. In addition, immigrant families face the challenge of a language barrier in society and as parents. To support families and ensure that parents are welcomed and engaged in the school, we have taken a number of measures. First, we have a bilingual parent coordinator, a fully bilingual guidance department, and a fully bilingual support staff. In addition, the majority of teachers are bilingual. To further engage parents, we have monthly parent nights in addition to the required conferences. These are well-attended. Parents, in their native language, are welcomed into the school on a regular basis and supported with a wide variety of workshops that address topics including student safety, teen health, academic support, and college admissions and financial aid. Finally, noting that our average daily attendance rate is 87%, we have a bilingual social worker who focuses on student and family outreach to improve attendance. In the 2017-18 school year, we had over 60 unaccompanied minors. We know that these students have unique socio-emotional needs. To address these needs, we have conferences with the students, the social worker, the guidance counselor and the students’ families. We work to support these students academically and socio-emotionally. Our social worker works with these particular students once a week. Through intake surveys and surveys during the advisory class, we noticed that our students know very little about the American college process, which is somewhat different than the college process in their home countries. Understanding the path to college and the college admissions process is integral to students’ success in high school. To address this need, we created a 9-12 college preparation curriculum in our Advisory classes. To support this curriculum, we hold multiple college information sessions at night and on occasional Saturdays led by our guidance and college counselors to help parents understand the college process and better support their students at home. Additionally, school counselors created a college advisory curriculum which requires students to reflect on their areas of challenge and to create self-improvement plans. This advisory curriculum has helped senior students consider their interests, needs, and aptitudes for writing effective personal statements and to complete college applications on time. The 2017 Framework for Great Schools Report has given us a Strong Family-Community Ties score of 4.29, comparatively our weakest area on the report. While our survey results are above the citywide average in the aggregate, we are weaker on Parent Involvement in School. Nearly all of our parents, like our students, are recently 2018-19 CEP 30  arrived immigrants, and these parents often face cultural, linguistic, and economic (i.e., working multiple jobs) barriers to school engagement. We have put in many structures in place to address these needs, and we want to focus more on outreach and expanding them. Since we have a bilingual guidance department, full-time college counselor, and bilingual college office assistant our goal centers in increasing outreach and attendance for post-secondary workshops for parents. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. To increase parent involvement and to increase parent understanding of post-secondary opportunities for students, the college office will work with school counselors to provide at least four workshops for parents and students by June 2019. 2018-19 CEP 31 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional  programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). The college office, school counselors, and parent coordinator will meet to plan and develop workshop materials and resources. All parents Parent coordinator will notify parents of workshop information (content, times, dates, etc.). All parents A minimum of four workshops will be planned and presented. All parents Parent evaluation survey data will be analyzed. The college office, school counselors, and parent coordinator will meet to make appropriate adjustments for future workshops. All parents 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Summer 2018 to Fall 2018 College Office, School Counselors, Parent Coordinator, Administration September 2018 September 2018 to June 2019 January 2019 Parent Coordinator, School Counselors, College Office, Administration Parent Coordinator, School Counselors, College Office, Administration If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. We will use the parent ENL classes and Adult ENL teachers to help increase attendance and participation in these workshops. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2018-19 CEP 32   We will budget per session funds for planning of workshops.  We will budget per session funds for counselor and teacher attendance at workshops. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, college office will have given at least two post-secondary workshops to parents. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Sign-in sheets and parent surveys. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 33  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Baseline exams Pre- and post- Assessments SLIFE Interview NYSITELL NYSESLAT Data ELE exam Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Targeted academic intervention sessions (twice per week) After-school tutoring (four times per week) Saturday academy (four hours each week) Summer program (six weeks) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Small group instruction One-on-one instruction Tutoring Enrichment and support classes When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) During the school day After school Saturday February and April Breaks Unit grades/progress report data Mathematics Student journals Interim assessments Performance-based assessment tasks Baseline exams Pre- and post- Assessments SLIFE Interview Spanish LAB-R Unit grades/progress report data Student journals Targeted academic intervention sessions (twice per week) After-school tutoring (four times per week) Saturday academy (four hours each week) Small group instruction One-on-one instruction Tutoring During the school day After school Before the school day Enrichment and support classes Saturday Summer program (six weeks) February and April Breaks 2018-19 CEP 34  Science Social Studies Interim assessments. Performance-based assessment tasks Baseline exams Pre- and post- Assessments SLIFE Interview Spanish LAB-R Unit grades/progress report data Student journals Targeted academic intervention sessions (twice per week) After-school tutoring (four times per week) Small group One-on-one instruction During the school day After school Tutoring Saturday Saturday academy (four hours each week) Enrichment and support classes February and April Breaks Summer program (six weeks) Interim assessments. Performance-based assessment tasks Baseline exams Pre- and post- Assessments SLIFE Interview Spanish LAB-R Unit grades/progress report data Student journals Targeted academic intervention sessions (twice per week) After-school tutoring (four times per week) Saturday academy (four hours each week) Summer program (six weeks) Small group instruction One-on-one instruction Tutoring Enrichment and support classes During the school day After school Saturday February and April Breaks Interim assessments. At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Performance-based assessment tasks Patterns in attendance and lateness, referrals from teachers, emotional issues, promotion, at-risk situations Individual counseling and parental outreach One-on-one meetings During the school day After-school Saturday Academy Summer school 2018-19 CEP 35  2018-19 CEP 36  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) At present, we have at least 108 students in temporary housing. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. We provide multiple services to address the needs of students in temporary housing:  We have a wide range of before- and after-school programs so that students have a safe place to study each school day from 7:45 am to 5:45 pm, Monday to Thursday. We provide three meals per day to students, and the after-school schedule is such that students can always stay with one of their classroom teachers. We also offer a Saturday program from 8:30 to 12:30 each Saturday. This way, students have access to supplemental instruction, additional support, and technology in a safe and supportive space. Both our after-school program and Saturday program are staffed by a licensed guidance counselor to attend to student socio-emotional needs.  This year, we are continuing to use a licensed social worker to focus on at-risk students and student populations, including students in temporary housing. Our social worker meets with these students on a regular basis to address their social and emotional needs. In addition, she advocates on behalf of students with respect to placements within the shelter system, applications to NYCHA programs, and application to Section 8 programs.  We have a housing coordinator who advocates on behalf of the STH population. She ensures that all students in temporary housing receive counseling from the guidance department and social worker, has priority in line to receive metro-cards, and that immunization and health service forms are up-to-date. The housing coordinator coordinates with the attendance teacher to ensure that home visits are made when needed, and coordinates with the school attendance liaison at shelters or communicates with other family members in non-shelter situations. In addition, the school purchases school supplies, backpacks, tee-shirts, and sweatpants for students in temporary housing, and the housing coordinator ensures that these supplies and resources are distributed to students. Finally, the school ensures that the families of students in temporary 2018-19 CEP 37  housing are engaged by ensuring that parents receive free metro-cards to attend meetings, conferences, and the free ENL parent classes at school. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). n/a 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. n/a 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. n/a 2018-19 CEP 38  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. We have worked to ensure that we have a highly qualified staff through an intensive and consistent professional development plan to support our CEP. Including as part of the CEP process, the professional development committee assesses school needs, and supports both formal and informal professional development. We continue to address these topics: · Classroom management. · Intervention strategies for high-need students. · Common core alignment. · Assessment of student work using protocols. · Designing curriculum that is both rigorous and accessible to ELLs. · Scaffolding strategies. · Creation of student learning outcomes. Our professional development schedule contains over four hours of professional development built into the schedule weekly. Each teacher has four week weekly meetings as part of an interdisciplinary teaching team, a discipline-specific team (e.g., the math department), or a larger interdisciplinary curriculum group (math-science or humanities). This team and interdisciplinary collaboration is a hallmark of our school, allowing us to grow professionally while sharing best practices. 2018-19 CEP 39  Our two Assistant Principals have worked closely with all teachers, and especially with new teachers, to support the creation of learning outcomes, facilitate the creation of interdisciplinary, teacher-written curriculum, help teachers improve assessment systems, and to give targeted feedback and support. Additionally, each teacher receives support from instructional team and discipline team leaders, and first-year teachers receive support from new teacher mentors. All teachers participate in a peer observation program, observing (and being observed by) at least four different teachers throughout the year. Teachers are purposefully paired to increase collaboration and learning, and all observations followed with peer-to-peer feedback. In late Spring, as part of a PROSE option for teacher evaluation, all teachers, guidance counselors, and the social worker create and present a teacher portfolio. Teachers set goals at the beginning of the year, aligned to the Danielson rubric, and teachers reflect on these through a formal portfolio process using data from student assessments, peer observations, teacher observations, student work, and teacher-created curriculum. The teacher portfolio includes a written self-reflection and an oral defense in front of a panel of staff and the principal. As part of the teacher portfolio, teachers generate ideas for the following year’s goals and professional development plan. When staffing needs arise, teachers are actively recruited through various avenues, including relationships with the NYC Teaching Fellows, individual colleges of education, and recruitment fairs. As highly qualified teachers are fully licensed and assigned to the license area, and ENL is a hard-to-staff license area, we have found our relationships with the colleges of education to be especially helpful in teacher recruitment. Our extensive support through coaching and additional prep periods, in addition to our collaborative structure and positive school environment, help us retain highly qualified teachers. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). At Pan American International High School at Monroe, all teachers are involved in the creation of of their own curriculum. We do this to enable our students, 100% of whom are ELLs and many of whom are SLIFE, to access the material and receive the necessary support to meet the rigorous common core standards. As part of our ongoing professional development program, our full-time instructional coach supports each teacher and teacher team, through a collaborative process, to create common core aligned learning outcomes for each unit. These outcomes, used in a mastery-based grading system, are met through differentiated, scaffolded, project-based units that integrate language and content instruction. This work is supported through an extensive professional development program. Every two weeks, the school dedicates two and a half hours to offer a high quality, in-house professional development workshop that is targeted to our CEP goals and the needs of our teachers and students. In the 2017-2018 school year, as part of our work to 2018-19 CEP 40  support rigorous instruction, we partnered with the NYC Writing Project to implement a six-part professional development series so teachers can better implement literacy across all subject areas . These were co-facilitated by a teacher–consultant from the New York City Writing Project, and another instructional coach, both of whom work at the school one day each week to visit classrooms, give feedback, and support teachers with planning. The workshops, offered throughout the year, were integrated with regular coaching, curriculum support, and classroom visits by the facilitators. In addition, administrators and teachers developed a series of professional developments on trauma based instruction giving our teachers more strategies to address the needs of our particular student population. As part of this trauma based PD, a group of administrators and teachers attended outside Restorative Circles PD's which will, in turn, develop more strategies for teachers to incorporate within the advisory curriculum as well as in their classrooms. The focus on trauma-based instruction in professional development will continue through the 2018-2019 school year, and will directly address the capacity of our teachers to support our students-especially the at-risk students-with their socio-emotional development. In addition to school-based PD, our teachers do extensive out-of-school PD that is aligned to our CEP goals. Each year, a teacher team works with Facing History and Ourselves to design and implement an unit in connection with a week-long PD and school visits. Our teachers and staff have also attended professional development workshops offered by Teachers College Writing Project, the Goddard-Riverside Options Institute, Math for America, and multiple workshops offered by the NYC DOE. In addition, our school frequently hosts and our staff regularly participate in inter-visitations though the Internationals Network for Public Schools. During the 2017-2018 school year, we continued to host schools in the NYC DOE as part of the learning partners program. Finally, all teachers have at least one full day of professional development through the Internationals Network for Public Schools, and most teachers, including all teachers with less than three years of experience, attend summer PD days with the Internationals Network. All teachers participate in decision making regarding the use and selection of multiple assessment measures through our distributive leadership structure. Teacher teams discuss the selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures, and team leaders bring this to the coordinating council, a weekly leadership group, which further discusses the selection of multiple assessment measures. The coordinating council additionally plans the professional development to support the use of assessment results in instruction. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. n/a 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). n/a 2018-19 CEP 41  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). n/a 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. The scaffolding cycle professional development series provided to teachers in the 2016-2017 school year focused extensively on the idea that teachers must have multiple assessment measures and that teachers should constantly assesses and use assessment results to adapt and improve instruction. Through the workshops, planning sessions and coaching, we ensure that all teachers understand and have implemented multiple assessment measures, and can effectively use them in our mastery-based grading system. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Title I Part A (Basic) Federal Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Federal Federal Title III, Immigrant Federal $544,680 0 $54,460 0 X X 2018-19 CEP 42 Column B Section Reference(s) 5A, 5B, 5C, 5D, 5E, 6, 7, 8 5A, 5B, 5C, 5D, 5E, 6, 7, 8  Tax Levy (FSF) Local $3,683,047 X 5A, 5B, 5C, 5D, 5E, 6, 7, 8 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. 2018-19 CEP 43  Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 44  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Pan American International High School ,, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students Pan American International High School will support parents and families of Title I students by:  providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology;  providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and  decision making in support of the education of their children; fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress;  providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments;  sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand;  providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; 2018-19 CEP 45  Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will:  actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact;  engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills;  ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and  strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills;  maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home;   provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report;  host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help;    The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement 2018-19 CEP 46   holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference;  hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year;  encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; supporting or hosting Family Day events;   establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents;  encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers;  providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress;  developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress;  providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) Pan American International High School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Pan American International High School is committed to providing high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards;  using academic learning time efficiently;    offering high quality instruction in all content areas;  providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the ESSA; I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Pan American International High School is committed to supporting home-school relationships and improving communication by:  conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; 2018-19 CEP 47    convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education;  providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact;   providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information;  ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Pan American International High School provides parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff  ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents;  notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff  member; arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities;  planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Pan American International High School provides general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents    creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents;   ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as  described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; 2018-19 CEP 48  Parent/Guardian responsibilities are as follows: II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities  monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent;  ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games;     promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits;  encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child;   participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education;  communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested;   become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact;  participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child;   Student Responsibilities are as follows: III. Student Responsibilities       attend school regularly and arrive on time; complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; show respect for myself, other people and property; try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 49 Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components: 1. 2. 3. The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers. Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. 1. 2. 3. 4. High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” 1. Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences. Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. 1. These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 3 9 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP 50  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the · · · · · · rationale subgroups and grade levels of students to be served schedule and duration language of instruction # and types of certified teachers types of materials Begin description here: At Pan American International High School at Monroe (PAIHS at Monroe), the target population of the entire school is comprised of recently arrived immigrants who are native speakers of Spanish and who score below the 21st percentile on the English LAB-R exam. Approximately 30% of our population qualifies as SLIFE, 63% are unaccompanied minors and 50% are over-age. Due to these factors, limited or insufficient educational opportunities prior to entrance in PAIHS, the lack of basic English skills upon arrival to our school and the low literacy and numeracy levels in Spanish, students at PAIHS at Monroe need instruction that extends beyond the school day in order to succeed academically. Before school, after school, and on Saturdays, we provide direct supplemental English language instruction, a native language (Spanish) literacy program, and support that focuses on literacy and numeracy skills. As with our regular instructional program, our supplemental programs integrate language and content instruction, utilize blended instruction, and are interdisciplinary in nature. Students whose first language is not English need additional support and instructional time beyond the regular school day in order to enhance skills and succeed academically. The NYSESLAT scores indicate that many of our students need additional support with reading and writing. The Title III program provides English Language Learners with direct supplemental ESL and content area instruction to develop English and Spanish academic language in the areas of English, Literacy, Math and History. All of our subject area classes are taught by ESL or bilingually licensed teachers, although many of our teachers have dual certifications and our pedagogical model features content-based ESL instruction. The Title III program will address the following students:• Entering, Emerging, and Transitioning students, as measured by NYSELSAT scores. Students that need additional support in 11th and 12th grade English based on the June 2018 Common Core ELA results and in-class assessments. • Students in 9-11 grade that need additional enrichment and support with language acquisition based on teacher-created units pre- and post-assessment results. • Students in 10th and 11th grade that need additional support with ESL and Algebra based on the 2018 Common Core Algebra Regents results.• 9th and 10th grade students that need additional support in the area of ESL/Social Studies based on pre- and post-assessment results and in-class assessments. The instructional programs provided with Title III funding will serve ELLs in three grade groupings (9th/10th, 11th, and 12th). In addition, our former ELLs may participate for up to 2 years after exiting ELL status. Teachers will be paid the per session rate. All of our supplemental Title III instructional programs will have ESL licensed teachers, dually licensed teachers in ESL and content area, or math-license teachers who possess bilingual extensions. The Saturday School program consists of 30 weeks of instruction, 4 hours every week. The Saturday Title III Program runs from 8:30 am to 1:30 pm, from September 2018 up to June 2019. Approximately 250 will be served in the Saturday program over the course of the year. Group size will be maintained from 15 to 20 students per teacher. Our Saturday School instruction is 2018-19 CEP 51  ESL through Social Studies classes support 80 students in grades 9 through 12. Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information comprised of 17 of our teachers. This includes 9 ESL teachers, 2 science teachers, 1 Social Studies teacher, 2 Spanish teachers, and 3 math teachers. The Saturday program runs for 30 Saturdays from September 2018 through June 2019. The program runs from 8:30 am to 12:30 pm. The Saturday program is divided in two sessions of two hours. Each class has, on average, fewer than 20 students. A variety of courses are designed to support ELL students, and students are programmed according to highest need as demonstrated by assessment data. We offer: · &nbsp;Students served by this class have been identified as lacking in language and content through teacher-created assessments. &nbsp; The class is taught by a certified ESL teacher who is currently pursuing dual licensure in Social Studies. &nbsp;This class &nbsp;addresses skills in the areas of critical thinking, chronology, supporting claims with textural evidence, reading informational texts, and identifying primary and secondary sources. &nbsp; Material for this class include: Word Atlas, Pro Quest &amp; Grolier Data Bases, DBQ Projects, SAS Curriculum Pathways, Brain Pop, and other teacher made activity guides.&nbsp; · Four math classes offer language-through-content instruction focused on supporting all students, especially SLIFE students and Entering and Emerging ELLs. &nbsp;In these classes students acquire both the language and mathematical skills to be successful on the text-heavy Common Core Regents exam. These classes are taught by bilingually certified math teachers, and make extensive use of native language supports. &nbsp;Instructional materials include web-based applications on student laptops and iPads, graphing calculators, and teacher-created materials. &nbsp; · Two ESL classes support Entering, Emerging, and Transitioning ELLs by teaching language through content. &nbsp;Primarily using a robust leveled reading library, students engage in group work and collaborative projects to build basic to intermediate reading, writing, speaking and listening skills. &nbsp;This class is taught by a dually licensed ESL and English teacher. ESL through Social Studies classes support 80 students in grades 9 through 12. Students served by this class have been identified as lacking in language and content through teacher-created assessments. The class is taught by a certified ESL teacher who is currently pursuing dual licensure in Social Studies. This class addresses skills in the areas of critical thinking, chronology, supporting claims with textural evidence, reading informational texts, and identifying primary and secondary sources. Material for this class include: Word Atlas, Pro Quest & Grolier Data Bases, DBQ Projects, SAS Curriculum Pathways, Brain Pop, and other teacher made activity guides. Four math classes offer language-through-content instruction focused on supporting all students, especially SLIFE students and Entering and Emerging ELLs. In these classes students acquire both the language and mathematical skills to be successful on the text-heavy Common Core Regents exam. These classes are taught by bilingually certified math teachers, and make extensive use of native language supports. Instructional materials include web-based applications on student laptops and iPads, graphing calculators, and teacher-created materials. Two ESL classes support Entering, Emerging, and Transitioning ELLs by teaching language through content. Primarily using a robust leveled reading library, students engage in group work and collaborative projects to build basic to intermediate reading, writing, speaking and listening skills. This class is taught by a dually licensed ESL and English teacher. Two additional ESL classes, taught by an ESL licenced teacher, focus on building academic literacy through more complex informational and literary texts. These classes primarily focus on 11th and 12th grade students, the majority of whom are classified as Transitioning, Expanding, and Commanding. This course supports students in meeting the Common Core English standards and developing college readiness. This course uses teacher-created materials. 2018-19 CEP 52 Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Please note that other funding sources will be used, complementing Title III funds, to fully fund the cost of after-school and Saturday programs. rationale teachers to receive training schedule and duration topics to be covered name of provider Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. · · · · · Begin description here: At Pan American International High School at Monroe, 99% of our students are ELLs, and the remaining are recently tested-out former ELLs. We have achieved a high level of success through our instructional model. Our school community has developed a shared understanding of effective instruction through the Danielson Framework for Teaching, as well as the Internationals Network for Public Schools (Internationals) rubric which guides our pedagogical model and complements the Danielson Framework. As an Internationals Network school since our founding in 2008, our curriculum and classroom practices have always followed best practices for the instruction of ELLs. The Internationals rubric consists of five principles: Heterogeneity and Collaboration, Experiential Learning, Language and Content Integration, Localized Autonomy and Responsibility, and One Learning Model for All. All of our teachers are responsible for the delivery of services and instruction to ELLs, and therefore receive extensive professional development in our instructional model. In the 2018-19 school year, we will have two two-and-a-half hour professional development workshops each month., differentiated to address specific teacher needs. So far, we have planned the following for the entire staff, with specific dates to be determined: · a series focusing on the meeting the needs of ELLs through scaffolding and curriculum design. &nbsp;This will be co-facilitated by our part-time instructional coaches and/or a coach from the Internationals Network for Public Schools. · York City Writing Project teacher-consultant and a part-time instructional coach. · support the social emotional needs of our diverse population of students. · - to highlight our teachers' different strengths and to learn from one another different strategies that our successful in our classrooms. &nbsp; a series focusing on the meeting the needs of ELLs through scaffolding and curriculum design. This will be co-facilitated by our part-time instructional coaches and/or a coach from the Internationals Network for Public Schools. a three-part series on increasing writing fluency for ELLs, co-facilitated by our New York City Writing Project teacher-consultant and a part-time instructional coach. workshops on using trauma-informed strategies and restorative-circles in the classroom to support the social emotional needs of our diverse population of students. Development and participation in teacher success-shares - both in-house and across INPS - to highlight our teachers' different strengths and to learn from one another different strategies that our successful in our classrooms. a three-part series on increasing writing fluency for ELLs, co-facilitated by our New workshops on using trauma-informed strategies and restorative-circles in the classroom to Development and participation in teacher success-shares - both in-house and across INPS 2018-19 CEP 53  Part C: Professional Development Finally, our school invests significant time and money into coaching and teacher support. In 2018-19 we will have three part-time coaches: an ELL specialist from the Internationals for Public Schools, a teacher–consultant from the New York City Writing Project, and a former teacher and administrator who has worked in multiple roles in schools within the Internationals Network. Each of these coaches provide classroom visits and coaching, support teachers in planning, and offer school-based PD workshops. Our school's PD coordinator will maintain records in the school's files of all PD provided to staff, including copies of agendas and attendance. rationale schedule and duration topics to be covered name of provider how parents will be notified of these activities Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. · · · · · Begin description here: As with our students, nearly all of our parents and family members are recently arrived immigrants. Our families must navigate significant linguistic, cultural, economic, and immigration-related barriers to fully support their children in attaining higher levels of academic achievement. In addition to mandated activities, we have the following parental engagement activities: · Three weekly adult ESL classes. &nbsp;These take place on Monday and Wednesday from 6 to 8 p.m., and on Saturday from 8:30 to 12:30 p.m, beginning in September and lasting through mid-June. &nbsp;All materials and supplies are free to parents and family members. &nbsp;The classes focus on basic literacy and conversational English, and include reading, writing, speaking, and listening exercises. &nbsp;They are taught two PAIHS at Monroe teachers, both of whom are native speakers of Spanish. &nbsp;Parents are notified of this during student enrollment, by personal calls from the parent coordinator, at PTA meetings, at parent nights by staff, and through the monthly newsletter. &nbsp; · counselor, the billingual college office manager, a bilingual guidance counselor, or a guest speaker. &nbsp;These workshops cover all aspects of college admission, financial &nbsp;aid, and enrollment, and directly support students in academic achievement. Three weekly adult ESL classes. These take place on Monday and Wednesday from 6 to 8 p.m., and on Saturday from 8:30 to 12:30 p.m, beginning in September and lasting through mid-June. All materials and supplies are free to parents and family members. The classes focus on basic literacy and conversational English, and include reading, writing, speaking, and listening exercises. They are taught two PAIHS at Monroe teachers, both of whom are native speakers of Spanish. Parents are notified of this during student enrollment, by personal calls from the parent coordinator, at PTA meetings, at parent nights by staff, and through the monthly newsletter. We offer four college workshops each year, given in Spanish by our full-time college 2018-19 CEP 54  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Total funds will be used to pay per-session for teachers who teach ELL students during the Saturday School Program. Budgeted Amount $36,256 $ Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) 1. 2. Purchased services 1. Per session Per diem High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials 2. Must be supplemental. Additional curricula, instructional materials. Must be clearly listed. 3. 4. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL $ $ $$36,256 2018-19 CEP 55  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 12 School Name Pan American International HS at Monroe Borough Bronx School Number 388 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Bridgit Bye Coach Rona Armillas ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Julia Caine Teacher/Subject Area Ann Starling/ESL Teacher/Subject Area Gerard Gomez/Math Related-Service Provider Thomas Erickson Superintendent Kathy Pelles Assistant Principal Jessica Kelly, Mary Pollack Coach Allison Koffler-Wise School Counselor Thomas Erickson Parent TBD Parent Coordinator Estefania Sosa Field Support Center Staff Member Jocelyn Santana Other (Name and Title) Mary Pollack, AP C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 6 11 5 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 5 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 1 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 451 2018-19 CEP 56 Total number of ELLs 442 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 98.00%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 2 K 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 3 0 4 0 5 0 6 0 7 0 8 0 9 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Some of the formative assessments and curriculum embedded assessments that we use at PAIHS at Monroe and Unit Pre- and post- Assessments, SLIFE Interview, NYSITELL and NYSESLAT Data, ELE exam, Unit grades/progress report data, Student journals, Interim quarterly assessments, Performance-based assessment tasks (PBATS), Spanish LAB-R Based upon information collected from students and parents during the enrollment process, including the NYSITELL and Spanish LAB, as well as observation and assessment during the first week of school, all new students suspected of being SIFE are given a SIFE questionnaire and provide a writing sample during at some point within the first 30 days of enrollment. The questionnaire and writing sample are administered by bilingual licensed pedagogues, Niulin Beltre and Clelia Nolasco. After administering the questionnaire the SIFE leadership team reviews all SIFE questionnaires and writing samples to determine which students should meet with a member of the SIFE team to be further evaluated. New admits and SIFE students are given a Lab Spanish assessment to determine their native language literacy, Math Numeracy (teacher-created assessment), as well as Fountas and Pinnell. These assessments are all used to determine student literacy and numeracy abilities. Using the results 2018-19 CEP 57  from these assessments, team leaders work to distribute students evenly across teams. The results are also shared with teachers to help level students in order to plan more effectively for homogeneous and heterogeneous groupings. We also use teacher-created assessments in all classes during all four years to provide us with student's grade level in reading comprehension, writing, speaking and listening skills. The results offer a breakdown of specific areas of strengths and weaknesses, so we can gear our instruction towards helping the student in areas of academic need and tailor extra help specifically to those students. The teacher-made assessments allow us to assess students' decoding skills, vocabulary and comprehension. The results of these assessments are shared with our content area teachers. This information helps inform our school's instructional plan, allowing us to design curriculum to address the specific needs of students. It is particularly helpful for those students in our SIFE class and is a useful tool to share with our content area teachers and after school tutors. In addition, this data is used to inform our curriculum, instructional approaches, and interventions. Our teachers work to develop reading and writing skills through all content areas. Through this consistent reinforcement of reading and writing in their classes as well as in our after-school and Saturday programs, students see improvements in their scores over time. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Structures that exist to support this effort are our ELL Coordinator, common planning between our teacher teams; vertical discipline, grade discipline and grade interdisciplinary, that provide the time and space to focus on instructional shifts that need to be made in response to the needs of our ELLs. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? New admits and SIFE students are given a Lab Spanish assessment to determine their native language literacy, Math Numeracy (teacher-created assessment), as well as Fountas and Pinnell. These assessments are all used to determine student literacy and numeracy abilities. Using the results from these assessments, team leaders work to distribute students evenly across teams. The results are also shared with teachers to help level students in order to plan more effectively for homogeneous and heterogeneous groupings. We also use teacher-created assessments in all classes during all four years to provide us with student's grade level in reading comprehension, writing, speaking and listening skills. The results offer a breakdown of specific areas of strengths and weaknesses, so we can gear our instruction towards helping the student in areas of academic need and tailor extra help specifically to those students. The teacher-made assessments allow us to assess students' decoding skills, vocabulary and comprehension. The results of these assessments are shared with our content area teachers. This information helps inform our school's instructional plan, allowing us to design curriculum to address the specific needs of students. It is particularly helpful for those students in our SIFE class and is a useful tool to share with our content area teachers and after school tutors. In addition, this data is used to inform our curriculum, instructional approaches, and interventions. Our teachers work to develop reading and writing skills through all content areas. Through this consistent reinforcement of reading and writing in their classes as well as in our after-school and Saturday programs, students see improvements in their scores over time. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Structures that PAIHS at Monroe has out in place to address interventions Targeted academic intervention sessions (twice per week), after-school tutoring (four times per week), Saturday academy (four hours each week), Summer program (six weeks) 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] N/A 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The ELL Data Analysis Tool has been useful in aggregating data to analyze the progress of our ELLs in a longitudinal fashion. As part of the Internationals' Network for Public Schools (INPS), every child's second language development is at the core of all of our instructional decisions. As such, INPS schools have five core principles, including: • Heterogeneity and collaboration: schools and classrooms are heterogeneous and collaborative structures that build on the strength of each member of the school community to optimize learning. 2018-19 CEP 58  • Experiential learning: expansion of the 21st century schools beyond the four walls of the building motivates adolescents and enhances their capacity to successfully participate in modern society. • Language and content integration: strong language skills develop most effectively in context and emerge most naturally in a purposeful, language-rich, interdisciplinary, and experiential program. • Localized autonomy and responsibility: linking autonomy and responsibility at every level within a learning community allows all members to contribute to their fullest potential. • One learning model model for all: levers member of our school community experiences the same learning model, maximizing an environment of mutual academic support. Thus all members of our school community work in diverse, collaborative groups on hands-on projects; put another way, the model for adult learning and student learning mirror each other. Therefore, based on this Internationals Approach, students’ backgrounds are viewed as assets in the classroom. Foreign transcripts, parent home language survey, NYSESLAT, NYSITELL, ELA, and academic content class grades/teacher feedback are all used to inform us as to the child’s academic history and background, assisting us in developing an individual academic support plan for a student. Important information from Home Language Survey, parent interviews and information on the child's education history are shared with the child's teachers so that teachers take this data into account when developing instruction. Second language development techniques are "turn-keyed" by the resident, certified ESL teacher on each instructional team. All teachers on instructional teams design inter-disciplinary units collaboratively, incorporating ENL strategies and developmentally appropriate activities into each activity, unit and assessment. In doing so, all content area teachers are building student language skills. The principal and Coordinating Council directs instructional based, teacher-led committees such as the "Portfolio Committee" to revise rubrics and design professional development workshops revolving around curriculum that is designed to integrate language and content in order to facilitate language development in our ELL students. Pan American International High School at Monroe also provides Home Language instruction to our students across grade levels. There are 5 Native Language Spanish Arts teachers, 3 in the Junior Institute (9th and 10th grade), and 2 in the Senior Institute (11th and 12th grade). The Native Language teachers work collaboratively with our other humanities teachers to design curriculum that is aligned both thematically and in terms of content and language acquisition. This alignment allows students to build knowledge and skills in both languages, providing a deeper understanding and stronger foundation for language development. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? To achieve our instructional goals and implement our core beliefs an extensive structures have been developed within our distributed leadership model to disseminate information. This distributed leadership structure is on-going and fully integrated into our school structure. Coordinating council meets weekly to discuss the needs of the school all team leaders and discipline leaders are present a log with a representative from guidance. Our entire school is divided into five team learning communities. The three Junior Institute (9th and 10th grade) teams are each comprised of 5 - 6 teachers and approximately 80 students. The two Senior Institute 11th and 12th grade) teams are comprised of 5 - 6 teachers and approximately 90 students. The teachers meet four times weekly to plan, develop and implement their curriculum and instruction - twice a week with their grade level, interdisciplinary team and twice a week with other teachers in their discipline. Teams typically interview and hire their team members, and meet at the beginning of the year to help each other develop goals. They develop and revise curriculum and model collaborative work for their students. Teachers also share and analyze student work in order to identify areas requiring targeted instruction and additional interventions. They also share strategies for teaching in-depth, project-based curricula while simultaneously preparing students for the Algebra I (Common Core) and Comprehensive English/High School English Language Arts (Common Core) Regents exams. Part IV: ELL Programming 2018-19 CEP 59  Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. At Pan American International High School at Monroe, ENL instruction is implemented in integrated content classes across multiple subject areas. Students are grouped heterogeneously, and are scheduled for classes as a cohort (i.e. one group of students constitutes one ‘class’). These students take all of their classes together for the entire academic year (which is annualized). Ninth and tenth graders take classes together on a two-year rotation (i.e. all ninth and tenth graders in a given class will be scheduled for Core English 1 [9th grade English] for one year, and then scheduled for Core English 2 [10th grade English] the following year, regardless of their official grade level). Eleventh and twelfth graders take classes separately, with students from their official grade level only. Classes offering integrated ENL instruction are taught by teachers dual-licensed in ESL and their content area.• Instruction at our school is delivered collaboratively by teams of five to six teachers who work to plan instruction for groups of approximately 85 students. • Our school uses all of the above program models. Each group of students is block programmed and those students travel together throughout the day. Within their blocks 9th and 10th grade students are mixed, while the 11th and 12th grades are separate. The blocks are heterogeneous but at various times teachers may choose to group students within the block homogeneously if that suits the students’ and block’s needs for a specific project. • Integrated and Standalone ENL are implemented: Beginning/Entering students will receive a minimum of 540minutes of ENL per week (this consists of 270 minutes of ENL standalone, and 315 minutes of integrated ENL (with ELA or any other content area). Low Intermediates/Emerging will receive 360 minutes of ENL per week (this consists of 225 minutes of standalone ENL, 270 minutes of standalone or integrated ENL with ELA or any other content area. Intermediate/Transitioning will receive 180 ENL minutes per week which consists of 90 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA or other content area and 90 minutes of standalone or integrated ENL with ELA or any other content area). Advanced/Expanding will receive 180 minutes of ENL per week which consists of 180 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA or other content area. Proficient/Commanding or students who are former ELLs will receive 90 minutes of ENL each week which consists of 90 integrated ENL/ELA or other content area. Students also receive 225 minutes of ENL in the 11th grade math class every week. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? At Pan American International High School at Monroe, mandated instructional minutes are met in the following ways: Ninth/Tenth Grade (Entering through Commanding): Interdisciplinary Core English 1 & 2 (ENL is integrated) - 6 periods per week x 45 minutes = 270 minutes weekly Interdisciplinary Global Studies 1 & 2 (ENL is integrated) - 5 periods per week x 45 minutes = 225 minutes weekly Visual Art 1 & 2 (ENL is integrated) - 2 periods per week x 45 minutes = 90 minutes weekly Total ENL Instruction - 585 minutes weekly Interdisciplinary Spanish 1 & 2 (home language instruction) - 5 periods per week x 45 minutes = 225 minutes weekly Eleventh Grade (Emerging through Commanding): Interdisciplinary Core English 3 (ENL is integrated) - 5 periods per week x 45 minutes = 225 minutes weekly US HIstory (ENL is integrated) - 5 periods per week x 45 minutes = 225 minutes weekly 2018-19 CEP 60  Total ENL Instruction - 450 minutes weekly Native Language Spanish 3 (home language instruction) - 5 periods per week x 45 minutes = 225 minutes weekly Twelfth Grade (Transitioning through Commanding): Interdisciplinary Core English 4 (ENL is integrated) - 6 periods per week x 45 minutes = 270 minutes weekly Total ENL Instruction - 270 minutes weekly Native Language Spanish 4/AP Spanish Literature (home language instruction) - 6 periods per week x 45 minutes = 270 minutes weekly Students at Pan American International High School at Monroe are purposely scheduled for classes in heterogeneous groups, to foster collaboration and help students across all language levels accelerate their English language acquisition, students (particularly in the tenth grade) may occasionally receive more minutes ENL instruction than mandated. Additionally, students in the eleventh and twelfth grade occasionally have English proficiency levels that require additional ENL minutes; these students are scheduled for targeted support during their Advisory periods with an ENL-certified teacher. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. At Pan American International High School at Monroe our ESL teachers as well as all of our content area teachers provide content area support for ELLs through all content area classes. All students take math, science, social studies, and ESL and/or English every year. Teachers use trans-languaging strategies during instruction, combining English and Native Language, to provide a deeper understanding of both. The language of instruction for specific projects and on any specific day is collaboratively determined – students use both English and their native language to explore content and the locus of control for language is student-driven by the content and the students’ needs. Instruction is not unidirectional from teacher to student in our school. Students work in groups to complete collaborative tasks that both develop language and content knowledge. The instructional method used in delivering content area instruction is through the Internationals Network for Public Schools (INPS) Approach. This research based instructional approach utilizes five strategies which foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. They consist of heterogeneity and collaboration,experiential and project based learning, language and content integration, localized autonomy and responsibility and one learning model for all. A variety of instructional materials are used such as: laptops, library books, work books, dictionaries and teacher generated activities. The educational principles of Pan American International High School at Monroe include an approach to curriculum that is student centered, inquiry driven and project based revolving around themes and essential questions that provide a balance between content and English language skill building. Small heterogeneous grouping within classes provides a powerful vehicle for English acquisition, wherein students from diverse language backgrounds use English to accomplish a given task, drawing on their native language as a resource. Language and literacy are developed through interaction with peers and teachers about meaningful ideas in authentic context. In order to provide our students with native language support in the content area we provide our students with bilingual dictionaries, peer group support, native language texts as well as bilingual paraprofessionals to assist in the classroom 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Native language arts and literacy is taught all four years of our ELLs academic career at PAIHS. Students are evaluated formatively throughout the duration of the class, and summatively four times a year, when students are expected to write a literary analysis essay, in Spanish, about a work of Spanish literature they have studied in class. Students are evaluated on a rubric, aligned to the Internationals Network for Public Schools’ PBAT literary essay rubric, that has been adapted to students’ specific learning levels. Every spring, all students take the New York City ELE exam. In addition, students are given the opportunity in the 11th and 12th grades to take Advanced Placement courses in Spanish language and Spanish literature, and the majority of the students enrolled in those courses opt to take the accompanying exams in the spring. Native language arts and literacy is taught all four years of our ELLs academic career at PAIHS. 2018-19 CEP 61  5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a. Instructional plan for SIFE Students: All students who are identified as SIFE students (Students with Interrupted/Inconsistent Formal Education) are immediately placed in our SIFE Team within the Junior Institute where they receive additional support in English and native language literacy until a level of proficiency is achieved as determined by the SIFE Leadership team along with the student’s individual teachers and guidance counselors. The common denominator among these students is a weakness or inability to read or write in their native language. Teachers and guidance counselors identify students who meet this profile through an examination of report cards, educational history and student work, student parent interviews and teacher referrals. Once students are identified to enter the SIFE Team, our challenge is to find ways to teach students to read and write in English and their native language as well as to acquire content knowledge when they have limited, if any, literacy skills in any language and may also have serious affective issues as well. In order to service students who are struggling, each team has provided extra services, including mentoring, small group instruction, targeted pull-out instruction and after school tutoring. School-wide, a Saturday Academy has been established, and changes in student programs (such as an extra language arts period and math in Junior Institute) have been made. With the money from the SIFE grant, an accelerated literacy program (called Alphabetters) and a numeracy support program were implemented school-wide and met with enthusiasm by staff, students and parents. Our SIFE model has four important features: Scaffolding students’ work in regular heterogeneous classes for most of the school day by developing collaboration between the SIFE Team and content area teachers to generalize and practice newly learned skills and strategies across a variety of settings. A team teaching approach would be used in which the SIFE Team teachers plan with the content area teachers, work with SIFE students in the classroom daily to implement strategies, and also meet during team and department meetings with the content area teachers to discuss students’ work and review lessons and activities. All SIFE students are expected to attend extra before and after school program sessions and are also enrolled in our weekly Alphabetters program, which serves to enhance their literacy skills through peer mentoring. •Our SIFE Leadership Team has attended various professional development sessions and workshops, via the Internationals Network for Public Schools and in which our SIFE Team works with other schools’ SIFE teachers to develop and share best practices. • Our SIFE Leadership team has also hosted a series of Open Houses over the past four years for SIFE Teachers from throughout the city in order to share best practices among educators of SIFE as well as all ELL studentsTeachers differentiate instruction by creating leveled activity guides and supplemental activities that address the needs of our SIFE population. These activity guides stress higher order thinking without making the language demands too great. b. Instructional Plan for Newcomer ELL Students: Newcomers to the school, along with their parents, meet initially with a guidance counselor who assesses their needs and academic development during intake. All new students and their parents receive an orientation developed by the guidance staff along with the parent coordinator. All students new to the United States and to NYC are given the NYSITELL exam which assesses the students English language abilities. We also administer the Spanish LAB to all newly admitted students.For students transferring in from NYC schools test results are reviewed and students are then matched with teams of teachers who it is felt would best meet the needs of the specific student. Students are placed in appropriate classes according to their specific needs. The teachers meet in teams to discuss the specific needs of all new students. A plan is formulated to best meet the needs of each particular student. c.Instructional Plan for Developing ELLs: The plan for developing ELLs receiving service for 4-6 years consists of ongoing support and mentoring. ELLs with 4-6 years of service are placed in appropriate classes to best meet their needs for continuing English language 2018-19 CEP 62  development. Their teachers meet regularly in teams to discuss the needs of each specific students. A plan is formulated and updated regularly to meet the needs of each student. ELLs who are receiving service for 4-6 years receive a full program and receive all the same support structures as the rest of our ELL populations. Struggling ELLs who are receiving 4-6 years of service are encouraged and often mandated to avail themselves of all the extra support opportunities provided to all the students at large. This help takes the form of one-on-one mentoring, small group instruction, after school homework help, Saturday Academy as well as a variety of other activities. ELLs with 4-6 years of service are encouraged to try to take some college classes to help them to begin the transition towards college life. These ELLs meet regularly with their guidance counselor and teachers on their team to receive support and feedback to help assess in their language development. d. Instructional Plan for Long Term ELLs: The plan for long term ELLs consists of ongoing support and mentoring. Long term ELLs continue with a full program whether they are with us 5 or 6 years and retain all of the same support structures in place for the entire student population. Struggling long term ELLs are encouraged to take advantage of all extra help opportunities provided to the students at large. This extra help takes the form of one-on-one mentoring, small group instruction, after school homework help, writing center as well as a variety of other activities. Whenever possible long term ELLs are encouraged to begin taking college classes to help them to begin the transition towards college life. International High School long term ELLs regularly begin taking remedial college classes. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? We believe ELL-SWDs should be held to the same rigor and standards as our general education students. In order to guarantee that our ELL-SWDs have access to the same curriculum as our general education students we focus on differentiating our classroom activities and unit projects to insure all students with disabilities are able to complete assignments on time. For students with learning disabilities, for example, who have a difficult time focusing, our Students with Disabilities Team customizes the classroom assignments of each ELL-SWDs with colorful visuals, additional examples and models, as well as technological aids online video tutorials links. Our ELL-SWDs are also supported in their learning of English by reinforcing their native home language first. Research has shown that by building up our students fluency in their home language helps students merge their culture fluidly with our school culture. The guidance counselor, Assistant Principal and Special Education teacher review all IEPs for ELL-SWDs to ensure that all IEP mandates are being met and to ensure that the ELL-SWD student receives the appropriate program in the least restrictive environment. After reviewing the mandates of the IEP, the full team of teachers meet with the Special Education teacher to discuss specific instructional strategies that would prove valuable to the growth of the ELL-SWD student and follow the mandates of the IEP. The team along with the guidance counselor, Assistant Principal and Special Education teacher ensure that all of the mandates in the IEP are carried out. If additional support is needed the student is provided with additional support services as per the IEP. The ELL-SWD students who may have learning needs undiagnosed in their home country, have been here a short time and are only beginning to learn English, and/or have experienced serious disruptions and inadequacies in their earlier academic preparation are addressed by creating instructional opportunities geared to their needs. Students with Individualized Education Plans (IEPs) receive full support from the instructional teams to which they belong. Those students are included in mainstream classes, and receive additional services in language, counseling, and adaptive physical education. In biweekly meetings, the teachers of our instructional teams meet to review the progress of these and other students. Teams of teachers along with the guidance counselors meet regularly throughout the semester to review the progress of each student in accordance with their specific IEP. Some of the specific instructional strategies for ELLs depending on the requirements of their specific IEPs include: Teachers, guidance counselors and Special Education teacher meet regularly to discuss the individual needs of the ELL-SWD student. Once students have been identified as ELL-SWD and a program has been established following the mandates of their IEP, the challenge is to find ways to teach the student the skills they require while also teaching the student to read, write and speak English and acquire content knowledge when they may have limited, if any academic skills, have specific disabilities as described in their IEP and may have serious affective issues as well. In order to service the ELL-SWD student in the least restrictive environment students are mainstreamed into the regular academic class and each team provides extra services: including one-on-one work with a paraprofessional, small group instruction and after school tutoring. School-wide, a Saturday 2018-19 CEP 63  Academy has been established, and changes in student programs are made to allow the student time to meet with the necessary special service provider depending on the students specific needs. Other strategies include scaffolding students’ work in the regular heterogeneous classes for most of the school day by developing collaboration between the Special Education teacher or service provider and the content area teachers. A team teaching approach would be used in which the Special Education teacher plans with the content area teachers to map out strategies an best practices and to access the students strengths and area which still need improvement. If necessary, ELL-SWD students are expected to attend extra after school tutoring sessions and are also enrolled in Saturday Academy, and our weekly Alphabetters program which serves to enhance their literacy skills through peer 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? The Pan American International High School at Monroe uses a variety of curricular, instructional and scheduling flexibility to meet the diverse needs of ELL-SWDs to attain their IEP goals within the least restrictive environment. Once students are identified ELL-SWDs our challenge is to find ways to teach students according to the mandates of their IEPs in the least restrictive setting. The team would meet with our Special Education teacher or service provider, depending on the needs of that student’s particular IEP, in order to determine the best instructional strategies to meet the needs to that student according to their IEP. In order to service students who are struggling, each team has provided extra services: including one-on-one work with a paraprofessional, small group instruction, and after school tutoring. School-wide, a Saturday Academy has been established, and changes in student programs (such as an extra language arts period and math period) have been made. Curriculum has been adapted to enable those students to succeed, by expanding the time available to team members to work with them individually, and by using the resources of paraprofessionals and guidance counselors, they are supported in meeting the graduation certification requirements. Our plan maintains that our future students with IEPs will receive additional academic assistance in accordance with the particular needs of their individualized IEPs.At our school we specifically schedule interdisciplinary meetings. Our Teacher of Students with Disabilities, meets with and plans with each interdisciplinary team to ensure students with disabilities are receiving the proper scaffolds and differentiation needed to succeed academically while achieving their IEP goals and attaining English proficiency. We also believe in providing our students with disabilities, who are also English language learners, with the least restrictive environment within activities. What this means is, we do not believe in providing the same repetitive graphic organizer or highlighter, we truly ask ourselves as a community, what do we want our ELL-SWDs to learn from each lesson. Our next question is also how restrictive is this approach and how can we free our students from classroom constraints. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. All of our targeted intervention programs are geared towards supporting all of our ELL subgroups; teachers running these programs implement the “Internationals Approach” in all of them: • Alphabetters: specially addresses instruction in second language acquisition to improve literacy performance through new vocabulary learning, pronunciation, read-out loud, oral practice through conversation and discussion, and sentence structure, facilitated by peer mentors. This class will target Entering and Emerging level students to help them improve both their English and Spanish literacy. • Numeracy: specially addresses instruction in math numeracy as well as in second language acquisition to improve math literacy performance through classroom discussion of mathematical concepts and word problems, vocabulary learning, pronunciation and oral practice through conversation and discussion. This class will target Entering and Emerging level students to help them improve on the Integrated Algebra/Algebra I (Common Core) Regents, as well as increase their English and Spanish Literacy. • Before/After School Tutoring: content area teachers in Social Studies, the students native language, English, Math and Science. Content area teachers in Social Studies, English, Math and Science provide support to students in all sub-groups in small group settings for one to two hours per week. Although all students may avail themselves of Before/After School tutoring the main ELL sub-groups which are targeted are the SIFE students, Newcomers and ELL-SWD students. This not only includes students who are having difficulties with their class work but also provides assistance for students who are working on 2018-19 CEP 64  their Senior graduation portfolio projects which include their Social Studies research paper, Spanish project, Math project, Science project, English literary essay, and Art project, as well as their Mastery Statement. These classes are taught by licensed pedagogues in the content area. Native language support is provided to students in all of the above mentioned intervention programs through the use of bilingual pedagogues, guidance counselors and peer mentors who share a common native language (Spanish). In addition, bilingual dictionaries and multi-lingual computer software are utilized. • Saturday Academy: classes will meet beginning in September, through mid June, from 8:30 a.m. to 12:30 P.M. Literacy and numeracy classes will be targeted to Entering and Emerging level students only; Transitioning and Expanding level students will be given targeted instruction in content-area classes. Certified ESL teachers along with content area teachers will provide supplemental instruction in alignment with the New York City and New York State content and performance standards. Instruction will focus on developing skills in both English and Math Literacy using English acquisition through new vocabulary learning, oral practice through discussions, and journal writing. These strategies will help students achieve higher scores on the NYSESLAT. • Mentoring: all Senior students at all levels - Entering, Emerging, Transitioning and Expanding - are assigned a teacher mentor to support them through the final graduation portfolio process. Teachers work with small groups of students (3 - 5 each) to identify areas in which students need additional support and ensure that all six graduation projects are completed satisfactorily. Students meet with their assigned mentor teacher bimonthly, from September to June, for 2.5 hours on Friday afternoons. • Year Book: this club will improve literacy skills and performance of Transitioning and Expanding level students through English language development through hands-on, activity-based sessions with student discussion, writing text & captions, and designing layouts and proofing and editing all written work. Thus, students’ English language development is enhanced. Students will publish annual school year book in the spring. • Student Community Opportunities: ELL students at all levels - Entering, Emerging, Transitioning and Expanding - are invited to participate in various school- and community-based activities, including Student Government, the Environmental Club, the Senior Activities Committee and Internationals sports tournaments. Additionally, all 11th grade students complete 100 hours of community service via an Internship program, which is supported by the school’s Service Learning Community Associate. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Based on data trends, regents results, particularly in respect to the English Common Core exam, as well as the formative and summative assessments mentioned earlier, our school has decided to create a supplemental writing class in the 11th grade to support our ELLs need to have more expsoure to low stakes writing opportunities. Also, we are starting a student mentoring program this year that will consist of 12th graders mentoring incoming 9th and 10th graders and provide them with both socio-emotional support at well as academic support. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? N/A 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. Since approximately 99% of our students are ELLs and the remainder are former ELLs, all school programs are “equal access.” In addition to the support and intervention services listed in the answer to question five of this section, we have the after-school classes and clubs, which, while they may not all be “academic” in theme, all of them are designed to continue students’ language development through activities incorporating listening, speaking, reading, and writing of English: • Alphabetters • SAT Prep. Classes • Student Government • Environmental Club • Senior Activities Committee All ELLs and former ELLs are invited to participate in the above listed activities at the time that they register for classes each year. Since 100% of our students are either ELLs or former ELLs the representation by ELLs in all of our school programs is substantial. 2018-19 CEP 65  In addition, Transitioning and Expanding level ELLs are invited and encouraged to take college-level courses via the College Now program, and all students are given the opportunity to take the four AP- and college-level courses offered at our school: AP Spanish Language, AP Spanish Literature, AP English Literature and a dual-enrollment geoscience course via SUNY Oneonta. Students are given information in their advisory classes, gym teachers distribute information on all sports teams within the school building. Team leaders are responsible for distributing information to their teams. Students are given translated forms to complete to have access to our Urban Helth Clinic and health care. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. It is the philosophy of the school that classroom teachers are the most knowledgeable as to what instructional supplies will benefit the ELL students from all ELL sub-groups in their content area classes. Teachers work in teams to order classroom supplies for the ELL students they have in common. The teachers, in consultation with their colleagues on their team as well as with the schools’ SIFE Team and guidance counselors, determine which classroom supplies would be most beneficial to the students in all of the school’s sub-groups. Each teacher team selects the instructional material they feel will work best for the needs of their individual students. This helps to best meet the needs of all of our students in the individual sub-groups within our school. Each team shares equally in the school’s NYSTL funds and chooses for itself how they wish to spend their allotment of funds to best serve their individual students in all of their content area classes. Teachers and students in all ELL subgroups have access to a huge array of novels, textbooks, non-fiction texts, and bilingual dictionaries, as well an extensive collection of native language books and literature. All of the materials are available to all ELL subgroups. Teachers are encouraged to attend ENL conferences to share information regarding various texts as well as other teaching aids; in addition, our teachers work collaboratively to create their own instructional materials. Teachers utilize computer software, maps, and the Internet as well as various other forms of technology which helps to maximize instruction in all content areas and within all subgroups. Teachers in all content areas have access to class sets of laptop computers with Internet access; additionally, all 11th and 12th grade students are issued a school-owned laptop computer that they may use as a “personal” computer (in and out of school) for the academic year. Every student in the school is issued a school email address and Google Drive account; consequently, students are able to use a variety of cloud-based computer programs to share the results of group projects or individual research. Teachers have made use of library book funds provided by the school to create mobile classroom libraries with books that are more accessible and more appealing to ELLs as well as all the other subgroups of students within our school. Instructional teams (both grade level and departmental) have amassed a compendium of book lists, articles on literacy, and reading programs that are available for reference by all school staff. All content areas develop activity guides which include specific scaffolds and activities to differentiate for beginner, intermediate, and advanced English language learners so that they are properly supported and challenged. Teachers also utilize the Promethean Board to insure visuals, routines, models, interactions, and larger text which support learning and language acquisition. All content areas also include native language support in their activity guides which promotes translanguaging. Our Humanities departments (Spanish, Social Studies, and English) and Math/Science departments align curriculum (activity guides) thematically and based on outcomes by grade level so that the repetition of academic vocabulary and ideas encourage second language acquisition and higher order thinking skills. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Home language support is mainly assessed in the NLA and algebra classes. All our students participate in our language development/ENL program. All of our classes use the native language to support learning. As described above, the locus of control over language use resides with our students and they use both English and their native languages to discover and develop content. All students take a native language literature class every year, to support students in developing their native language to the greatest extent possible. Students are supported by peers, community partners, family members and/or school personnel. Native language skills are a valued aspect of all subject area classes. Students are required to complete a Native Language project as one component of their graduation portfolio - a formal Literary Essay (assessed using the same rubric as the English Literary Essay) analyzing a piece (or pieces) of Spanish literature The bilingual algebra teachers and native language arts teachers communicate with the rest of their grade teams to inform the other content teachers on student home language progress. Language in content teachers use bilingual syllabi, 2018-19 CEP 66  translanguanging, cognates, project based learning, heterogeneous groupings and activity guides in classes to help support the use of L1 to develop L2. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Grade level teacher teams align each unit thematically and with targeted content, language, and skill outcomes to promote trans-languaging, transferring skills and academic vocabulary and ideas within their humanities classes and their math/science classes. When planning and designing curriculum, teachers refer to the ESL standards and Common Core standards to assure that grade level expectations are met within the unit. Our instructional teams meet regularly to ensure that required services and supports correspond to ELLs’ age and grade levels. All of the required services for high school-aged ELLs are available to students. We use a wide array of resources in our school, including teacher-made materials, text books on a range of levels, trade books at many reading levels, and a large variety of non-text hands-on materials. In addition, our school has wireless access in all classrooms and students use the Internet to access resources. If a teacher or instructional team is having problems locating published materials that are appropriate to the age of the ELLs they teach, then the instructional teams work together to create and/or adapt material which will be appropriate for the age level of the ELL. Our teachers understand the importance of utilizing materials and resources for the ELLs’ appropriate age level in order to keep them engaged in learning. In addition, instructional teams are encouraged to attend professional development workshops throughout the year to access and develop age- and grade-level appropriate content, in order to help them better meet the needs of the ELLs in their classrooms. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Pan American International High School at Monroe shares space with three other high schools. The vast majority of after-school support services offered to ELLs are tailored to each school’s unique population, and so are necessarily managed “in-house”. However, all students who attend classes at the James Monroe campus have access to the LYFE Center (an on-site day care center for the children of students enrolled at campus schools) and the campus Urban Health clinic. Weekly principals meeting supports the facilitation of sharing resources such as the gym and cafeteria to ensure our ELL students academic needs are met. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Enrollment happens on a rolling basis throughout the school year. Students meet with parent coordinator and guidance councilor before entering in classes to address the model of the school. Sinced we are 98% ELL school majorily newcomers, the structure entire structure of the school assists newly enrolled ELLs. Prior to the school year new ELL students are assigned to attend an introductory orientation session at the beginning of the school year. Students receive a tour of the school facilities and take part in ice breaker activities in an effort to become more comfortable with the high school environment. During that orientation testing coordinator assess the new students’ English language abilities as well as their native language (Spanish ) abilities. During this time SIFE students are also assessed in their native language abilities and numeracy skills. The parent coordinator along with the guidance counselors provide helpful tips for parents and their children in order to help their transition. New students are assigned to heterogeneous teams. The new students are paired with more experienced students who are responsible for escorting them to class and lunch, making sure they know how to get home, explaining school rules and customs, and acting as their translator and advocate in class. During this time a meeting is held with the parents of incoming ELLs to provide them with an understanding of the resources available to them at the school as well as within the community. Many similar activities take place when ELL students enroll throughout the school year. When a new student enrolls they meet with their guidance counselor and parent coordinator to receive a one to one orientation to the school and the community. Just as with the students who began in September, students who enroll throughout the year are paired with more experienced students who are responsible for escorting them to class and lunch, making sure they know how to get home, explaining school rules and customs, and acting as their translator and advocate in class. Every effort is made to help newly enrolled ELLs to be fully integrated into the school community. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? 2018-19 CEP 67  Pan American International High School at Monroe awards eight high school credits in the student’s native language as per Part 100 of Commissioner’s Regulations NYS, Section 100.5. which is based on students previous language experience in their native country plus the completion of a native language project as a part of their graduation portfolio. Additionally, students have the opportunity to obtain college language credit by taking the AP Spanish Language and Literature exams (offered in the 11th and 12th grade, respectively). Additionally, Art elective is taught by a teacher who is triple certified in Fine Arts/ESL/ELA. Her curriculum is structured in a way that allows students to practice language while receiving art class that covers core visual art standards. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? PD series that has been given to all ELL personnel which are all pedaguges at our school is - Internationals Network for Public Schools Scaffolding Series Overarching Concepts: • Scaffolding is not about "dumbing down" material, but about providing supports that allow students to achieve above their current performance level. • Some form of scaffolding is almost always necessary with students (and even with adults). As students perform at increasingly higher levels, the nature and quantity of scaffolding changes. • Teachers should "lower the cognitive burden" on their students by introducing new content, language, or skills through activities that build on knowledge that is already familiar to students. • The Scaffolding Cycle is a framework for methodically organizing the acquisition, rehearsal, and application of new content, language and skills within project-based units; students collaborate extensively before having to demonstrate the ability to synthesize these new elements individually. • Backwards planning project-based curricula with the Scaffolding Cycle is an effective way to ensure that you as a teacher understand the content and language objectives that you want students to reach before mapping out the road students will follow to get there. Professional Development Sequence on Differentiated Outcomes, Formative Assessment and Responsive Feedback This six-part series of 2.5 hour workshops builds on participants existing understanding of the scaffolding cycle in order to focus on developing strong project units that have 1) clear outcomes with differentiated indicator criteria, 2) firmly demarcated moments of varied formative assessments throughout, and 3) distinct ideas of how both to provide effective feedback and to utilize feedback in responsive adaptations to curriculum. The series includes simulations, collaborative activities, teacher-created examples and resources, as well as ample time for individual application. 2018-19 CEP 68  2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. All of PAIHS at Monroe's PD is geared towards meeting the specific needs of an 98% ELL population. The Assistant Principal Jessica Kelly administers PD in conjunction with INPS also the NYC Writing Project administers PD on how to scaffold and differentiate for ELLs. All agendas are kept by the Assistant Principal Jessica Kelly in the Professional Development binder with all supplemental materials. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? In accordance with DOE Policy, our guidance councilors work with our parent coordinator to meet with our 450 plus ELL students's parents individually to discuss the results of their language proficiency assessment and the individual language needs of their student in all content areas throughout the year. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. As newcomers to this country, our students must learn English and navigate a new culture. In addition, immigrant families face the challenge of a language barrier in society and as parents. To support families and ensure that parents are welcomed and engaged in the school, we have taken a number of measures. First, we have a bilingual parent coordinator, a fully bilingual guidance department, and a fully bilingual support staff. In addition, the majority of teachers are bilingual. To further engage parents, we have monthly parent nights in addition to the required conferences. These are well-attended. Parents, in their native language, are welcomed into the school on a regular basis and supported with a wide variety of workshops that address topics including student safety, teen health, academic support, and college admissions and financial aid. Finally, noting that our average daily attendance rate is 88%, we have added a bilingual social worker who focuses on student and family outreach to improve attendance. The school holds annual meetings with parents of ELLs at least once a month during each school year, in addition to the four regular parent teacher conferences scheduled by the NYC DOE. At these meetings, the goals of the program, the language development process of students, the language proficiency assessment results as well as the student's language development needs in all content areas are discussed. Teachers, guidance counselors, parents, students and support staff attend these meetings. A staff member who speaks the family’s native language is available to answer any questions and address any concerns. The school has teachers working collaboratively on five interdisciplinary teams (3 JI and 2 SI) . Each of the teams meet together to discuss students' language development and content knowledge progress, language proficiency assessment results and language development needs during their biweekly forty-five minute meetings. Each interdisciplinary, grade-level team may use their biweekly team meeting time for parent involvement and outreach. Each team has at least one bilingual teacher, and the Parent Coordinator is also available in order to place phone calls to parents to schedule individual meetings. Guidance counselors also meet with parents individually over the course of the school year to discuss student credit accumulation, behavioral issues, as well as to explain and go over the transition students make from high school into college and beyond. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. N/A 2018-19 CEP 69  2018-19 CEP 70 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Bridgit Claire Bye, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 71  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Pan American International HS School DBN: 12x388 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Bridgit C. Bye Title Principal Jessica Kelly Assistant Principal Estefania Sosa Parent Coordinator Julia Caine TBD ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent Ann Starling Teacher/Subject Area Gerard Gomez Teacher/Subject Area Rona Armillas Allison Koffler-Wise Coach Coach Thomas Erickson School Counselor Kathy Pelles Jocelyn Santana Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Jocelyn Santana Mary Pollack Other Assistant Principal N/A N/A Other N/A Other N/A Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 6/27/17 6/27/17 6/27/17 6/27/17 6/27/17 6/27/17 6/27/17 6/27/17 6/27/17 6/27/17 6/27/17 6/27/17 6/27/17 6/27/17 6/27/17 2018-19 CEP 72  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 12X388 School Name: Pan American International HS at Monroe Superintendent: Kathy Rehfield-Pelles The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Jessica Estefania Clelia Kelly Sosa Nolasco AP Parent Coordinator Teacher No Yes No Yes Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Based on the Home Language Identification Survey, an appropriate and current record of adult preferred languages for written translation and oral interpretation are maintained in ATS as 100% Spanish. All written and oral correspondence between the school and students' families are provided in Spanish, which is the common native language among all parents. The majority of our school personnel including the Principal, AP, Guidance Counselors, Social Worker, Parent Coordinator, School Aide, most teachers, and secretary are bilingual or have Spanish language proficiency. All correspondence and telephone calls are in English and Spanish. 2018-19 CEP 73  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral English Spanish Italian 9 434 1 2.03 97.75 0.23 9 434 1 2.03 97.75 0.23 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to Families Parent Newsletter Every Month School Calendar Every Month Invitation for Financial Aid workshops December - January How do you plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Parent Coordinator, a native Spanish speaker, writes and disseminates newsletters in Spanish. LAC and Parent Coordinator request information from teachers and staff to include in monthly calendars. Information is requested two-weeks prior to sending out the calendar and is due one week prior to sending it out. Parent Coordinator, a native Spanish speaker, writes and disseminates calendars in Spanish. College counselor creates invitation and works with LAC and Spanish speaking guidance counselor in October to translate all information into Spanish. Principal approves invitation and it is distributed to students and mailed home in November. 2018-19 CEP 74  Planning Letter Interview (requesting conferences regarding student attendance) After 20 absences Progress Reports Every 6-8 weeks Welcome packets for families Distributed to all parents/students upon admission into school Field trip fliers and forms two weeks prior to any out-of-school activity or trip School Events and/or Meeting Announcements 1-2 weeks prior to event/meeting Promotion in Doubt Letters End of each Semester Social Worker and Guidance counselor - both native Spanish speakers - translate the letter at the beginning of the school year and use the same template to distribute to each student who is chronically absent. Teachers work in teams to translate student outcomes and comments on progress reports. Each team of teachers has, at least, two native language Spanish speakers. The documents are then created by the teams one week prior to printing out the reports, using a common template designed and translated by LAC and data specialist. Reports are distributed to students, mailed home, and shared with parents during parent-teacher conferences. The majority of documents/handouts within packets are already pre-translated into Spanish by DOE. Any document within the packet that requires translation is translated by the parent coordinator and/or a Spanish native language teacher. The DOE Spanish template of the permission slip is used for all out-of-school activities. Teachers work in teams to complete the trip information on the permission slip and all other trip fliers/forms. Each team of teachers has, at least, two native language Spanish speakers. Completed forms are submitted to principal for approval at least two weeks prior to distributing them to students. Parent Coordinator, LAC, and native Spanish speaking teacher(s) create and translate all necessary announcements 1 week prior to printing and distribution. ATS provides a Spanish version of this letter to send out. The teacher teams also work together to create a more specific version of this letter, indicating to parents and students the particular outcomes and subject areas that the student is struggling with. The team created letter is developed by native Spanish speaking teachers. 2018-19 CEP 75  2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Open School Night September PTA SLT Every month Every month Parent Teacher Conferences At least 4 times a year, or more (as needed) College Information Sessions At least 4 times a year Enrollment Interviews Ongoing interpretation service(s)? Parent Coordinator and student volunteers welcome families and give initial information. Parents are divided into teams, and each team has at least 2 native Spanish speakers to help translate during the course of the meeting. Parent coordinator, counselor(s), and AP plan and facilitate meetings in both English and Spanish. Student volunteers, as well as Spanish speaking teachers, also help to provide translation services. Principal, AP, and Parent Members plan and facilitate meetings in both English and Spanish. Student volunteers, as well as Spanish speaking teachers and English speaking parents also help to provide translation services. Teacher teams conference with students and parents to discuss academic and/or behavioral progress of student(s). Each team has, at least, 2 native Spanish speaking teachers to provide translation. When the conference involves behavioral issues, the guidance counselor and/or social worker - also Spanish speakers - participate, as well. Spanish speaking guidance counselor attends all meetings to provide translation services All students and parents meet with Principal and/or AP, Parent Coordinator, Guidance Counselor, and/or Social worker during the Enrollment process. Each of these staff members is Spanish speaking and has no need for translation services. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. 2018-19 CEP 76  The school's Crisis Intervention Team consists of a native Spanish speaking teacher as the Communication Coordinator who is responsible for incoming/outgoing phone calls; reviewing the telephone logs; and monitoring all visitors entering the building. The assistant chair to the Crisis Team Leader is also a Spanish speaking guidance counselor who helps to oversee all team functions, including communication with staff, families, community partners, etc. The Staff Notification Coordinator and Counseling Coordinator are also native Spanish speakers. The Parent Coordinator and Spanish speaking staff members are also utilized by the Crisis Team Leader to reach out to families in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Pan American International High School at Monroe has experienced bilingual staff who have been providing translation services for all forms of communication since the school opened. All translation services are provided by in-house school staff. An in-house PD will be given at the beginning of the school year to ensure that all staff is aware of Chancellor's Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to them within the school. T&I Brochure, Language ID card, and Language Palm Card will be distributed at the meeting. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) At Pan American International High School at Monroe all documents for parents, including the Parents Bill of Rights and Parents' Guide to Language Access, are provided in Spanish and English. All meetings with parents are conducted with Spanish speaking staff members present. Welcome posters are posted in the main office as well as the Parent Coordinator's office. Language ID Guides are made available in the main office and at the security desk. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? At Pan American International High School at Monroe parents are offered the opportunity to take English classes during our Tuesday, Thursday, and Saturday Parent Program. The class is taught by a bilingual pedagogue who also gathers feedback on the quality of services. In addition, our parent coordinator makes phone calls to gather any additional information. 2018-19 CEP 77  During our annual meetings with parents the school staff welcomes parents to share their questions and concerns. The school also collects data from the Learning Environmental Parent Survey results. Every effort is made to provide the best services to our parent community. 2018-19 CEP 78 
