2018-19 SCHOOL COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (SCEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 10X390 School Name: M.S. 390 Principal: ROBERT MERCEDES 2018-19 SCEP-P 1  School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Section 4: SCEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) Section 7: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 8: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 9: Title I Program Information Section 10: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 SCEP-P 2  Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Number (DBN): 10x390 718 583-5556 Fax: Email Address: rmerced@schools.nyc.gov School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Middle School 390 TBI Grades 6-8 1930 Andrews Avenue 718 583-5502 Phone Number: Robert W. Mercedes School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Robert W. Mercedes Julio Marte Maria Villalobos GuillerminaCeballos Aura Vasquez Melissa Mora Gabriel Oberhofer Geraldine Chico Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Nadia Sobhan District Information Geographical District: 10 Superintendent’s Office Address: Maribel Torres Hulla Superintendent: 1 Fordham Plaza Bronx NY 10458 mhulla@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-741-5852 Phone Number: 718-329-8030 Fax: 2018-19 SCEP-P 3  Bronx FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Field Support Center (FSC) Jose Ruiz Executive Director: 1 FordhamPlaza, Bronx NY 10458 jruiz2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-828-7776 Phone Number: 718-828-6280 Fax: 2018-19 SCEP-P 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the SCEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Robert Mercedes Julio Marte Maria Villalobos Raphael Ortiz Aura Vasquez Melissa Mora Gabriel Oborhofer Geraldine Chico N/A Nadia Sobhan Rosa Diaz *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Elected Parent 2018-19 SCEP-P 5 Signature (Blue Ink) Name ElisDuran Angela Abreu Virginia Pou Guillermina Ceballos Raphael Ortiz JustoSoto Joel Nieves Joel NIeves Patricia Triviño ElibanesaDuran Position and Constituent Group Represented Member/ Elected Parent Member/ Elected Parent Member/ Elected Parent Guidance Counselor Social Worker/Student Support Technology Specialist Member Member Member Member Member 2018-19 SCEP-P 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) is a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. The process of developing and implementing the SCEP is aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding SCEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department has established programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students supports to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and SCEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint for continuous improvement that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to increase student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five (5) goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 SCEP-P 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. Accountability Tools and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is informed by the New York State Education Department’s (NYSED) Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) Tenets, the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Rubric, School Quality Guide and other quantitative and qualitative data tools. NYSED’s Six DTSDE Tenets To strengthen the existing system, the NYSED has developed a tool that captures the best practices from each of the current tools called the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness. This new tool encompasses multiple instruments such as interviews, classroom observations and surveys. The protocol will begin with a clear and cogent statement of the optimal conditions of an effective school and the instruments comprising the protocol will measure how close or far away a particular school is to the optimal conditions identified. Once reviewed, the school and district will create a strategic plan to address the areas in need of improvement. All current Priority and Focus Schools and Focus Districts must use the tool; districts that are required to submit District Comprehensive Improvement Plans and Comprehensive Educational Plans also will use the tool. The DTSDE protocol includes a rubric, which identifies clear and coherent expectations of the optimal conditions of an effective school and school district across the following six tenets:  Tenet 1: District Leadership and Capacity  Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions  Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support  Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions  Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health, and  Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 2017-18 Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: 2018-19 SCEP-P 8  Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) I. II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Structures for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the SCEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the SCEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. Next Steps for SCEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: In Part 1A of the Section 5: Needs Assessment indicate the Statement of Practice (SOP) from the DTSDE Tenets that will be addressed in the action plan. Schools that received an Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) School Review should use the recommendations from the review to select their SOPs. Schools that did not undergo an IIT review should select SOPs informed by the major findings/recommendations from your most recent Quality Review (QR) or Central-led Review (CLR), and other qualitative and quantitative data.  Step 4: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you 2018-19 SCEP-P 9  monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 5: Build consensus around activities, strategies and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 6: Step 6: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 7: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 2018-19 SCEP-P 10  Section 4: SCEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Our mission is to provide a structured, safe and supportive environment where students, parents and staff will exhibit ”Inspiring Greatness" attitude in a culturally rich environment which will foster and develop the potential of each student through questioning, probing and researching. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Middle School 390 is located in the South western corner of Community School District Ten in the Bronx. The building is shared with two other schools, P.S. 396, a Pre-K-5 school and P10 a District 75 program. MS 390 is housed in a three (3) winged building on Andrews Avenue with a current student population is 535. The student population is comprised of 85 percent of Hispanics, 13 percent Africans/African Americans, 1 percent Asian and 1 percent White. Twenty – eight percent of our students are classified as Students With Disabilities, and twenty - seven percent are English as New Learners. The school serves students who live within the University Heights and neighboring communities. MS 390 is a middle school 6-8 offering General Education, Dual Language, Bilingual, STEM oriented and Special Education programs and the ongoing use of technology to ensure digital equity so that students are prepared for the demands of the 21st century. As a community, it is our belief that students learn best via opportunities to engage in collaborative work/study, class discussions, student-led inquiry processes and quality production of student work and work products. Strategic Collaborations/Partnerships and or special initiatives being Implemented to accomplish MS 390 mission:  Learning Partners Program - MS 390 serves as a Host school - working collaboratively with IS 206, Leaders of Tomorrow and Mott Haven Academy.  4th year of the Dual Language Program implementation in a 6th, 7th and 8th grade class. In addition to the Honors Track Program 6-8 grades and Regents Prep program in 8th grade. School Administration Manager program (SAM)- tracks time spent on instruction by the school principal.   Middle School Quality Initiative - Socratic Seminar, Reciprocal Reading, Word Generation (Selected Classes) LightSail Reading program including an on-site literacy coach once a week.  Partnership with Expeditionary Learning Education: Expeditionary Learning Coaches focus on-Learning Targets and Teachers and Students Checking for understanding- common assessments.  Generation Ready- ELA, Science and Math consultants support teachers in customizing learning for the students while providing on-site professional development.  Academic Parent Teacher Team (APTT)- teachers build parent capacity while providing them with the necessary tools to practice at home the skill their child needs to improve on.  Extra Curricular activities (After school) through DreamYard- Performing Arts: band, chorus, poetry, drama, varied dance and Kapura Martial Arts. In addition to, visual arts and sports. Liberty Partnership Program- Bronx Community College   Outstanding Chess Program-8th place nationwide Strong Family-Community Ties: MS 390 has:  Developed long standing partnerships with key organizations to strengthen the home school connection as well as to develop students’ social emotional well-being. We currently partner with ASTOR Mental Health, Juntos-Cornell University, St. Barnabas Hospital, Lehman College  Continued to use Pupilpath to keep parents/families and students informed of student progress  Continued to invite guest speakers to address families around their key issues of concern. 2018-19 SCEP-P 11  Continued to ensure the school's guidance counselors and social workers hold parent meetings to inform them and take them step by step through the High School admission process  Continued to strengthen relationships with public servants that provide resources to parents/families around key issues such as housing, health etc. at school meetings  Continued to provide families with bi-weekly workshops on key topics of their interest  Continued to maintain an on- site health clinic staffed by Morris Heights Clinic  Maintained an open door policy for parents Supportive Environment: MS 390 has: Implemented Social Emotional Learning Core Competencies into the school program and culture   An ongoing RTI: Response to Intervention team and tiered academic and behavioral supports for at-risk students and families in need  Additional enrichment activities/programs that support student social-emotional such as: Boys and Girls Basketball Teams, Orchestra, band, Arts programming, Dreamyard Partnership,(Arts), PBL (athletic partnerships and opportunities), active Student Government, Chess tournaments etc.   Student Peer Mediation on-going Implemented the use of Restorative Justice Practices through "The Leader in Me" program - The 7 Habits of Highly Effective People.  Experienced a decline in the number of high level infractions/incidents at the school Effective Leadership: Implementation of the Honors Program  Continued Learning Partner collaboration- Host School   Engaged in ongoing attendance at monthly meetings with the principal  Attendance key conferences ex: SAM with focus on improving time management and organization with a focus on instruction Secure grants   Ongoing infusion of technology for students and staff to maintain state of the art instructional practices-One-to-one I-pads and laptops student match  Ongoing study of Covey 7 habits of Effective Leader through The Leader in Me series 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. MS 390's goal is to provide a supportive learning environment for all students with specific emphasis on students with disabilities and English as a New Language students, so that each potential can be developed fully. Thus, these students with language deficiency and/or lack of literacy and numeracy skills as revealed by school data-NYSESLAT and IEP goals, can aspire to "Greatness." •Rigorous Instruction: MS 390 implements a research-based curricula (Expeditionary Learning and Engage NY) in the quest to support students in the development of higher order thinking skills and the capacity to understand content that is complex 2018-19 SCEP-P 12  and challenging. MS 390 pedagogues created collaboratively a curriculum pacing calendar and Module Visualizers to scaffold instruction to meet student needs, share resources among teachers and hold teachers and students accountable for rigorous and engaging instruction. Collaborative Teachers: MS 390 has:  Scheduled weekly teacher team meetings- structured collaborations with a focus on the analysis of student work using protocols such as, Tuning, Atlas, Final Word, etc.  Teachers continue to engage in structured inquiry, monitoring the progress of English Language Learners and Students with Disabilities. This strategic work began through the Chancellor's initiative of the Learning Partners Program; a learning focus area, cycles of learning and change ideas guided the work on improving best teaching practices for ELLs.  Grade Teacher Teams engage in group study and planning around the effective implementation of Reciprocal Reading, Socratic Seminar and instructional technology. Effective Leadership: Implementation of Dual Language Program  Continued Learning Partner collaboration   Engaged in ongoing attendance at monthly principal meetings  Attendance a key conferences ex: SAM with focus on improving time management and organization   Ongoing infusion of technology for students and staff to maintain state of the art instructional practices  Ongoing study of 7 habits of Effective Leader through The Leader in Me program. Secure grants to fund new initiatives 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Key Areas of Focus for this School Year: Rigorous Instruction: MS 390 will continue modifying the module visualizers for each module to better address student needs and customize learning while providing students multiple access points to the curriculum. In addition to, planning for effective strategies for teachers and students to check for understanding and creating effective formative and Summative assessments to guide instruction. Furthermore, based on current NYSESLAT and math data, MS 390 will to focus on continuing to decrease the number of level ones in both these subjects. In addition, MS 390 formative, Summative and standardized data reveals that our Students with Disabilities and English Language Learners are not yet meeting the yearly target. Therefore, additional curricular and instructional adjustments will be made to meet the needs of these sub groups. Specific needs for these subgroups are rooted in poor literacy and mathematical skills that prevent them from acquiring the targeted Common Core Learning Standards.· Finally, teacher and peer feedback using the language of the Danielson's Framework rubric to highlight promising practices and guide teacher goal setting process. 2018-19 SCEP-P 13  Collaborative Teachers: MS 390 will continue to strengthen structured teacher collaborations with a focus on the analysis of student work that results in teacher instructional adjustments and engaging differentiated instructional practices to meet the needs of a diverse group of learners. In addition, teachers will engage in collaborations that will expand teacher instructional practices to include varied teaching styles that will address students’ multiple intelligences. Supportive Environment: Creating and sustaining supportive environment in classroom, a school community is vital to the success of both pedagogues and students. MS 390 will continue to implement programs such as the 7 Habits for Highly Effective Teens, to foster students' development and challenge students to take risks and strengthen students’ personal and academic behaviors that prepare students for college and careers. Moreover, there will be a continued focus on the development and use of restorative justice strategies that support students in strengthening their self-regulation skills. Strong Family/Community Ties: MS 390 has been most successful in this area. Therefore, we will continue to intensify our partnerships and collaborations so students and families may also continue to strengthen the home-school connection. In addition, MS 390 will continue to bolster communication streams for students and families via the use of Academic Parent Teacher Team meeting, Pupilpath, LightSail, Progress Reports that will ensure all stakeholders remain informed of students’ ongoing progress. Effective Leadership: The school leader and administrative team will continue to engage in learning via our Learning Partner collaboration, monthly Principal’s meetings, Professional conferences and ongoing study of Covey’s 7 Habits of Effective leaders. 2018-19 SCEP-P 14  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 10X390 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 05,06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 539 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual YES Dual Language YES Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 39 40 13 4 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 10 7 5 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 98.0% % Attendance Rate 96.1% % Reduced Lunch 29.7% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.0% 86.5% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 0.2% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 19.09 6% 27% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 31.7% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YSH N/A NO YSH Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A NO N/A N/A NO High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Yes N/A 75 74 93.3% 2.6% 25.0% 12.8% 0.6% 0.0% 6 42% 6 22.6% 19% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No YES N/A N/A NO YSH NO N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A YES NO N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 SCEP-P 15  2018-19 SCEP-P 16  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 3 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 3.2 The school leader ensures and supports the quality implementation of a systematic plan of rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of students. Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction (DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and address student achievement needs. The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. 3.3 3.4 3.5 SOP(s) Addressed X X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. MS 390’s effective trends as indicated in the PPO report conducted for the school year 2016-2017 are as follow: · Expeditionary Learning research based ELA curriculum aligned to CCLS · Periodic Assessments (DRP and Benchmarks) administered three times a year. · Implementation of questioning and classroom discussion techniques based on DOK levels- Some teachers formulate and incorporate pre-planned questions in instructional activities based on DOK levels 3 and 4. · Word Generation (Interdisciplinary Curriculum)-6th and 7th Grade · LightSail (Reading Program) across the school · Access Code (Builds phonics and phonemic awareness skills for ELLS) 2018-19 SCEP-P 17  · Reciprocal Reading · ELA/Math/Science Socratic Seminar- Student-Led discussions in some classes · Project Based Learning in some classes · Math - Engage NY curriculum Need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan: In order for the instructional strategies and practices to be aligned with the concepts in Tenet 3, and the Framework for Great Schools element - rigorous instruction- the school should expand collaboratively planning with a focus on differentiation among content teachers based on past and recent data trends for SWDs and ELLs. Our lntegrated Team Review (IIT), Progress Report, Spring DRP and the current Skills Analysis breakdown from the NYS Spring ELA exams, our English Language Learners and Students with Disabilities trends remain constant for analysis of across content areas as well as vocabulary. ~ Instructional plans should focus on the learning target, which delineates what students should know or be able to do by the end of the instructional period and activities for achieving the target within the class time period. ~ Teachers should include in their lesson plans how technology will be used to enhance the lesson through existing programs- LightSail, MathSpace and School4One. ~ Assess and reflect how instruction is impacting student achievement- ongoing checks for understanding, including an exit activity to assess overall learning. ~ Flexible Groupings that will reflect targeted strategies based on student data ~ Differentiated/Tiered Instruction - Consistent Response To Intervention Service ~ Uniformity/consistency in student portfolios for students and teachers to monitor growth ~ Evidence of Data-driven instruction (LightSail, Periodic and Formative Assessments ) Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, our teachers will effectively increase the level of rigor across classes, as evidenced by a 5% decrease in the number of students scoring a level one and a 10% increase in proficiency levels on NYS assessments in ELA/Mathematics. 2018-19 SCEP-P 18 Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) All students September to June 2019 Administrators, ELA/Social Studies Teachers and Literacy coaches Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). The school will utilize the use of module visualizers that will facilitate differentiated instruction in content, process and product for all students. Expeditionary Learning - Provides more structured support in the areas of building background knowledge and learning experiences into reading/writing that require effort and tenacity by students to focus on quality rich tasks/entry points combined with strategic inquiry to delve deeper in discussions, reciprocal reading and debating in selected units through the use of protocols. Also, high interest open ended questions that will improve ELLS AND SWDs discussion techniques and skills across content. Expeditionary Learning will provide common core aligned curricular enhancements to core classes that will engage students and challenge them to improve their learning. Curriculum Planning Team- Through a collaborative approach, literacy teachers will develop the scope and sequence of our core curriculum (Expeditionary Learning with intentional areas of science and social studies, mathematics) scaffolding instruction and multiple entry points for all students. 6-8 Literacy Teachers July to December 2018 Administrators, Literacy Coaches, and Grade Leaders Literacy Coach to provide teacher trainings, model lessons, provide feedback on pedagogical practices and support the development of teacher teams. Generation Ready will provide our school with support to help realize our SIG goals and implement our key strategies. Supports will include, professional development sessions and job embedded coaching. Generation Ready will support our schools ability to improve pedagogical practices, allow for multiple entry points in to the curriculum, support literacy, integrate the common core and make curricula adjustments when needed. 2018-19 SCEP-P 19  ENL Teachers will use Access Code/Word Generation - to provide basic phonics, phonemic awareness skills and vocabulary for our ELLs. Special Education Teachers will utilize the Word Generation/Wilson's Reading Program/ multi-modal representation strategies to address the needs of SWDs. Guided Reading Teacher-to support struggling readers who are well below grade level and supported by an Individualized Education Plan. This person will pull students out as well as push into classes and provide training to teachers of their students on adjusting curriculum to meet their needs. Engaging Family - Families of ELLs and SWDs will be invited to curriculum night that focuses on Questioning and discussion techniques. Parents and family will watch video clips and discuss elements/criteria of the rubric to move conversation and develop skills. In addition, Juntos will monitor PupilPath online record keeping system, and liaise with parents about students performance, and how best they can work together to improve learning outcomes ELLs and SWDs September to June 2019 ESL/Bilingual, Special Education Teachers and Administrators ELLs, SWDs September to June 2019 ESL/Bilingual, Special Education Teachers and Administrators 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. The principal, Student Support Based team and instructional team will meet with the parents on a monthly basis to discuss the current academic student data and common core aligned activities to enhance parents' understanding of rigor to support their chidren at home. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. MS 390 will utilize Tax Levy funds to support Common Planning Time (content focus) , and coordination of after School and Saturday professional learning cycles around the implementation of school-wide Socratic Seminar. Ms 390 will also utilize Consultants/Instructional Coaches/Model teachers to lead classroom demonstration. MS 390 will 2018-19 SCEP-P 20  utilize augment the school schedule to provide teachers with the opportunity to debrief and plan future cycles of learning. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded X P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 100% of the staff will engage in assessing the effectiveness of differentiated instruction using a tracking sheet with a range of 1-5 ( levels of comprehension, lexile level, interventions) to monitor the progress of all students including SWDs and ENLs in both ELA and math and attaining a score of at least 3. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The instrument of measure that will be used to assess progress is a progress monitoring tracking sheet, as evidenced by student work samples, baseline, MOSLs and Formative/Summative assessments. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-P 21  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 5 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 5.2 The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. 5.3 The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students. 5.4 All school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health supports tied to the school’s vision. X 5.5 The school leader and student support staff work together with teachers to establish structures to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental health needs. SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? MS 390 Strengths: MS 390 has established systems to support students social emotional development through multiple school-wide interventions as indicated on the last Principal Performance Observation, Quality Review and Integrated Team Review in connection to the Framework for Great Schools - Supportive Environment. We provide our students with multiple opportunities to engage in personal and social development activities in and out of the classroom, such as providing ongoing targeted interventions, youth development training, peer leadership, peer mediation, conflict resolution training, health education, on going one on one and small group interventions. In addition to provide opportunity for college and career exploration, these interventions are possible through collaboration and partnership with Columbia University, Hunter College, Mercy College, Cornell University, Bronx Community College Bronx Borough President office, Morris Heights Health Center through our school based clinic, Astor Child Guidance providing school based mental health services, Saint Barnabas Hospital, and Urban Health. 2018-19 SCEP-P 22  School needs/ areas for in need of further growth: We will continue to extend additional socio-emotional support to our most behaviorally challenging students by creating additional opportunity for social skills development and by continuing to reduce the percent of high level infractions and Principal’s suspension,and increase our efforts on supporting students’ behavioral needs through the use of restorative approaches/practices. All staff, and stakeholders will continue to participate in professional development to implement and support the development of responsive circles in the classroom as a preventive and restorative practice. In addition to the implementation of practices and programs that foster overall socio-emotional growth and development (The 7 Habits of Highly Effective Teens). Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools –Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, our staff will participate in professional learning activities to support our goal of supporting students socio-emotional development through the use of restorative approaches resulting in a 5% decrease in the number of high level infractions as measured by OORS data. 2018-19 SCEP-P 23  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Staff will participate in professional development on restorative practices. School wide Sept. to June School stakeholders and Social Worker Learner Centered Initiative SEL Training is provided to teachers across the cluster model of schools . This training will aide this learning community in understanding SEL strategies to support student learning. Strategy: Implementation of circles in the classroom as a community building and restorative approach. School wide Sept. to June School stakeholders and Social Worker School Social Worker supports students in social-emotional skill building as well as interface with SBST and makes recommendations on how to best support students in crisis and those facing difficult circumstances. Providing parents and families with additional opportunities to engage and work in collaboration with the school to support our goal. Dream Yard's provides Programming in visual art, arts activism, theatre, poetry, hip-hop and dance. They empower youth to be confident, creative leaders through rigorous artistic development, academic enrichment, and a commitment to social justice. Our participants discover the skills to be successful adults through higher education and a deeper connection to their larger community. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement All Parents Sept. to June Parent Coordinator and Social Worker School wide Sept. to June School stakeholders How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Monthly parental trainings in "Restorative Practices" through the Leader in Me Program" will be facilitated by the SBST and students to support parents' understanding in developing the whole child. 2018-19 SCEP-P 24  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. . MS 390 will utilize Tax Levy and Tiltle 1 funds to support teachers and students with the launching of Social Emotion Learning activities, the 7 habits of highly effective people (Teens) Tax Levy funds will be utilized to support classroom teachers and staff with materials and resources to implement self-regulation, respect, safety and belonging strategies. We will utilize the Social Worker and Social Worker interns to support students in developing the practices of these approaches to engage in conflict resolution. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded X X P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 100% of teachers will implement fully "The Leader in Me" program in ICT, Bilingual, and Self-Contained classrooms to support our students' social-emotional development, as indicated in the completion of students' Leadership Portfolio and a decreased in high level infractions on the OORS report. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The instrument of measure that will be used to assess progress is: The data collected on the Online Occurrence Reporting System (OORS) and/or a reduction of teacher's referral for guidance intervention.. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-P 25  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 4 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 4.2 School and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. 4.3 Teachers provide coherent, and appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. 4.4 Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences and tailored to the strengths and needs of all students. SOP(s) Addressed 4.5 Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, and progress monitoring). Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. X 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The following are MS 390's strengths as revealed by the 2016-2017 IIT Review, Principal Performance Observation Practice and School Quality Guide Ratings. ● Use of a Common Core aligned curriculum (Expeditionary Learning and Engage NY) ● Collect data from multiple sources (periodic assessments, writing baseline, mid-lines and end-lines. ● Consistently collect and analyze assessment data and student work for the students in the grade. ● Engage in structured, inquiry-based professional collaborations that promotes the achievement of school goals and the implementation of Common Core Learning Standards ● Time for teacher teams to evaluate practices and adjust accordingly 2018-19 SCEP-P 26  ● Teacher teams check-in on student learning using quizzes, exit tickets, conference notes, reflections, student work, and other formative assessment tools as data sources ● Benchmark assessments and rubrics are refined and used as evaluation tools by both teachers and students Areas of growth/ improvement as indicated by NYS ELA/Math data analysis, NYC Shool Survey and School Quality Snapshot ● Establish common language for instruction ● Inter-visitation to observe best teaching practices based on selected criteria ● Collaboratively looking at student work to implement strategic teaching/instruction ● Systematically and collectively monitor student progress to make necessary adjustments to the curriculum. Teacher and students check for understanding before, during and after each lesson. . Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, teacher teams will engage in structured collaboration to analyze student work and work products (Inquiry Approach) developing shifts in teacher instructional practices that will result in a 35% increase in the number of students attaining proficiency levels (level 3) on end of unit written assessments. 2018-19 SCEP-P 27  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Curriculum planning team Teachers will work collaboratively to design standard-based instructional tasks. Teachers August to December Administration, Literacy Coaches, Grade Leaders Sept. to June Teachers, Administration, Grade leaders, Content Area Teachers Focus on scaffolding instruction/tiered activities for English Language Learners and Students with Disabilities to give them opportunities to develop deeper levels of thinking. Teachers - SWDs, ELLs Analysis of student work through the use of research based protocols to analyze students work and identify teacher instructional practices to meet student needs. Targeted Strategies/assessments through the use of multiple resources that will aid in acquiring standard based across content (tiering of standards 6-8 or lower depending on the need) Learning Cycles and Professional Learning Communities- to share best practices, discuss professional literature to facilitate professional development for parents to help them understand the CCLS and student level of performance. Teachers Sept. to June Teaches, Grade Leaders, Literacy and Math Coaches 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. _______ Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2018-19 SCEP-P 28  MS 390 will utilize Tax Levy Funds to promote and provide teachers with additional time to meet in teams by grade and content. MS 390 will also utilize Tax Levy to provide in-house and external opportunity to extend teacher level of understanding of coherent aligned instructional practices. MS 390 will use title 1 funds to purchase materials and resources to support teachers with further development of the understanding of planning and delivery of instruction that is aligned and coherent. Similarly MS 390 will infuse the use of technology through School 4 One to further assist teachers in providing standard-based instruction that is coherent and aligned.. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded X P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By December 2018, 100% of our teachers will participate in designing common formative and summative assessments with the students' input across the grades. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Progress will be measured by data collected from student graded work and assessments administered. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-P 29  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 2 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 2.2 The school leader ensures that the school community shares the Specific, Measurable, Ambitious, Results-oriented, and Timely (SMART) goals/mission and long-term vision inclusive of core values that address the priorities outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP). Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital resources. 2.3 2.4 The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district's Annual Professional Performance Review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. 2.5 Leaders effectively use evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve critical individual and school-wide practices as defined in the SCEP (student achievement, curriculum and teacher practices; leadership development; community/family engagement; and student social and emotional developmental health). X SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. .MS 390' s strengths as outlined by the Framework for Great Schools Tenet 2 - Effective School Leadership. In addition to the feedback provided in Principal Performance Review: Strengths:  Building and fostering teacher capacity and teacher leadership development through a Master teacher, Instructional Coach, and Learning Partners School- Model Teachers initiatives.  A culture of high expectations that are emphasized through purposefully planned professional development and training for teachers. The ongoing effort to communicate high and clear expectations has resulted in collective accountability among the stakeholders.  Establishing a strategic process for engaging all stakeholders in organizational decisions- Student Government, Parents Focus groups, etc.  Peer Inter-visitation to monitor and obverse common practices across content and grades 2018-19 SCEP-P 30  Student Support Team meet regularly with Principal to look at attendance and disciplinary data to identify routines and plan next step for student achievement. Areas of Growth: A particular area of concern is using evidence based systems and structures effectively to improve individual and school wide practices for student achievement. As indicated by our school Quality Guide 2015-2016, our school did not meet our Student Achievement target; especially our ELLs and SWDs.  Support teachers through the use of a collaborative approach that focuses on student outcomes as well as leadership development for capacity building in best teaching practices.  Build on already improved pedagogy, utilize professional development and targeted feedback to promote consistency of teaching strategies and to enhance teacher capacity impacting high levels of student thinking, participation and ownership across grades and subjects. Immediate and actionable feedback based on curriculum and teacher practice   Enhance instruction across content with a goal of improving student performance  Consistency in Social Emotional Learning development  Increase communication with families to present opportunities for them to engage in school community activities that promote student achievement. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART– Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June of 2019, school administrators will provide pedagogues with actionable feedback aligned to the Danielson’s Framework in competencies 1e, 3b, 3c, and 3d resulting in 20% increase in the number of teachers receiving a rating of effective on the Danielson’s Framework for teaching. 2018-19 SCEP-P 31  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Establish norms, protocols and implement a strategic improvement plan that provides bite-sized actionable feedback. Teachers Set goals collectively (administrators and teachers) to establish common language and purpose. Teachers September to June September to June Administrators Administrators Book Study: “Feedback that Works," “Rethinking Teacher Supervision and Evaluation and "Making Thinking Visible." Teachers September to June Administrator Engaging Parents: Increase parent/families involvement (family nights, parent-teacher to help foster a rich learning community with common rituals- APTT in 6th, 7th and 8th grade. All Staff and parents/ September to June families Administrator/ Parent Coordination/Student Support Team 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Principal, Assistant Principals, Parent Coordinator and the Instructional Team will conduct monthly targeted student improvement strategies meeting with families of struggling students in ELA and Math. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. MS 390 Will utilize Tax Levy funds to support administrators in attending professional learning throughout the district and City to better understand the evaluation system. MS 390 will utilize tax level funds to support instructional leaders with additional materials and resources to further their understanding of the framework. Tax level funds will be utilized to provide teachers and instructional leaders with planning time, geared towards teacher growth and 2018-19 SCEP-P 32  development. Title 1 funds will be utilize to support teachers and instructional leaders with the technology tools to facilitate immediate actionable feedback. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. ● Teacher leaders Benchmark reflection in December ● Evidence of effective professional development from feedback Integration of feedback in instruction Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Progress will be monitored by the Advance tracking system. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-P 33  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 6 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 6.2 The school leader ensures that regular communication with students and families fosters their high expectations for student academic achievement. 6.3 The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders so that student strength and needs are identified and used to augment learning. 6.4 The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to support student success. 6.5 The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school community members centered on student learning and success and encourages and empowers families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their children. X X SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. MS 390 has been able to establish and develop strong family partnership which is evident by the number of parent involvement in our SLT and PA. In order to foster a strong alliance with our families we provide parents with the following: Strengths: - An open door policy - Weekly parents meetings- 2018-19 SCEP-P 34  - On going communication with parents via our online grading system, emails, phone calls, letters, flyers, Robo calls, monthly school calendar, and community events. - Provide workshops and information about additional community resources available in the community. - Technology Training- Provided on one on one basis and in small group to facilitate the management of student data. - Workshops on how to read and interpret Common Core Learning Standards, report cards, progress reports, online grading and other technologically advanced applications that aide student progress. Areas of Improvement: More parents to become involved with their children’s academic progress by attending weekly Tuesday meetings, and to increase their technological skills. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 80% of parents will participate in Academic Parent Teacher Conferences (APTT) resulting in a 75% increase in parent participation as indicated on the parent attendance. 2018-19 SCEP-P 35  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Weekly meetings will continue to be offered during the school day, evenings and weekends to expose parents to CCSS as well as expectation for children towards graduation and college and career readiness requirements. Meetings will have a specific focus for ELLs and SWDs Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) All parents Sept- June Parent Coordinator Guidance Counselors and Social Worker Bi-weekly student led technology parent conferences on Parent Tuesdays scheduled by appointment. All parents Oct.- June Parent Coordinator Guidance Counselors and Social Worker TBI TBI 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. ______ Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. MS 390 will utilize Title 1 funds to provide an array of professional learning opportunities to support parents with the tools necessary to aid the academic development of their children. MS 390 will also utilize Title 1 funds to purchase materials and resources to further their understanding of the use of technology. MS 390 will utilize Title 1 funds to provide parents opportunities to attend outings within the City in order to increase their exposure to educational venue. Tax level funds will be utilize to support parents by making the School Computer Specialist, and other technology savvy staff available to lead tech workshops. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA P/F Set-aside 21st Century C4E 2018-19 SCEP-P 36  Title I 1003(a) Title III PTA Funded SIG Grant School Achievement Other Funding Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 15, 2019 all parents will have participated in an APTT and/or individual meeting with their child's teachers. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Progress will be measured by providing parents with an electronic video feedback link after viewing each video. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-P 37  Section 6: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) Program Description Directions: Expanded Learning Time activities are directly aligned to the elements of the Framework for Great Schools, Rigorous Instruction, Supportive Environment, and Strong Family and Community Ties. ELT provides enriching educational experiences that happen outside of the traditional school day and blend skill acquisition, relationship-building and fun to foster academic and social-emotional growth. Summer learning, afterschool programming, and extended-day ELT models, when well-implemented, play a critical role in supporting students in all grades and ensuring that they graduate from high school, college and career ready. SED requires that Priority schools offer a minimum of 200 additional student contact hours as Expanded Learning Time in addition to the current mandated length of 900 hours of instruction per year (25 hours per week) in grades K-6 and 990 hours of instruction per year (27.5 hours per week) in grades 7-12. Effective ELT models will blend school staff with community partners, and will provide a balanced curriculum that can include ELA, Math, STEM, arts, physical activity, and leadership development. Complete the sections on this page to demonstrate how the school will meet these requirements. Part 1 – ELT Program Goal(s) Describe the summative goal(s) of the ELT program for the 2018-19 school year. Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. By June 2018 70% of students participating in the ELT program will increase their ELA and Math state exams score by at least 10 points in Reading Literature- 6.1, 7.1 & 8.2. Part 2 – ELT Program Type Is the ELT program voluntary or compulsory? X Voluntary Compulsory If the ELT program is voluntary, indicate how you will actively encourage the participation of all students, with the goal of serving at least 50% of students. Students and parents are motivated to participate in the ELT program through outreach, guidance conferences, and parent-teachers meetings where academic ELT goals for students will be established. Part 3 – ELT Program Description The ELT program will be offered to all students eligible for Academic Intervention Services (AIS), with the goal of serving a minimum of fifty percent of AIS-eligible students. Describe how the school will meet the following SED requirements for an ELT program in a Priority School:  Integrate academics, enrichment, and skill development through hands-on experiences that make learning relevant and engaging.  Offer a range of activities that capture student interest and strengthen student engagement in learning so as to promote higher attendance, reduce risk for retention or drop out, and increase the likelihood of graduation.  Actively address the unique learning needs and interests of all types of students, especially those who may benefit from approaches and experiences not offered in the traditional classroom setting.  Contain components designed to improve student academic, social, and emotional outcomes, including opportunities for enrichment programs such as in music and art.  Ensure instruction in any core academic subject offered in the program will be delivered under the supervision of a teacher who is NYS certified in that particular content area.  Engage in outreach activities made to families. The ELT program has been made available to all students eligible for AIS services through a systematic approach. The program design is structured to reach all students by providing ELT during after school hours and Saturdays. The students have been grouped by proficiency levels, including our ELLs and SWD while providing the ELLs students to work on mixed level groups. Students are provided with the opportunity for hands-on experiences through project based learning and college and career readiness activities/lessons. Furthermore, students participating in the ELT have the additional advantage of participating in extra-curricular activities such as Art, music, dance, drama, and sports. Students are provided with rigorous materials and curriculum such as: STARS, Ready Common Core, Accessing 2018-19 SCEP-P 38  Complex Text, Access Code, Finish Line and Brain Pop. All these instructional materials are aligned with the program delivery model, engage ELLs, and help accelerate grade level content and language development. For mathematics we are placing greater focus on skills, fluency, and applications with the same intensity. Students engage in skills-building activities through mental math and worksheets which foster the development of fluency in performing algorithms. In addition, students are exposed to problem solving experiences which build on their mastery of related skills and strengthens conceptual understanding. Emphasis is placed on Common Core Mathematical Practice #1 in which students make sense of problems and persevere in solving them. We implement tasks that promote reasoning and problem solving, and making connections among mathematical ideas to deepen understanding. The ELT is staffed by content area teachers in ELA, Math, Science, Bilingual, Special Education, and ESL. The supervision and oversight of the program is under one of our instructional leaders: Ms. A. Varona. Our bilingual school counselor and social worker provide additional socio-emotional support to our students during the ELT program, engage on parent outreach, family workshops, High School Articulation, in addition to college and career readiness activities. Part 4 – ELT Program Implementation and Oversight Part 4a. Who will implement the ELT program? Who will oversee the program? 1. Indicate the key personnel that will be responsible for implementing and overseeing the ELT program, including school-based staff and any high-quality community partners that will be involved. If applicable, describe the scope of involvement of all community partners and how the joint ELT program is structured. 2. 3. Explain how you will evaluate the program to assess impact on student achievement. The Instructional Assistant Principal, the school counselor and social worker are responsible for program operation. Dreamyard which is CBO/ Community partner works in collaboration of the ELT provides extra curricular activities to students participating in the program. Students are assessed three times per year: Baseline administered on October 2018, Mid-line on December 2018, ELA End-line March 2019, and Math on April 2019. In addition to progress monitoring every four weeks. Part 4b. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. October 2018 - April/May 2019 Part 5 – ELT Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the ELT program. ______ Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support the ELT Program. Note: If the program is funded by 21st Century Community Center Learning Funds, it must be offered in conjunction with a high quality, high capacity community partner. 21st Century Title I 1003(a) Tax Levy Title III Title I SWP PTA Funded Title I TA SIG Grant P/F Set-aside School Achievement Funding C4E Other 2018-19 SCEP-P 39  Part 6 – ELT Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. _____ Part 6b. Indicate the instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. ______ Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-P 40  Section 7: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) ~Academic performance below level 45 on the Degrees of Reading Power (DRP) assessment. It will be administered three times during the school year ~Running records from Fountas & Pinnell will be used as the Secondary Diagnostic Assessment Standardized assessments - students receiving a Level 1. Science Argument Writing Baseline and Midline Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) ~ Access Code- Phonemic awareness and vocabulary development Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) small group, one-to-one, tutoring During the school day and after school Problem Solving, small group, one-to-one and tutoring During the school day and after school native language support for ELLs ~ Skills Intervention for Algebra ~Math Coach ~WordGeneration will be utilized as a strategy to address vocabulary instruction in specific targeted Mathematics classes. ~WordGeneration will be utilized as a strategy to address vocabulary Small group During the school day 2018-19 SCEP-P 41 Small group During the school day Individual: one on one, Small groups, class presentations, and assemblies. During the school day and after school assessment - CCLS aligned Social Studies Argument Writing Baseline and Midline assessment - CCLS aligned At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Teacher’s referral Parent’s referral Student self-referral instruction in specific targeted science classes. Differentiated instruction to support the multiple learners during the school day. ~Integration effective reading and writing strategies. Word generation will be utilized as a strategy to address vocabulary instruction specific targeted Social Studies classes. Social Emotional Learning- Targeted Interventions: Conflict resolution, peer mediation, peer leadership, youth development training, organizational skills, study skills, anger management, health workshops college and career readiness through a partnership with Cornell University. 2018-19 SCEP-P 42  Section 8: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) TBI 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. TBI Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). TBD 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 SCEP-P 43  TBI 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. TBI 2018-19 SCEP-P 44  Section 9: Title I Program Information Directions:  All schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the strategies and activities for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, staff, and paraprofessionals that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Best practices are celebrated by school administration and shared among staff for school wide implementation.Teachers receive differentiated weekly professional development facilitated by the Instructional coaches, School Administration, and independent consultants. Teachers are also provided with opportunities to attend Professional Development outside of the school setting in order to enhance pedagogical practice. Teachers attending outside Professional Development turnkey the information regularly. This year during professional development time department teams are engaging in the following:  Analysis of the data from state exams/DRP/class tasks and discussed implications for content-specific instruction and design  Weekly Professional Development ( Monday) Inter-visitations   Peer-visitations  Coaching to build capacity - best practice oriented  One-on-One meetings Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program 2018-19 SCEP-P 45  Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/information, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. The MOSL work in conjunction with teacher team to ensure the selection of appropriate testing material and tasks are applied consistently and fairly across all teachers of similar programs at a school and that students in the same grade/subject at the school are assessed in comparable ways In addition, liaise with department groups to score student work, analyze and create appropriate assessments to monitor student progress and inform school leaders throughout the year. Professional developments are geared toward student achievement and are planned in cycles/ Citywide PDs based on feedback from MOSL data. Within the cycle, specific time is allotted to review, analyze and refine assessments. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds enables, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (SCEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are 2018-19 SCEP-P 46  Title I Part A (Basic) Title I School Improvement 1003(a) Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funds Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Local Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) 336,450.00 0 12,824.00 0 3,082,897.00 consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) X X X Column B Section Reference(s) See Action Plan See Action Plan See Action Plan 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH). 2018-19 SCEP-P 47   Title I School Improvement 1003(a): To support implementation of school improvement activities identified through the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) reviews or a school review with district oversight and included in the DCIP/SCEP.  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: To support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs.  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan.  Title I Priority and Focus School Parent Engagement Set-aside: Additional set-aside is to enable greater and  more meaningful parent participation in the education of their children. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process, including Title I 1003(g) SIG funds: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 SCEP-P 48  Section 10: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Middle School 390, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Middle School 390 will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● M.S. 390 will continue to operate programs, activities and procedures for the involvement of all parents by providing materials and training to help them work with their children to improve their achievement level in all areas including use of technology. ● M.S. 390 will continue to provide full opportunities for the participation of parents with limited English proficiency (IEP), parents with disabilities, and parents of migratory children by offering multiple meeting times including Saturday sessions and training families to use the school’s website/online grading site and I-pad applications paid by M.S. 390. ● M.S. 390 will continue to build the parents' capacity for a strong parental involvement by ensuring the effectiveness of parents meetings. Parents will be asked to evaluate the meeting completing a feedback survey at the end of every general parent meeting. The collected information will serve as a baseline for future meetings. 2018-19 SCEP-P 49  ● M.S. 390 will continue to provide parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in the educational day of their children. Workshops will be developed to help parents to plan routines at home to aide the education of their children with the goal to foster a caring and effective home-school partnership. ● M.S. 390 will promote the use of the school’s online tools with the goal to ensure effective parental supervision and support at home. ● M.S. 390 will provide assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments. ● Parent coordinator will train parents leaders to recruit additional volunteers and increase community involvement. ● Parent coordinator will share information in a language that parents can understand. Parents who speak a language other than English and Spanish will communicate through over the phone translator from the DOE Translation Department. ● Provide professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community. Add visual aids on our school website, informative posters as well as, post on the school website educational videos. Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and 2018-19 SCEP-P 50  inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year such as, a Literacy Night and Academic Carnival ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area for parents to networking and instructional materials for parents ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress ● developing and distributing a school calendar or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 SCEP-P 51  Middle School 390 , in compliance with the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information 2018-19 SCEP-P 52  ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend) ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title 1 programs. II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age 2018-19 SCEP-P 53  ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 30 minutes) ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions ● show respect for myself, other people and property ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 SCEP-P 54  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 SCEP-P 55  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: Our English language Learners struggle to obtain the necessary literacy skills and academic language to become proficient in English. The focus of the Title-III Academic program is to address the barriers associated with interrupted formal education, limited native language skills, as well as transitioning from native language to English language. This program will increase the number of students that meet AMAO 1 and AMAO 2The Title-III academic Extended Day and Saturday programs provide English Language Learners with advanced literacy skills opportunities to enrich and develop their listening, speaking, reading and writing; It provides students with the strategies needed to meet instructional expectations to prepare them for the world beyond high school. We use a variety of instructional programs to address the needs of all English language learners. Students are divided by proficiency levels in English: entering and emerging students use Access Code, a research/ computer based program focused on decoding skills. Transitioning and Expanding students use Brain Pop ESL. as a comprehensive program that provides students an engaging way to model conversational English skills. The focus for commanding students is cognitive academic language development. To address the academic needs of commanding students, we use Word Generation. Word Generation is a web based program that emphasizes academic language development by introducing current events and five college- level focus words for weekly lessons . We also utilize "Accessing Complex Text," and "Strategies To Achieve Reading Success" for the Saturday Academy program. These resources allow English Language learners to be exposed to different levels of complexity addressing the CCLS for each grade. All these programs are supplemental and distinct from the day school curriculum. The after school program is staffed by one ESL teacher and one certified bilingual teacher. The program is held from October 13, 2018 to May 2019. The program takes place Wednesdays, Thursdays, and Fridays from 2:30 pm to 4:30 pm and Saturdays 9:00 am to 12:00 pm. Teachers utilize a variety of resources as well as research based techniques and methodologies. The students social emotional needs are addressed by exposing them to reading and writing activities, project based learning, and discussion with and presentations from the school guidance counselor and social worker. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered 2018-19 SCEP-P 56  Part C: Professional Development Begin description here: All teachers participating in the Title-III program will continue to participate in professional development activities related to the program, such as reciprocal teaching, collaborative learning and checking for understanding. In addition, teachers will meet for common planning and share best practices. Teachers are engaged in professional development activities on and off-site. The teachers also meet with content area teachers to align activities and lessons to the English language arts curriculum. Through teachers' participation on ongoing PD will positively impact the outcome of student's progress. All professional development activities are facilitated in house utilizing teacher's expertise in specific instructional areas. However, teachers are being compensated through per session activities. The topics and dates for the professional development sessions are as follows: September 24, 2018 Dual Language and TBP Logistics Facilitator: A. Varona, AP October 1, 2018 Guiding principles for DL and TBP Facilitator: A. Varona October 2, 2018 Guiding Principles - Curriculum Facilitator: Mrs. Donza, ESL Teacher October 16, 2018 CR PART 154-Language Allocation Facilitator: Ms. Lillis and Mr. McCauley November 13, 2018 Assessment and Accountability Facilitator: A. Varona and Ms. Lillis December 18, 2018 Instruction in the DL and TB classrooms Facilitator: Collaborative work / Team January 8, 2019 Program Structure Collaborative work/ team February 12, 2019 Family and Community Engagement Facilitator: Mrs. Ceballos and Mrs. Varona March 5, 2019 Review Professional Learning Cycle Program design and Implementation by Sonia Soltero April 9, 2019 Data Analysis - Collaborative work May 14, 2019 Sharing Best Practices, Reflection and Feedback Common planning and sharing best practices are an essential part of our work. We will meet for common planning every other week. Common planning sessions are led by Valerie Green Thomas, our Literacy Coach - Professional development sessions and common planning will take place from 2:30pm to 4:30 pm. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Parents will be provided with monthly workshops - 2 hours on Saturdays (10am -12pm) or evenings (4pm-6pm) depending on parent's availability. The parent meetings will begin on November 2017- May 2018. Parents will be provided with opportunity to participate in coordinated activities related to the students academic needs. In addition, workshops will help us introduce parents to the new school initiatives such as Pupil Path, a student information 2018-19 SCEP-P 57  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities system for parents and students to track academic progress. In addition to general parent meetings, the ENL department will facilitate NYSESLAT informational meetings to increase awareness of the test, explain how the students are being assessed, and provide parents with resources for assisting their ELLs at home. The following are the topics that will be presented during parents' workshops: -November Middle School Transition for 6 th grade ELLS and PupilPath Facilitator: V. Pou, bilingual counselor and J. Duran, parent coordinator -December High School articulation Facilitator: V. Pou, bilingual counselor -January Preparing for NYSESLAT Facilitator: Mrs. Donza, ESL teacher -February Preparing for English LAnguage Arts Facilitator: Mrs. Donza ESL Teacher -March Preparing for Mathematics Exam Facilitator: Ms. Cerritos, Bil. Teacher -April Adolescent development and the immigrant experience Facilitator: G. Ceballos, Bilingual Social Worker Parents will be invited to participate in these activities through letters, phone calls, emails and messenger in English and their native language. Agenda, attendance sheets and training sessions for the parents will be done in both languages-English and Spanish. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) 2018-19 SCEP-P 58 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Travel Other TOTAL 2018-19 SCEP-P 59  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 10 School Name Middle School 390 Borough Bronx School Number 390 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Robert Mercedes Coach Valerie Green-Thomas ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher ENL Teacher/Subject Area Tracy Lillis Teacher/Subject Area Related-Service Provider type here Superintendent type here Assistant Principal Andrea Varona Coach Valerie Green-Thomas School Counselor Virginia Pou Parent type here Parent Coordinator Jose Duran Field Support Center Staff Member Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 3 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 3 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 2 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 520 2018-19 SCEP-P 60 Total number of ELLs 140 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 26.92%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): Spanish If yes, indicate language(s): Spanish Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 4 3 2 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 5 0 6 1 1 2 7 1 8 1 9 10 11 12 1 1 0 0 0 0 Tot # 3 0 0 1 0 0 4 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? MS 390 uses the following assessments to assist teachers working with ELLs identify students' early literacy skills. 1. Fountas and Pinnell- running records 2. DRP 3. Writing Base line, mid line, and end line assessments 4. Benchmark assessment twice a year 5. Mid and End unit assessments for EL These assessments measure students proficiency level in reading and writing These assessment tools assist with informing the type of reading and writing skills students struggle with as well as planning differentiated activities and/or what intervention students need 2018-19 SCEP-P 61  2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? Formal assessments provide insight into students' needs and inform the effectiveness of our instruction and programs. AYP is measured through students performance on NYSESLAT. These results are then paralleled with outcome as set by the districts targets as outlined in the Title III AMAO targets. AMAO estimator tool is used to assist personnel with this process. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] At the beginning of the school year, all students are given different assessments such as Degrees of Reading Power, Common Core Reading and Writing Baseline, Periodic Assessments, ELA and Math Simulation (Tier 1). Based on students Degrees of Reading Power score, particular students are then given the Fountas & Pinnell Running Records which examines students fluency and compreshension in reading (Tier 2). Data is used to guide instruction and provide additional support to identify areas of concern. Based on DRP students are referred to researched based programs such as Access Code, Word Generation, and often placed AIS groups and in after school programs. Throughout the school, ELLs are being supported in the curriculum with some initial teaching/support of vocabulary and story content in their native language when possible. Content as well as ENL teachers, use ESL methodologies, for example, providing visual support, additional modeling, visual cues, demonstration, and explanation of key phrases. Teachers support each other to scaffold tasks, and provide additional materials tying concepts to the student's background knowledge, interests and experiences- matching student's level of English acquisition and ability to respond 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Looking at the data patterns across performance level it is reveal that students in 6th, 7 th , and 8 th grade performed better in the speaking and listening modalities, but students struggled in the reading and writing modalities of the NYSESLAT. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. d. All of our ELLs in 6th, 7th, and 8th grade Freestanding ENL programs, receive ENL instruction through integrated classroom, where the ELA and ENL teacher work together and integrate ENL through content area. ( ) provides instruction to students who are at the Entering or Emerging level with stand-alone services. The ENL students, who are at the transitioning/expanding level receive instruction through content area teachers that infuse ENL methodologies into their practice. The content area teacher uses ENL methodologies by working with the ENL 2018-19 SCEP-P 62  teachers; that is, planning together, or using different resources or programs. Students who are in 7 th grade receive ENL through (Ms. Jamie) who intregates ENL through her science class. In the 12:1:1 setting Ms. Mora infuses ENL methodologies in her ELA class. Students in 8 th grade receive ENL from ( ). Our program model is based on heterogeneous groups. There are mixed proficiency levels in all classes. For the ESL pull-out and push in program, the children are grouped heterogeneously in the same grade, and in the same class. Having all the ELLs in the same class according to their grade level gives the students more opportunities and the trained ESL teacher can service the students in one classroom. b. TBE program. If applicable. In the TBE program, students are grouped heterogeneously; students receive instruction through content area teachers using ESL methodologies. The bilingual students receive instructions in their classrooms from pedagogues trained in ESL methodologies and/or bilingual instruction. TBE classes travel together from class to class. c. DL program. If applicable. In the DL program, students are heterogeneously mixed and students receive instruction through content area teachers using ESL methodologies, specifically in their ELA and Math class. Dual Language class travel together from class to class. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? To ensure that the mandated number of instructional minutes are provided in the ENL program. ENL teachers spend the mandated time in the students content area classes utilizing the integrated model. The time is split through out the week, transitioning/expanding students receive 200 minutes per week, about 4 periods a week. Entering/emerging students receive 400 minutes per weeks, about 8 periods per week. This time is split between ENL teachers ensuring that each students receives the mandated time. In freestanding ENL, about 95% of instruction is in English, the other 5% can be a translation, or used of their native language resources. In the TBE program, native language arts, English language arts and ENL instruction are provided according to the school's language allocation policy (LAP). For the sixth, seventh and eighth grade bilingual classes, we follow a 60/40 model, in which 60% of instruction is in English and 40% is in the native language (Spanish). As the year progresses, we increase the percentage of English instruction and decrease the native language instruction to reflect an 80/20 model. Dual Language program follows the 50/50 model. Students receive receive instruction 50% of instruction in English and 50% in Spanish. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. In the TBE program, for all grades, content areas are delivered in English using ENL methodologies with Spanish support. As the students' progress, the amount of English instruction is increase with the utilization of ESL strategies. Support in the native language is provided for students on a need basis. Spanish and English are used interchangeably to teach content area subjects, which is supported by instructional materials in both languages. Content area teachers follow the schools' curriculum maps which are aligned to the New York City, New York State and the Common Core Learning Standards using Expeditionary Learning for ELA and Engage NY for math. In the beginning of the school year, students are given more native language instruction, and as the year progresses English instruction is increased. The ESL teacher provides content area support for ELLs through various scaffolding techniques - use of Q-TEL strategies, utilization of graphic organizers, audio, visual materials, technology, hands on projects and manipulative. They also provide glossaries, dictionaries and reference charts to support student learning. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? DRA 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? 2018-19 SCEP-P 63  SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a. SIFE students are place in our Transitional Bilingual Program if they are Spanish speaking, which facilitate the grouping of the students based on readiness, interest, native language skills. Differentiated instruction is provided in all content areas. b. Newcomers are offer a placement in our Transitional Bilingual Program, where they will receive academic support to transition and adjust into the school culture/community. c. Developing students are offered a placement in the our monolingual classes with ENL support, should the parents and the students accept the placement. When placing our students in monolingual classes the students continue to receive the same level of support through integrated ENL and/or ENL support. Content area teachers group students according to their levels using NYSESLAT/DRP scores, to be able to differentiate instruction to meet the students at their level. d. Long Term. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? accelerating Some of the instructional strategies that teachers of ELL-SWDs use to provide access to academic content development areas as well as accelerating English language development are as follow: ~ (instructional strategies) 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? MS 390 provides the same curricular for all students including ELL-SWDs. We flex our schedule to accommodate needed services within the least restrictive environment. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. MS 390 targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, Math, and other content areas include: Saturday Academic support in ELA and Math, afterschool tutoring through Dreamyard and Title III Academic and Cultural Enrichment program, RTI, technology based reading program such as Access Code, Math Space, School for One, and Light Sail. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? New programs for the upcoming school year are Dual Language Programs DreamYard Afterschool Program Saturday Enrichment Program Title III afterschool tutoring Summer Enrichment Program LightSail MathSpace 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? BrainPop ESL will be discontinued because it is a program that does not teach through content, we are interested in program that use content to teach language. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All ELLs are identified for all available academic support services which are offered to the entire school population. Which are embeded during daily program and during after school programs. 2018-19 SCEP-P 64  12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. In order to support our ELLs, we use the following programs: Access Code, LightSail and Word Generation. Technology is also used to enhance teaching such as Smartboard, Ipads, Apple TV and laptops. Expeditionary Learning ELL resources. Also glosaries, use of graphic organizers, picture books, videos and visuals are also part of instruction to support English Language Learners. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? We deliver native language support in our TBE program in different ways. The teachers provide small group instruction, direct translation, differentiaed instruction, use of glossaries and dictionaries, time allocation, and color coded charts in order to support the native language. As a community, we support native language development through allowing students the opportunity to use both their home languages and English to make meaning of the work. For our ENL program, the students are afforded the opportunity to refer to glossaries in their native language, grouped by proficiency levels and when need to be by language. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Required services, support, and resources are determined by the students proficiency levels, ELA/Math scores, and in some cases their entry date in this country . 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? In order to support our ELLs, we use the following programs: Access Code, LightSail and Word Generation. Technology is also used to enhance teaching such as Smartboard, Ipads, Apple TV and laptops. Expeditionary Learning ELL resources. Also glosaries, use of graphic organizers, picture books, videos and visuals are also part of instruction to support English Language Learners. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). MS 390 assists newly enrolled ELL students before the beginning of the school year by inviting them to participate in a Summer Enrichment program, parent student welcome luncheon, parent workshop, and Dual Language Program cultural monthly celebration. For students who enroll throughout the school year, we invite them to participate in the the afterschool Enrichment program, and DreamYard program. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? N/A 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? The dual language model MS 390 uses is a 50-50 model. The instructional week is divided 50/50 in English and Spanish. ELA and Math are taught in English and classes like Science, Social Studies, Physical Education are taught in Spanish. Students are aware of their schedule and they are aware of what language the class is taught in. 2018-19 SCEP-P 65  Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? At the beginning of the year, we identify where teachers need training in the programs we will implement such as: Access Code, Expeditionary Learning, LightSail and/or Word Generation. Staff are scheduled to attend in-house and outside training. The training for these programs are given in the beginning of the school year and periodically thoroughout the year. Senior expert staff and staff that have participated in outside professional development are expected to turnkey information from their experience. These staff members become a reliable source of support to staff implementing and using programs for the first time. The use of Monday Professional development is used to to give such professional development. AMAO Estimator Tool PD Word Generation Language Acquisition Strategies PD Access Code Expedionary Learning LightSail Dual Language Program CommonCore Framework NYSITELL/NYSESLAT Scoring/Administration Training Translanguaging Strategies Differentiation CR Part 154 Social Emotional Learning Teacher Rounds Socratic Seminar ESL Methodologies/Strategies 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Support staff assists ELLs as they transition from elementary to middle school by providing study skill presentations and social emotional learning presentations to incoming 6th graders. In addition, support staff offers high school readiness and career exploration presentations primarily to seventh and eighth graders. MS 390 meets the professional development Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Summer Orientation Dual Language Orientation Parent Workshop NYSESLAT Monthly Family Meetings/ Cultural Celebrations All parent orientations/meetings are presented by a bilingual personel. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. 2018-19 SCEP-P 66  ELL parent involvement includes bi-weekly parent meeting/workshops, cultural celebrations, and Tuesday parent engagement meetings. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. 2018-19 SCEP-P 67 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Robert Mercedes, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 SCEP-P 68  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: School DBN: Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Title Principal Assistant Principal Parent Coordinator ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 2018-19 SCEP-P 69  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 10X390 School Name: MS 390 Superintendent: M. Mashel The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this (*Primary) conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. MS 390 follows the four steps process for the identification of ELLs. 1- The administration of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS) which includes an interview with the student and the parent to determine the student's home language, this interview is conducted by an ESL teacher. 2- Determination of eligibility to the NYS identification test for all ELLs (NYSITELL) , 3- The administration of the Spanish LAB to newly identified ELLs whose home language is Spanish. When parents come in to enroll their child at the school we determine the enrollment status category where student belongs, such as: enrolling as a new student to New York City Public school, if so the student completes the entire Ell identification process; enrolling as a new student coming from a NYS school, prior school is contacted to obtain NYSITELL/NYSESLAT scores from the sending school in order to continue to receive ELL status. When students are enrolled as former students and they have been out of the NYC/NYS school system for two years or more, the entire ELL's identification process is administered. In order to determine the family's language preference for communication we utilized results from the Home Language Identification Survey, ATS , information provided by the family on the emergency blue card, and other school surveys. 2018-19 SCEP-P 70  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral MS 390 community provides parents with both written and oral communication in their preferred language. All written and voicemail communication is provided to all parents in both English and Spanish, oral communication is also provided in the parent's preferred language. For parents of spoken/ written language of: French we utilized the Dept. of Education Language and Interpretation services. 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency How do you Distributed to plan to Families translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. MS 390 provides all written and oral communication in both languages: English and Spanish, Monthly calendar, parent letters, informational flyers, Handbook, Cell phone policy, registration packet, all web based information about programs and services, robo calls, student behavior and academic rubric, RFT information, charater education workshops, and mandated mailing to parents. 2018-19 SCEP-P 71  2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? Parent orientation, open house, parent teacher conferences, parent engagement time, HS articulation, parent workshops, guidance conferences, social work interventions, registration process including meeting with ESL teacher for ELLs identification process, guidance orientation meeting for new register, all meetings and communication with parents are provided in their preferred language. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Parents are welcomed to the school building in all languages through a written board and are directed to request assistance with translation and interpretation services from parent coordinator. 2018-19 SCEP-P 72  Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? MS 390 gathers feedback from parents by making a school survey available to all parents during parent teacher conferences, and during parent engagement time. Also our daily interactions with parents are assessed in the quality of customer service our parents received. 2018-19 SCEP-P 73 
