2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 08X392 School Name: BRONX DELTA SCHOOL Principal: MARIA ROGALLE 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information PS 392 Bronx Delta School 08X392 School Number (DBN): 320800010392 PK, K, 1, 2, 3, 4, SE 650 Hollywood Ave, Bronx NY 10465 718-319-7147 Phone Number: 718-319-2450 Fax: Maria Rogalle MRogalle@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: 08 Superintendent’s Office Address: Email Address: Maria Rogalle IlkaniaVargas Jasmine Morera Ilkania Vargas Jasmine Morera NA NA NA District Information Erika Tobia Superintendent: 1230 Zerega Ave, Bronx NY 10462 ETobia@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: (718) 828 – 6653 Phone Number: (718) 828-6239 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 CEP 3  FSC: Bronx Executive Director’s Office Address: Jose Ruiz Executive Director: 1230 ZeregaAvenue Bronx, NY 10462 Jruiz2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-828-7776 Phone Number: 718-828-6280 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Maria Rogalle IlkaniaVargas/Helene Barr-Newman JamineMorera Danielle DeLuca Jennifer Pacheco *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ UFT Member/UFT 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Emily Lawrence Ramie Holmes NuliyaRosario Charlotte Willis Elizabeth Rivera Member/ UFT Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? The children at Bronx Delta come to us with unique experiences, interests, and learning styles. Our goal as a school community s to truly know each child well and use this knowledge to to guide, support, and motivate him or her. At Bronx Delta, we believe that good teaching requires continued professional development, personal reflection, and collaboration. We value parent involvement at every level and encourage parents to partner with our school to give our children the most powerful and joyous learning experience possible. 2018-19 CEP 9  2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. As of the 2018-2019 school year, Bronx Delta is a fifth year elementary school co-located among two intermediate schools in the Throggs Neck section of the Bronx. For the 2018-2019 school year, we have 4 kindergarten classes (1 ICT and 1 ASD/Nest), four first grade (1 ICT and I ASD/Nest), two second grade classes (1 ICT), two third grade classes (1 ICT), two fourth grade classes (1 ICT) and two 12:1:1 classes. In addition we also have 3 Pre-K classrooms. We are a newly zoned school in district 8. We have an involved and vibrant parent and staff community. As a community of families, students, and staff, we will work together to develop students who strive for academic, social and emotional growth. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. For the 2018-2019 school year, we have grown in numbers as well as in ENL population and SE population. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. The key areas of the Framework for Great Schools that we will focus on this year is to have student achievement the center of all decision-making and spending. 2018-19 CEP 10  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 08X392 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 281 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient N/A N/A 18 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 18 3 3 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 74.0% % Attendance Rate 65.8% % Reduced Lunch 7.5% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.4% 68.3% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 16.0% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 3.26 0% 33% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 41.4% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 14 14 91.1% 8.5% 18.1% 10.0% 4.6% 1.1% 0 0% 5.3 53.3% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 11  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Programs that address rigorous instruction: For Kindergarten, First Grade, Second Grade, Third Grade, and Fourth Grade: - Teachers College Reading and Writing Project: teachers use the workshop model to instruct reading and writing with a Balanced Literacy approach and phonics program -Recipe for Reading -Envisions Math for CCLS aligned mathematics instruction Professional Development provided for all teachers in Teacher's College Reading and Writing project. Professional Development from National Teacher Network for Math For Pre-K: -Creative Curriculum for ELA, including reading, writing, listening, and speaking -EngageNY for mathematics -General exposure to phonemic awareness -TC strategies for Reading and Writing enrichment Classroom observations, teacher conferences, and student data all suggest that students would benefit from direct instruction in concrete modeling strategies that could be taught and applied. To support our growth in mathematics, we have taken steps to implement Exemplars, a problem solving curriculum that supplements math instruction. As a school, we have a need to make sure that students understand the basic principles of counting and cardinality as a stepping stone to engaging in more rigorous problem solving skills. A professional developer is working directly with our school to implement such changes. Additionally, as part of the Teachers College Reading and Writing Project, our 2018-19 CEP 12  teachers will be provided with coaching and support to implement the program to support student gains in reading and writing. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all students, including Students with Disabilities and our English Language Learners as a whole who exist in the testing grades will show a 5% increase in ELA as measured by MOSL ELA performance tasks and NYS ELA assessment. 2018-19 CEP 13  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). TCRWP Staff Developer will be in the building to support teachers and students. Staff Developers will support in formulating pacing calendars, curriculum maps, and lesson plans that fit the needs of the students. TCRWP Staff Developers will support pedagogy best practices among teachers including and not limited to guided reading groups, strategy groups, shared reading groups, and conferencing. Parent Connection Tuesdays that will explain the expectation and goals of the TCRWP. Teacher - Led Parent Workshops about specific Units of Study. SETTS and AIS - Using the P&F LLI program and Recipe for Reading Small Groups 3b – Parent and Family Engagement All Teachers and Students All year Staff Developer and Administration Parents All year Parent coordinator,Administration, and Teachers Students All year Teachers Students All year Teachers How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent Connection Tuesdays that will explain the expectation and goals of the TCRWP. Teacher - Led Parent Workshops about specific Units of Study for parents. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. -Schedule adjustments -budget alignment -materials 2018-19 CEP 14  -TCRWP teacher resources and website - iReady -TC reading and Writing Curriculum -New Performance Task for ELA - Complete the Performance Tasks three times a year -NTN Staff Development -Fulll Time ULIT coach Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Assessment calendar is in place for the school year with benchmark dates to record and review data This data will be used to develop inquiry cycles were teachers will look at student work to reflect and prepare lesson plans and group work on Professional development Mondays. TC Assessment Pro organizes data input for class and school statistics. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) TCRWP Running Records TCRWP pre-post and on-demand writing TC Assessment Pro ELA Performance Tasks - 3 times a year Math Performance Tasks - 3 times a year Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 15  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? TRIBES Learning Communities has been adopted as our Social/Emotional program for the school. Behavior charts and classroom modifications follow 5 agreements as implemented within the program. Book of the Month support the Social Emotional component of our curriculum. Our full time Guidance Counselor will develop lesson plans incorporating TRIBES and the Book of the onth to establish character development. Our SBST team meets regularly every Friday to review students needs and our school-wide Response to Intervention Behavior. Professional Development Cycle of Inquiry have been organized and established giving paraprofessionals time to work with the Guidance Counselor.. Our school 's partnership with Yale University and the Emotional Intelligence work with RULER will enhance our work this year. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June of 2019, in collaboration with our Guidance Counselor, TRIBES, and RULER, we will strengthen our school-wide TRIBES/RULER community building program which will show a 5% increase as evidence by the percentage of Highly effective rating in Advance in 2a - Creating an environment of Respect and Rapport and 2d - Managing student behavior. 2018-19 CEP 16  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? TRIBES 5 Agreements instruction and common language reinforcements in classrooms, in all subject areas and specialty classes. All students All year Staff Professional development facilitated by our TRIBES Facilitator and the Guidance Counselor All staff All year TRIBES Activities for the staff to participate in and modeled for them to you use in their class. All All year students and A common language and behavior expectation that is used in all classes staff In-House teacher and Guidance Counselor In-House Teacher and Administration .Professional Development outline and expectations for Cycles of Student Inquiry - tracking impact and next steps. All staff All year Administration 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent Connection Tuesdays that will explain the expectation and goals of TRIBES. Teacher - Led Parent Workshops about specific TRIBES Agreements for parents. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. -School Culture Professional Development for parents and teachers, provided by TRIBES Facilitator and Guidance Counselor -Partnership with the Department of mental Health to provide professional development for our teachers on mindfulness, stress-reduction, de-escalation, and behavior modifications. 2018-19 CEP 17  Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Classroom Observations Advance data percentage reports Teacher surveys Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Advance Teacher written surveys Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 18  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Teachers have the opportunity to meet as Professional Learning Communities during our Monday professional time, in addition to common preparation period time at least two times per week. During our Monday Professional Development plan, we have created groups of teachers for cycles based on needs of the students based on work related to subject and grade level. Teachers College will work with Teachers and students 18 visits throughout the school year. In addition, teachers will also go to TC for Professional Development and have opportunities to work collaboratively with colleagues to turn-key the information. For the 2018-2019 school year we added NTN Math Staff Development with 18 sessions of in-house collaborative professional development among grades. Full time ULIT coach Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be an increase of 5% in teacher voice and trust as represented by collaborative teacher structures measured by the school survey. 2018-19 CEP 19  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Eighteen days of professional development from Teacher’s College Consultants Teachers Paras All Year - 15 Days Staff Developers - Consultants will dedicate one half of each visit to embedded on-the-job coaching with teachers, visiting classrooms to model, observe, and give feedback on teaching practices Eighteen days of Professional Development as outline by the Principal and presented by NTN for Math Training and practice for teacher teams in the use of protocols to view student work Teacher teams All year Administration Parent workshops offered to Parents on Parent Connection Tuesdays. School time writing celebrations Families All Year Parent and Teacher surveys of interest Families All year Teachers Administration and Teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent workshops offered to Parents on Parent Connection Tuesdays. School time writing celebrations Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. -Coaching plan and cycle schedules for Teacher’s College and NTN -TC units of study, books for growing libraries, additional resources -Scheduled cycles of professional learning time dedicated to analyzing student math, reading, and writing work 2018-19 CEP 20  -Parent Workshop / Curriculum Celebrations Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. After each cycle of teacher teams, the PD team and the staff as a whole will evaluate the next steps of the school community to meet the needs of the students. Weekly Instructional cabinet meetings that includes lead teachers, ENL, Speech, Guidance, ULIT coach,and Administration. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. School Survey Teacher suggestion box for Instructional Cabinet meeting. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 21  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Being that we are using a new math progrram for the 2018-20189 school year - Envisions, we have increased our NTN staff development to support teacher understanding of mathematical content and standard based planning and learning. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the principal will participate in instructional planning and professional communities in mathematics to continue to support the teachers and staff as measured by a 5% increase in the number of students scoring at level 3 and 4 on the 2019 NYS Mathematics exam. 2018-19 CEP 22  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). NTN Staff Develpoment Monday Professional Development Na NA 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers and Students 18 school days Teachers and students NA Na A series based on teacher needs and wants NA NA Staff Developer, Administration and Teachers Teachers NA NA How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. SLT, Family Math Night Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Schedules, room arrangements, materials, professional development, Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 2018-19 CEP 23  We will conduct the Math - BOY, MOY, and EOY Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Math Performance Tasks and Math State Exam. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 24  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. We provide a welcoming environment for parents and families. We have organized and planned activities for Parent Connections on Tuesdays. Other specific school strengths, as identified by the School Leadership Team, include: Strong involvement with local officials - Councilman Gjonoj Reso-A grant for technology purchases, Fall Festival parade, Food Drives, partnership with the Beacon Phipps program to provide free after school programming, and a strong PA that meets regularly with Administration. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, with an increase in parent communication, there will be a 3% increase in parental engagement during PA and school events as measured by parental and staff attendance forms. 2018-19 CEP 25  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? PA Meetings Parents All year PA Parent Connection Tuesdays Parents All year Principal Teachers Administration Fundraisers and events SLT Meetings 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Families Parents Families Parents Teachers All year PA Principal Teachers All Year Teachers Principal Parents If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Phipps Community - Beacon Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Mid-Year assessment of parent involvement looking at attendance and sign-in sheets. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other 2018-19 CEP 26  Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Mod year check including sign -in sheets and surveys. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Parent Surveys and Parent Sign-In sheets Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 27  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Targeted Guided Reading Groups TCRWP Assessment Data and Running Records Recipe for Reading MOSLPerformance Tasks F&P LLIProgram Envisions Assessment Data Targeted Guided Math groups MOSL PerformanceTasks Science Lab NA Social Studies Passport to Learning NA Performance Tasks Guidance At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Whole Class Character Development small group one - to - one Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Small group One-to-one During the school day Small group One-to-one Whole Class Whole Class During the school day During the school day During the School Day 2018-19 CEP 28  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 4 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Busing uniforms materials Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). NA 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 29  Books Materials BackPacks Supplies 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. NA 2018-19 CEP 30  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools X Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Lead Teachers 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). TCRWP NTN Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. NA 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). NA 2018-19 CEP 31  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). Aligned curriculum, parent activities, visitations 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. MOSL Committee 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. 2018-19 CEP 32  Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 33  2018-19 CEP 34  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. 08X392 Bronx Delta School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. [PS 392] will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 2018-19 CEP 35  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report;  host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right 2018-19 CEP 36  to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed;   ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) 08X392 Bronx Delta School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. 2018-19 CEP 37  I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas;  providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; 2018-19 CEP 38  ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy;  advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; 2018-19 CEP 39 II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities  ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; 2018-19 CEP 40  ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 41  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 08 School Name Bronx Delta School Borough Bronx School Number 392 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Maria Rogalle Coach Irene Williams ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Ann Casalan Teacher/Subject Area Ikania Vargas/2nd grade Teacher/Subject Area Related-Service Provider Superintendent Karen Ames Assistant Principal N/A Coach School Counselor Parent Marie Camacho Parent Coordinator Wendy DiTiberiis Field Support Center Staff Member Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 2 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 1 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 209 2018-19 CEP 42 Total number of ELLs 22 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 10.53%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 4 3 1 0 2 0 K 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? The formative assessments we use to guide instructional planning for ELLs are TCRWP Running Records, TC Concepts of Print Assessment, TC Spelling inventories, TC Writing Benchmarks and Writing on Demands. This data has helped us to make instructional plans that incorporate a lot of shared literacy experiences, the use of Wilson Fundations program, small group instruction using Recipe for Reading, rich Level A & B books that contains clear picture and text matching, the use of small group targeted reading behavior guided reading and the direct instruction of everyday sight words and key content area vocabulary. Based on our findings, we have also been working on building ELLs' comprehension skills by focusing on inferencing, predicting, making text-to-self and text-to-text connections. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? The structures we have in place are curriculum materials and support provided to all teachers. Scheduling of small group instruction. Hiring Classroom teachers who have ELL extensions to facilitate the support of this effort. 2018-19 CEP 43  3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? Summative assesments and baseline/benchmark assessments that are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need are NYSESLAT scores and TC Assessments such as running records, concepts of print, spelling inventories and writing on demands. In addition we utilize student progress reports and report cards. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? To address needed interventions as informed by the summative data gathered, we have put in place several schoolwide supports. We have incorporated the additional literacy support of a newly introduced program, "Recipe for Reading" as well as have continued the use of Wilson Fundations program and the program Leveled Literacy Intervention (LLI). We also have provided needed intervention on an ongoing basis through the use of an AIS support teacher. Through these intervention literacy programs teachers target needed reading behaviors through guided reading and the direct instruction of everyday sight words and key content area vocabulary. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Data is collected by the classroom teacher and the ENL teacher to see how collectively the ELLs are performing on assessments and if progress is being made. The results help teachers to look closely at their Tier 1, or their core instruction, for improving the quality of their instruction that is focused on language and literacy development. Measures are taken to provide instruction that is more rigorous and targeted to student needs. Such measures include taking into consideration individual children's cultural and linguistic background, building on their background knowledge, providing opportunities to work in pairs and groups, utilizing routine checks of comprehension, forming guided reading groups and strategy groups, assigning appropriate homework assignments that match their current proficiency level and the explicit teaching of key terms, words, idioms and phrases that ELLs need to be exposed to. After looking closely at data over a period and recognizing that a child is still not progressing next steps are taken according to the RTI model. The classroom teachers, ENL teacher, school psychologist and academic coach meet in a team and discuss the student as a whole taking into consideration information from a number of levels including their academic, social-emotional and home-community characteristics. Achievable goals are set for a period according to each ELL’s needs. Intensive small group interventions are put into place by the classroom, ENL teachers as well as the AIS support teacher as a Tier 2 support. These supports are provided in a combination of different groupings of push-in instruction, small group instruction and one to one support. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The outcome assessment data used to inform our ELL program is provided by NYSESLAT scores and this coming year of 2016-2017 we will be administering the ELA and Math State Exams. This data is gathered from the RLAT from ATS and the ELL Data Analysis Tool. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? The findings are discussed at the principal's Instructional cabinet meetings to evaluate the status, the progress, and needed adjustments to be made. Part IV: ELL Programming 2018-19 CEP 44  Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. ELLs are served by our ENL teacher through the push-in model for all of the required stand alone ENL minutes and half of the Integrated ENL minutes. The other half of the Integrated ENL minutes are covered by the dually certified ESOL and Common Branches teacher in a Social Studies/ELA cluster. To enable smooth programming and compliance with all the mandated minutes of ESL instruction, all ELLs are placed in one classroom on each grade level for the upcoming 2017-2018 school year. Thus each class has ELL students of heterogenous proficiency levels. Classroom teachers and the ENL teacher collaborate to create lesson plans that support the ELLs needs.. The ENL teacher works with small groups of ELLs or one on one (depending on the number of ELLs in each class and the number of minutes of service mandated per ELL). ENL teacher provides scaffolding during and after mini-lessons (eliciting the teaching point and often re-teaching it), adapts and/or creates materials for ELLs at varying proficiency levels and uses a myriad of ESL strategies to support language learning. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? PS 392 ensures that the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency level by scheduling the appropriate number of minutes in the ESL teachers' mandated programs. ENL is delivered push-in into the classrooms for the students who need 180 minutes or 90 minutes of instructional time. 90 minutes of Integrated ENL instruction is taught through a Social Studies literacy program by the ESL teacher who is also licensed in Common Branches. The other 90 minutes that Entering and Emerging students received is through the push-in model. Thus, in accordance with CR Part 154.2, K-8 ELLs who are at the Entering level and Emerging level receive a total of 360 minutes/week, Transitioning level and Expanding level receive 180min/week and Commanding level receive 90 minutes/week. The ESL teacher set up her schedule so as to service ELLs mostly during their Teacher's College Reading and Writing lessons, Literacy lessons and Shared Reading and Science/Social Studies content area lessons. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. The ENL teacher services ELLs mostly during their TC Reading and Writing lessons and Literacy and Shared Reading lessons using the push-in model. However, she also pushes-in for Science or Social Studies in first grade. Content area instruction is delivered by both the classroom teacher and the ESL teacher with an emphasis on differentiated instruction for ELLs through the use of scaffolding techniques, visual aids, realia, intensive and deliberate modeling, Total Physical Reponse and multi-sensory activities, graphic organizers, sentence starters, peer interactions and vocabulary instruction of content area words, as well as the more simple basic vocabulary unknown to students in these specific content area. Special attention is also given to the teaching of Academic Language, as the students are greatly exposed to it, even more now that the Common Core Standards is increasingly focusing on reading comprehension of nonfiction and informational texts. The ENL teachers incorporates a balanced literacy instruction through the use of shared reading, read-alouds, interactive writing, and choral reading in the teaching of Social Studies as well. Along with the differentiation strategies listed above, the ENL teacher also makes use of poetry, songs, drama, vocabulary games, and a classroom library with nonfiction literature of the content area at their reading levels The explicit ELA instruction for ELLs in their classrooms and in the push-in ENL program includes the 2018-19 CEP 45  Teacher's College workshop model for Reading and Writing with a focus on shared reading. Consistent with the Natural Approach for second language acquisition, the ELLs are fully incorporated into their regular classroom along with English proficient students to enable them to benefit from social interaction and academic curriculum in the target language. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? ELLs who take the NYSITELL and test eligiible for ESL services are also given the Spanish Lab. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a. There are no SIFE students present in our school at this time. Should our school enroll a SIFE student in the future, their particular needs will be assessed and more intensive and one on one academic intervention will be given by all necessary support staff. First the guidance counselor will meet with the student and assist them with the understanding and importance of the school routines and rules. They would also be given a student buddy who speaks their native language to help them transition into a school setting and be a social and academic support for them. Instruction for these students would be greatly differentiated and a Teacher Assistant would be assigned to them for their literacy intervention and support. The ESL teacher would focus on the more basic oral and academic vocabulary they will need to make content area instruction more comprehensible. We also use an online Literacy intervention program called iready which provides tailored instruction and practice for the student's needs based on ongoing assessment. The student will be placed in the best class that can serve their needs at the time. b. For the newcomers who are here less than three years, native language use will be provided by teachers, teacher assistants and other support staff who speak their language on a needed basis. Students will be given ESL instruction by the ENL teacher in the content areas of science and social studies in order to assist them with easier comprehension of these subject areas. Students will be paired with native speakers on a regular basis for opportunities to hear conversational English spoken through partner activities such as book discussions, math problem solving explanations and literacy center discussions. Teachers will provide picture supports and the use of techonology in their lessons in order to ensure more understanding by these newcomers. c. We do not have the subgroup of developing ELLs in our school. d. We do not have long term ELLs in our school. Should we have such a population we will support them with more individualized instruction through the use of one on one academic intervention instruction by a certified teacher as well as the ENL teacher. The student's best form of instruction that addressses their learning style will be utilized and technology supports will be interwoven throughout their instruction. Their interests will be a big tool for finding the content to drive instruction so their best work can be achieved. e. ELLs who passed the NYSESLAT are given two years of transitional support in the form of reading and math small group work during the day. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? All teachers of ELLs-SWDs follow the Teacher's College Reading and Writing Units, the New York City Scope and Sequence for Social Studies and Science and Go Math curriuculm. Teachers make the academic content more comprehensible through differentiations such as the use of graphics and visual cues, graphic organizers, social and academic vocabulary, smartboard presentations, partner work, different paper choices and small groups based on data guided by classroom teacher or led by the available paraprofessionals designated to their class. Goals are adapted to the learner and 3rd graders who will be taking standardized tests will focus more on increasing general academic vocabulary, as well as reading skills and reading comprehension. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? 2018-19 CEP 46  To meet the diverse needs of ELL-SWDs within the least restrictive environment, all students are taught with the Standards based Curriculum appropriate for their grade. All teachers meet weekly for common grade planning to provide uniform grade appropriate curriculum and content for all students including our ELL-SWDs. All students are exposed to a very rich multidisciplinary arts focused curriculum. All ELL instruction is provided in a multi-dimensional format of push-in and small group intervention. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. The Wilson Fundations program and Recipe for Reading is used as a support for ELA instruction with all ELL students. Rich Level A & B books that contains clear pictures and text matching, the use of small group targeted reading behavior guided reading and the direct instruction of everyday sight words and key content area vocabulary are also supports for ELLs in ELA. For science, social studies and math, pictures, realia, chart, graphic organizers and picture books are utilized to provide intervention for ELLs in all grades. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? We are continuing the Fountas & Pinnell Leveled Literacy Intervention and the newly added Recipe for Reading program. We have refined and expanded these programs to include more teachers implementing them. We have extended the professional development for more staff to be trained in Recipe for Reading. We continue to use RAZ Kids as a supplement to our independent reading program. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? We have not had a bilingual program in our school 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs have equal opportunity to access to all school programs. The students participate in our supplemental services of Music Through Education, Studio in a School Art program as well as Town Hall Dance Program. Students are have equal opportunity to attend our afterschool programs including Beacon afterschool program, Bronx Arts Ensemble and Marquis Studios. The two latter afterschool programs are theatre based and promote social and academic language and literacy development through performance and small group interactions. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. In supporting ELLS teachers have access to Smartboards in their presentation of their lessons and have the ability to offer an interactive approach that is more visual and hands on in teaching all of the subject areas. Students directly have access to technology through their interaction with RAZ kids, scheduled ipad use, and group laptops that are made available to teachers during class time. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Home language support is assessed by the ELL teacher at the time of registration. She informally interviews both the parents and the student to determine their home language and the level of language support they need. Home language support is offered by any staff who speaks the child's home language as well as students in their class who can assist with translation when needed or to assist with partner work. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Required services and resources correspond to ELLs' ages and grade levels. We provide leveled reading books for students based on their reading ability, on grade level texts in all content areas with scaffolded supports by the ENL teacher and classroom teacher. 2018-19 CEP 47  15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Campus ELL teachers attend district professional development together and can coordinate efforts to share resources and assistance. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Newly enrolled ELL students are supported before the beginning of the school year by having the parents' questions answered by a school translator. The ENL teacher meets with the parents upon registration to assist with the interview process of filling out the Home Language Survey and to see if there are any concerns or needs of the students. The incoming Kindergarten students are invited to a Kindergarten Orientation held during the present school year for the upcoming school year. The Kindergarten Orientation is presented by the administrator and classroom teachers. Translation is provided at orientation. The students are given a welcome summer packet to prepare them for the upcoming school year which includes a list of suggested book titles, recommended enrichment activities offered throughout the city and a supply request list for the new school year Parent coordinator contacts parents and ENL teacher meets with the parents at registration to answer any questions. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? At this time we do not offer a language elective. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Teachers of ELLs attend professional development throughout the year provided by the Department of English Language Learners and Student Support, Teacher's College Colombia workshops and the District 8 Office of ELLS. The ESL teachers attend all in house Professional Development for our staff covering the implications of the Common Core Learning Standards including the proper administration and analysis of Running records, curriculum planning that aligns with the CCLS, focusing on strategies for teaching academic language and improving rigor in lesson planning and examining the specific language standards on each grade level. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Our school will meet the requirement of a minimum of 15% of the required professional development hours for all teachers by having our Monday professional development include a focus on language acquisition with a concentration on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for English language learners. For our ENL teacher a minimum of 50% of the required professional development will cover language acquisition in alignment with core content area instruction, including a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content 2018-19 CEP 48  instruction for English language learners. This profesional development will be given by our ENL Teacher and Academic Coach as well as going out to Office of ELLs professional development workshops. All professional developments will be recorded through attendance sheets and agenda that are kept on file in the ELL Compliance Binder. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Classroom teachers and ENL teachers are also available to parents during the parent involvement time on Tuesdays afternoon to meet with parents to discuss individual needs of their ELL student. During this time there are scheduled annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress and language proficiency assessment results and language development needs in content areas. During these meetings if a translator is needed one is provided through our school or the Language Interpretation unit is called for a phone conference. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. ELL parent involvement in our school is growing as we continually seek out ways for parents to play a more active role in the school. At the beginning of the year the parents are invited to a Curriculum Night where they were able to meet with classroom teachers, speciality teachers and support staff to learn about the curriculum and the expectations for their children and for themselves as parents. There are 2 Parent-Teacher Conferences and 1 Spring Ahead Parent Teacher conference scheduled where parents get a 1:1 meeting with their child’s teacher to discuss their child’s progress. We will continue to offer coach-led workshops for parents to share with them the current work being done in ELA and math with their children. These workshops are designated parent involvement time each Tuesday afternoon of each week. All parents are invited to participate in school wide activities such as Publishing Parties, Winter and Spring Music concerts, the PA led fundraisers, School spirit events and special parties. All letters sent home with information detailing these events are translated into the languages of the parents. All parents are also offered the opportunity to act as Class parent of their child's class to organize the parents and be a liason for their needs and contributions to the classroom teacher. Translators are always available at these functions for ELL parents to be included and able to have a voice within the events themselves. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. We added an enrichment program, Enrichment Clusters, that allows children to be exposed to academic vocabulary of a specific hobby or profession. This kind of small group enrichment time promotes interactions with students socially, focusing on speaking and writing skills. 2018-19 CEP 49 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Maria Rogalle, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 50  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: 392 School DBN: Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Maria Rogalle Title Principal Assistant Principal Parent Coordinator Ann Casalan ENL/Bilingual Teacher Marie Camacho Parent Ikania Vargas Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Irene Williams Karen Ames Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 2018-19 CEP 51  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 08X392 School Name: Bronx Delta Superintendent: Karen Ames The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Ann Wendy Casalan DeTiberiis ESL Coordinator Parent Coordinator No Yes Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. The Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS) is the first piece of data considered when assessing our translation needs. Specific attention is given to the Part 3 Parent Information section on the HLIS. Part 3 specifically asks “In what language would you like to receive information from the school?” and “In what language would you prefer to communicate orally with school staff?” The responses to these two questions are our primary basis for deciding the need for written translation and oral interpretation. The classroom teachers also survey the parents at the beginning of the school year to ensure the families of their students receive correspondence in the needed languages. We then keep record of the totals of each written language required for each individual class in the office. This enables the school staff to send home school notices and important information in the necessary languages. In addition, for the oral translation needs of our parents we utilize the Student Emergency Contact Card to be informed of their language preference when contacting the parent by phone or in a face to face meeting. 2018-19 CEP 52  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral English Spanish Arabic Urdu Bambara 238 20 2 1 1 90.15 7.58 0.76 .38 .38 238 20 3 1 1 90.15 7.58 1.14 .38 .38 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Spanish & English Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Documents translated includes but is not limited to parent handbooks at the beginning of the school year, parent-teacher conference announcements, after-school program information, parent workshops, general correspondence, New York State testing dates, general overview of student curriculum, letters from school leadership and any schoolwide programming. Month/Frequency How do you Distributed to plan to Families translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. September-June Documents that are translated into Spanish is done by a Spanish speaking school aide on staff. Documents in Arabic are 2018-19 CEP 53  done through the Google translation application. Most school letters are sent out with English on one side and Spanish on the other. Arabic letters are sent with both the English translation on the back as well. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide September-June Parent Teacher Conference Dates: November 16th & March 15th & May 23rd. interpretation service(s)? The school utilizes Spanish speaking school aides and paraprofessionals to provide Spanish translation services. For other languages the Language Translation Unit is called for the teacher or staff member to speak to parents through an interpreter. Our school holds several face-to-face meetings with our parents throughout the year. Our school holds the three citywide centrally-scheduled parent teacher conferences, The other weekly scheduled Parent Involvement days each month are set aside for one on one meetings with parents for the purpose of discussing any concerns of the teacher or parents regarding their child. The parents also meet with teachers formally on a needed basis for any other academic or behavioral issue such as Hold-over conferences or Behavioral interventions. Super Tuesdays are Parent Engagement workshops. Curriculum Night September 13th ENL Parent Orientation September Paraprofessional on staff provides translation Paraprofessional on staff provides translation 2018-19 CEP 54  ENL Parent Meeting Spring months Paraprofessional on staff provides translation or The DOE translation unit is called for translation. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Spanish speaking families are contacted by phone through our staff who speak Spanish fluently. The DOE Translation unit is used to reach families who do not have someone present at home with them that speaks English. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Staff members are provided the Chancellor's Regulation A-663 and are required to read by a September deadline date. The full text of Chancellor’s Regulations A-663 is also on file in room 117. This text is available to anyone requesting to view this regulation. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) At the beginning of the school year parents who have translation needs receive the Language Access Support for Schools brochure provided by the district Field Language Access Coordinator. In the school's main lobby the Parent Coordinator displays the Welcome poster and the Achieve NYC poster provided by the Field Language Access Coordinator. The front office utilizes the Language Identification card for a parent who has a language need. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? PS 392X will make every effort to consistently seek feedback from parents to ensure that they have access to the school community and that they are being supported, so they in turn may be active in the school community. We make sure all of our correspondence goes out in English with Spanish on the back as per parent feedback. 2018-19 CEP 55 
