2018-19 SCHOOL COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (SCEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 11X418 School Name: BRONX HIGH SCHOOL FOR THE VISUAL ARTS Principal: IRIS WITHERSPOON 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 1  School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Section 4: SCEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) Section 7: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 8: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 9: Title I Program Information Section 10: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Bronx High School for the Visual Arts 11X418 321100011418 9-12 School Number (DBN): 2040 Antin Place, Bronx, New York 10462 718-319-5160 718-319-5165 Phone Number: Iris Witherspoon Fax: iwither@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Email Address: Iris Witherspoon Robert Roache Tammy Lea Larrier Iris Witherspoon Tammy Lea Larrier JazmineMedina, Johnny Gonzalez, Cheyenne Lindsay N/A- District Information Geographical District: 11 Superintendent’s Office Address: Carron Staple Superintendent: One Fordham Plaza, Bronx, New York 10458 cstaple@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-741-5852 Phone Number: 718-741-7098 Fax: FSC: Bronx Field Support Center (FSC) Executive Director: Nancy Saffer 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 3  Executive Director’s Office Address: One Fordham Plaza, Bronx, New York 10458 NSaffer@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-828-7776 Phone Number: 718-741-7098 Fax: 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the SCEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Iris Witherspoon Robert Roache Tammy Lea Larrier JazmineMedina Cheyenne Lindsey Johnny Gonzalez Melissa Rodriguez UrsullaHicks Allinger Teresa Marino *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Rep Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/Teacher 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 5  Name Suzanne Ribeiro Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/Teacher Member/ Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) is a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. The process of developing and implementing the SCEP is aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding SCEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department has established programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students supports to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and SCEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint for continuous improvement that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to increase student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 7  comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five (5) goals and action plans that align with the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. Accountability Tools and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is informed by the New York State Education Department’s (NYSED) Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) Tenets, the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Rubric, School Quality Guide and other quantitative and qualitative data tools. NYSED’s Six DTSDE Tenets To strengthen the existing system, the NYSED has developed a tool that captures the best practices from each of the current tools called the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness. This new tool encompasses multiple instruments such as interviews, classroom observations and surveys. The protocol will begin with a clear and cogent statement of the optimal conditions of an effective school and the instruments comprising the protocol will measure how close or far away a particular school is to the optimal conditions identified. Once reviewed, the school and district will create a strategic plan to address the areas in need of improvement. All current Priority and Focus Schools and Focus Districts must use the tool; districts that are required to submit District Comprehensive Improvement Plans and Comprehensive Educational Plans also will use the tool. The DTSDE protocol includes a rubric, which identifies clear and coherent expectations of the optimal conditions of an effective school and school district across the following six tenets:  Tenet 1: District Leadership and Capacity  Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions  Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support  Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions  Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health, and  Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 8  Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 2017-18 Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) I. II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Structures for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the SCEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the SCEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. Next Steps for SCEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: New this year, instead of self-rating, in Part 1A of the Section 5: Needs Assessment indicate the Statement of Practice (SOP) from the DTSDE Tenets that will be addressed in the action plan. Schools that received an Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) School Review should use the recommendations from the review to select their SOPs. Schools that did not undergo an IIT review should select SOPs informed by the 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 9  major findings/recommendations from your most recent Quality Review (QR) or Central-led Review (CLR), and other qualitative and quantitative data.  Step 4: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 5: Build consensus around activities, strategies and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 6: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 7: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 10  1. What is your school’s mission statement? Section 4: SCEP Overview Our vision is to establish a leading visual arts school that fosters artistic and academic excellence and prepares students to be creative, empowered citizens of the world. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Bronx High School for the Visual Arts has a diverse population of students. Our students are able to obtain an arts-endorsed Regents Diploma, which includes portfolio development and a specialty in Graphic Arts which ensures that our students are college and career-ready. We are an AP for All and College for All school and have expanded our college prep courses and AP offerings this school year. Our total enrollment for the 2017-18 school year is 371 students, of which 47.71% are female and 52.29% are male; 59 % are Hispanic, and 27.49% are Black and 9.7% are White, and 3.07% are American Indian, Asian, or Pacific Islander. Of these 371 students, 34% have IEPs and 7% are English language learners (ELLs). In the 2017-18 school year, the BHSVA school community collaborated with the following community-based organizations to make strides towards achieving our vision: Generation Ready (supported Professional Learning, teacher leadership, instructional programs), CUNY's Creative Arts Program (embedding drama into literacy), College for Every Student (supported college readiness work in the classrooms and in the building), Writing Revolution (supported writing instruction in ELA, History, and Science), Counseling in Schools (provided counseling and crisis intervention), and the Institute for Mediation and Conflict Resolution (provided restorative practices, mediation, peer mediation, de-escalation and classroom presentations). Through the work with these organizations, efforts were made to improve school culture and structures that support higher engagement in the classrooms and in the school community. In addition, we hired a full time dean in March and began to make additional strides to reduce suspensions and increase student supports. We continued to implement the Peer Group Connection program, where we had a group of 11/12th Grade students mentor the 9th graders. We strengthened and expanded our Student Council and had seven students participate in the Bronx Student Advisory Council. Students were able to engage in a variety of community building activities and special fundraisers, including a Blood Drive, Shoe Drive, Clothing Drive, and Food Drive. We trained multiple staff on Therapeutic Crisis Intervention Supports (TCIS) in an effort to build a school culture that is equipped to support our most neediest students. We also trained our 39 students to become our Peer Mediators and began to create a structure for student leaders in the building. We also expanded our internship and community service opportunities to ensure students had multiple opportunities to contribute to the school and develop their own leadership and employability skills. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. The incoming 9th grade cohort adds to our existing special population of struggling readers and writers; two-thirds are entering with a level 1 ELA 8th grade state assessment proficiency score, while the remaining third are comprised of mostly those scoring a level 2 proficiency score with only a handful scoring a level 3 or above. Additionally, this incoming class has a greater number of students with disabilities, which call us to increase interventions and resources and supports. Our special education population as a whole continues to increase, which requires us to hire additional staff to ensure adequate provision of services and supports. We recognize the challenges these students will face as they enter into Regents bearing courses and therefore are galvanizing our strategic instructional planning and professional development around common literacy strategies, necessary for accessing complex text, across content areas. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 11  We used our resources to focus on teacher development, including professional development with Generation Ready, professional learning communities that involved cohort and subject area teacher teams, inquiry-based teamwork, and Kid-Talk - individual student-based interventions on the grade level. In addition, we reorganized the school program and reduced the number of prep periods ICT teachers have so that more energy and focus was spent on common planning time that strategically targeted students. Each content area team met to work increasing student outcomes by focusing their efforts on instructional strategies that supported their needs. Teacher collaboration increased during the school year, as a direct result of the work of the content teams and teacher leadership opportunities. We hired a Peer Collaborative Teacher and utilized our model teacher, who opened up their classrooms as a model classrooms and provided teachers with instructional supports and feedback. We supported the emergence of other teacher leaders and they engaged in facilitating professional learning cycles. In addition, teachers were provided with opportunities for choice in their PL cycles, which increased teacher motivation and participation. 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 12  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 11X418 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 441 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 39 39 3 4 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 32 34 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 82.0% % Attendance Rate 77.3% % Reduced Lunch 5.9% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.5% 61.2% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 9.8% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 3.24 0% 3% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 74% 62% 61.6% 1.8% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Yes N/A 96 104 12 83.1% 4.5% 33.1% 24.9% 2.9% 1.1% 4 34% 8.7 N/A N/A 73% 65% 60.2% 7% N/A No Yes Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No No Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups Hispanic, ED, Hispanic Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A NO N/A N/A YSH Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A N/A NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A YSH N/A N/A N/A NO YSH N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A YES 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 13  2018-19 SCEP-SIG 14  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 3 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 3.2 The school leader ensures and supports the quality implementation of a systematic plan of rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of students. Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction (DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and address student achievement needs. The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. 3.3 3.4 3.5 SOP(s) Addressed x x x x Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3.2 STRENGTHS in this statement of practice include ensuring that our curricula is aligned to standards (According to the April 11, 2018, Principal's Performance Observation report by Superintendent Staple, ”You are ensuring that curricula is aligned to the CCLS and content standards. Additionally, you have structures in place (through the work of grade and content teams) to support the refinement of curricula and academic tasks using protocols and student work to elicit data on student performance levels and needs. Advanced Placement power standards have been incorporated into the curriculum and you have expanded the high-level courses students can take by adding AP Psychology and AP environmental Science this year. ) Additionally, all teachers submitted revised syllabi and unit plans for review by administrators and Generation Ready consultants. NEEDS are to continue coaching teachers in the revision and implementation of curricular improvements and for curricular designs to be assessed in critical friends conferences in content team meetings. In addition, in the school’s last Quality Review (2016-2017) the school was rated developing in 1.2, where there was a lack of evidence demonstrating a coherent set of beliefs about how students learn best that was consistent in all classrooms. 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 15  3.3 STRENGTHS as indicated in the April 11, 2018 PPO include an instructional focus that fosters independence in the students’ literacy skills and builds their cognitive capacity by engaging them in a 4-pronged school-wide approach that includes the following: writing to learn, see-think-wonder, annotation and vocabulary development. The PPO stated that “Teachers use discussion techniques as a way of making thinking visible as witnessed by turn and talk, and class discussion. Most teachers were incorporating writing and reading and one teacher incorporated the use of stations in her Geometry lesson which was very helpful and effective for students. (1.2)” The Staff Handbook includes exemplary lesson and unit plan templates. The school has included Hochman Writing strategies more comprehensively this year than, last, and has begun to incorporate DDI protocols suggested by AP for All coaches. NEEDS as indicated in the April 11, 2018, Principal's Performance Observation report, we are to “support all teachers with the discussion process by focusing on metacognitive tasks that enable students to explain their thinking process verbally and in writing. Students should also learn how to consistently respond academically using “accountable talk”. Having high-level discussions will increase student engagement and improve sub-indicators 3b and 3c which are intertwined. Use the examples Dr. Karin Hess provided to us at the Principals' conference meeting to plan your next PD. (1.2) (4.1)” 3.5 The STRENGTHS as indicated in the April 11, 2018 PPO include “You have also continued to deepen the work happening in content teams around assessment. This data is being used to create purposeful groupings, provide extensions and intervention classes, and close achievement gaps. (2.2)” NEEDS, as indicated in the April 11, 2018 Principal's include, “Continue to examine student work during teacher team meetings to better close gaps, but start thinking about which 10-15 students from each grade and or content area you want to focus on because they are struggling and need additional support. Create inquiry teams next year whose sole mission will be to improve these targeted students’ achievement and progress, thus improving the amount of students who will be one step closer to graduation. (4.2) 3.4 Strengths- The school leader has secured more technology for teachers to use in their classrooms, which include laptop carts for every department and smart boards. In addition, a larger number of teachers are using Google classroom as a platform to engage students in learning. In addition, CUNY Creative Arts Team has been working with our 9th grade classes, embedding drama into literacy, in an effort to strengthen students' skills in writing. Teachers have collaborated on creating curriculum activities, across grade levels, that support college and career readiness to ensure students are developing a college and career mindset from the moment they step into the school. Needs: More interdisciplinary work needs to occur to ensure students see the connections across classrooms. 3.5 Teachers implement systems for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. For example, in the 9th grade, our ELA teacher has been monitoring and tracking student writing using the Writing Revolution strategies. NEEDS: As indicated in the April 11, 2018 Principal's Performance Observation, we need to “continue to examine student work during teacher team meetings to better close gaps, but start thinking about which 10-15 students from each grade and or content area you want to focus on because they are struggling and need additional support. Create 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 16  inquiry teams next year whose sole mission will be to improve these targeted students’ achievement and progress, thus improving the amount of students who will be one step closer to graduation. (4.2)". Ultimately, teachers need to share student work on a continuous basis, in grade teams, to determine gaps, strengths, and next steps, which could then be embedded into each of their courses. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. As a result of targeted support by teachers, by June 2019, there will be a 5% increase (from 25.6% to 34.1%) in the percentage of students who graduate college ready (meet CUNY benchmark) including passing all CCLS Algebra 1 or Geometry Regents exams with a score of 75+ and passing the CCLS ELA Regents exam with a score of 75+.) 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 17 Teachers Students September 2018– June 2019 Principal Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Assistant Principal, Peer Collaborative Teacher Model teachers Principal Assistant Principals Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Teachers will engage in structured workshops on unit and lesson designs that include CCLS-based learning targets. In weekly meetings, content teams will work collaboratively to engage in vertical alignment of their curriculum, paying special attention to ensuring we plan backwards to ensure students are college ready by the time they leave 12th grade. Teachers will engage in Regents Prep activities, which will be held 6 weeks before the Regents and Common Core NYS assessments. Teachers will adapt the New Visions ELA curriculum to ensure CCLS-aligned rigorous tasks Teachers Students September 2018-June 2019 All students will be given the opportunity to receive academic enrichment courses via an extended-learning (ELT) program and Saturday Academy. These seminars will support all core courses. Special attention will be paid to ELA and Math to ensure we are preparing students for higher level ELA courses and Math content. All 9th -12th grade students will use the Hochman Writing Method in Science, ELA, and History, to create complex ideas in writing and ensure mastery of the CCLS writing standards to improve their literacy proficiency in all subject areas. Students Teachers September 2018 – June 2019 Teachers Principal Assistant Principal Teachers (cohort and content teams) Counselors 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 18  Math teachers and ELA teachers will engage in inquiry work, focusing on the lowest 3rd, particularly looking at student work on a continuous basis, to ensure they develop interventions and strategies that are monitored and revised to address gaps in knowledge. College Readiness courses and workshops will be scheduled for students in grades 9-12. We will work with Opportunity Network, a CBO, on curriculum design and instruction, throughout the course of the school year. Common planning time will be incorporated in the school-day for Collaborative Team Teachers to address the needs of our special-needs populations. AP Vertical Team work will continue to ensure that AP power standards are embedded into the curriculum. We will partner with CUNY's LINCT program and offer the CUNY Math Assessment Prep course to targeted students to ensure they meet the college readiness standard for getting into college math courses. Teachers will receive on-going training throughout the school year and will look at data to adjust their practice on a continuous basis. Each grade level will be afforded the opportunity to engage in at least 2 college trips during the course of the school year. Teachers Students Field Borough Service Center The Writing Revolution Support Staff Opportunity Network Assistant Principal College Access for All Teachers Counselors AP for All Model Teachers Peer Collaborative Teacher CUNY LINCT AP 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 19  Social Workers, Guidance Counselors, and SAPIS worker will provide intensive support to students who are academically in danger or failing. Counselors will assist with parent meetings, academic outreach and intervention services to ensure students are attending day school, Extended Learning Time, and Saturday academy. Teachers, counselors, College Access for All, College for Every Student Principal Assistant Principals Guidance counselors Social Worker Paraprofessionals SAPIS September 2018 – June 2019 Students 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent Coordinator and AP Guidance will ensure that workshops and information pamphlets are provided to families about the CC and Rigorous Instruction and our high expectations. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Administration - Title 1 Funds/ Tax Levy funds Teachers - Title 1 Funds, SWP, LPP funds Common planning time for teachers Cohort meetings Saturday Academy per session- Title 1 Funds/SWP Extended learning time per session- Title 1 Funds/ SWP Guidance Counselors - College Access for All funds College Access for All funds to support College Access for All team work, curriculum development, etc. 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 20  AP for All PD, Peer Collaborative Teacher, AP courses- AP for All funds CUNY LINCT Program CUNY Creative Arts Team Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded X P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 50% of students enrolled in classes that culminate in an ELA or Algebra Regents assessment will pass a mock regents exams by the end of March 2019, which will lead them to a college ready score in time for graduation. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Mock regents assessment data will be used to measure progress. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 21  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 5 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 5.2 The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. 5.3 The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students. 5.4 All school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health supports tied to the school’s vision. 5.5 The school leader and student support staff work together with teachers to establish structures to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental health needs. x x x x SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Strengths: As indicated in the April 11, 2018, Principal's performance Review, “you are commended for fostering a safe, secure and nurturing environment for your diverse population of students. Students have multiple adults they can go to for support and benefit from student council, the addition of daily homeroom announcements, pupil path, class visits from guidance counsellors and the use of Peer Group Connection (PGC) which is an amazing mentoring program that build community and a sense of belonging. (1.4)” Additionally, a curriculum is provided by Center for Supportive Schools: Peer Group Connections, an evidence-based program to support students as they transition from middle to high school. As a result, a strong cohort of student leaders has been established pairing 12th graders with 9th graders as peer mentors. Needs: As evidenced by 2017-2018 School Quality Guide, results in the category of Supportive Environment, 57% of teachers say that adults at their school teach students the skills they need to regulate their behavior. And 68% of teachers say that adults at their school have access to school-based supports to assist in behavioral and emotional escalations. A data collection system is needed to assess students’ social and emotional barriers to learning prior to escalation. Part 2 – Annual Goal 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 22  Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools –Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. As a result of our strategic guidance and discipline team's professional learning and support, by June 2019, there will be a 14% increase (from 51% to 65%) in the number of positive responses under Personal Attention and Support on our School Survey. 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 23  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Guidance Counselors, SAPIS counselor, and our School Social Worker will work with student support staff and administration to provide targeted interventions to students who are chronically absent, students who are showing signs of chronic absenteeism, students who are cutting, and students who consistently experiencing discipline problems. Teachers Discipline Team Students Support Staff September 2018– June 2019 Administration Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Pupil Personnel School Social Worker SAPIS Counselor Guidance Counselors Attendance Teacher Discipline team Administration Teachers Support Staff Monthly safety meetings will be held to address internal and external safety issues and to implement strategies for a safe school. The attendance team will meet weekly to discuss interventions and strategies to address student needs. Action plans will be developed and monitored as a result of these meetings. Discipline team members will be provided with ongoing professional development and embedded coaching to effectively manage discipline and implement restorative practices. PGC will be implemented to ensure that all 9th graders are mentored by a peer leader in the school community. A peer tutoring program will be established and facilitated by Student Council. Teachers, Counselors, Discipline team members, Student September 2018-June 2019 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 24  Teachers and support staff will engage in Weekly Kid Talk meetings, with a focus on the "lowest third" to address student concerns and to implement intervention plans. The team will invite parents, students, dean, and counselors, to these weekly meetings to address concerns and provide students with resources and supports for improvement. PGC will continue to be offered to ensure all 9th grade students are mentored by a peer leader in the school community. Parent coordinator will work with student support staff, administration, and all CBOs to create parent workshops on financial aid, the college process, ways to support students with homework, as well as curriculum and reading nights. The same stakeholders will also collaborate to create engaging opportunities for parents such as parent support groups, restorative practices, and other workshops. These will provide families opportunities to strengthen their relationship with the school and their ability to see our community as a positive learning environment for their children. Attendance Teacher and Guidance Counselors will provide more intensive home visits, targeting at risk students who become 407's or who are at risk of showing up on the 407 list. IMCR will help us with developing our Peer Mediation Program and will provide us with ongoing coaching and support. Student Council Institute for Mediation and Conflict Resolution Teachers Guidance counselors Students Parents September 2018 – June 2019 Dean Social Worker Administration Parents September 2018 – June 2019 Students Parent coordinator IMCR PGC Staff Guidance counselors Attendance Teacher School support staff Students Parent Teachers Discipline Team Students 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 25  Parent Coordinator, Social Worker, and Counselors will provide parents and students with hands-on workshops on Restorative Practices, Managing Conflict, Dealing with Bullying, and other pertinent workshops that will support their understanding of protocols used at the school as well as develop and strengthen their partnership with the school. Timeline will be as follows: November- Managing Conflict, December: Dealing with Bullying, January: Restorative Practice, February- College and Career planning, March- College and Career Fair, April-June Ensuring student success via monitoring and collaborating with school staff. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Counselors Parent coordinator Administration Parent engagement time Monthly meeting opportunities for teachers and counselors Per session will be provided for teachers and staff for parent engagement, and academic intervention--Title 1/ SWP Per diem will be offered to cover teachers classrooms so they can participate in student intervention meetings-Title 1/SWP Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded X P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, we will have a survey on Supportive Environment that parents, students, and faculty will complete to give us feedback on our progress. We expect to receive 65% positive responses. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. We will use a school-made survey on Supportive Environment, targeting the specific questions on the Learning Environment Survey. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 26  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 4 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 4.2 School and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. 4.3 Teachers provide coherent, and appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. 4.4 Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences and tailored to the strengths and needs of all students. SOP(s) Addressed x x x 4.5 Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, and progress monitoring). Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. x 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strength: The April 11, 2018 Principal's Performance Observation (PPO) states, “You are ensuring that curricula is aligned to the CCLS and content standards. Additionally, you have structures in place (through the work of grade and content teams) to support the refinement of curricula and academic tasks using protocols and student work to elicit data on student performance levels and needs.” In the same report, the school is celebrated, “You have also trained a teacher to be your Hochman expert who has trained other teachers on how to plan and implement using the Hochman strategies. (4.1)” The PPO report goes on to state: “You have also continued to deepen the work happening in content teams around assessment. This data is being used to create purposeful groupings, provide extensions and intervention classes, and close achievement gaps. (2.2)” Need: The PPO report recommends the following: “Continue to examine student work during teacher team meetings to better close gaps, but start thinking about which 10-15 students from each grade and or content area you want to focus on because they are struggling and need additional support. Create inquiry teams next year whose sole mission will be to improve these targeted students’ achievement and progress, thus improving the amount of students who will be one step closer to graduation. (4.2)” 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 27  While our School Environment Survey results show a slight improvement in our ability to meet the needs of all learners (from 52% of students in 2016-17 to 57% of students in 2017-18, expressing that in " all of their classes, their teachers explain things a different way if they don’t understand something in class"), we need to increase that percentage substantially to not only align with the citywide average but to ensure that all learners needs are being met. The results of our current School Environment Survey (2017-18) also show that fewer teachers have faith that their colleagues "feel responsible that all students learn": 75% of teachers last year responded that a lot or all of the teachers at their school feel responsible that all students learn. This year only 62% of teachers say that teachers feel responsible that all students learn. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. As a result of a school-wide focus on inquiry work around improving outcomes for students, by June 2019, there will be a 10% increase (from 45% to 55%) in the percentage of positive responses on the innovation and collective responsibility section of learning environment survey. 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 28  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Students will participate in an on-line reading assessment, Scantron, which will be administered 2 times during the school year. Teachers Content teams will utilize baseline data to implement and monitor literacy strategies. The Hochman Writing Program will be implemented school wide to support students with reading and writing skill development in ELA, Science, and History, in grades 9-12. Professional development will be provided to teachers to support the collaborative implementation of the Hochman writing program. Students September 2018- June 2019 Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Principal Assistant principals Teacher leaders Parent Coordinator Counselors Parents Professional development will be provided to teachers on identifying the lowest 3rd, setting goals, and on differentiating instruction to support their needs. A system for tracking the progress of students in the lowest third will be implemented in the kid-talk cohort weekly meetings. Student data trends will be analyzed and needs addressed. Teachers Hochman consultants Counselors will participate in the weekly kid talk meetings to address student concerns and to develop action plans to address those needs. Teachers will engage in content team meetings during other professional work time to address the needs of special needs 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 29  students and to ensure rigorous tasks are provided to students with multiple entry points. Teacher and counselors will engage in weekly kid talk meetings to address student concerns and to develop action plans to address those needs. Common planning will be scheduled into teacher programs to collaboratively analyze data and implement strategies. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will be provided with mailings and workshops on the work our teachers are engaging in to support our literacy goals. Our Parent Coordinator and counselors will provide these workshops and AP will oversee. Workshops will be provided during Coffee with the Principal - September - June and during the PTA meetings. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Administration Student support staff Bronx Borough Field Support Center Academic Intervention team Per session and per diem will be offered to teachers and support staff to ensure they are available to address student and parent needs, during the day, as well as after school and on Saturdays Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded X P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 30  By February 2019, we will have a 5% increase in the percentage of positive responses on an in-house survey that evaluates teacher collaboration. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Survey results, observation reports, classroom observations Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 31  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 2 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 2.2 The school leader ensures that the school community shares the Specific, Measurable, Ambitious, Results-oriented, and Timely (SMART) goals/mission and long-term vision inclusive of core values that address the priorities outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP). Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital resources. 2.3 2.4 The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district's Annual Professional Performance Review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. 2.5 Leaders effectively use evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve critical individual and school-wide practices as defined in the SCEP (student achievement, curriculum and teacher practices; leadership development; community/family engagement; and student social and emotional developmental health). x x x SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths: The April 11, 2018 Principal's Performance Observation (PPO) report states, “You have completed and confirmed close to 80% of your teacher observations, and your post-observation feedback and examination of Danielson data has helped to frame the type of professional development you provide. “ The PPO also states: “High expectations are communicated regularly through your post –observation feedback to teachers, as well as your weekly memo, school-wide announcements, pupil path, cohort meetings with counsellors, bi-weekly updating Skedula, and incorporating practices into the curriculum that are connected to college and career readiness.” According to the 2016-17 School Environment Survey, 63% of teachers agreed or strongly agreed that the principal/school leader at their school communicates a clear vision for their school. This year (2017-18 LES) that increased to 73%. In addition, in 2016-17, the survey demonstrated 62% positive responses in the category of Instructional Leadership, while the 2017-18 survey indicated a 65% positive responses in this same category. Also, in 2016-17 survey only 63% of teachers agreed or strongly agreed that the principal encourages feedback through regular 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 32  meetings with parents and teacher leaders while in the 2017-18 survey result, 73% of teachers agreed with this statement. On the 2016-17 Quality Review, we received proficient ratings on indicators 1.3 (aligning resource use to support instructional goals that meet students' needs), indicator 5.1 (evaluate school level decisions with a focus on CCLS), and indicator 3.1 (share school level theory of action and goals with the school community). Needs: On the 2017-18 Learning Environment Survey, 58% of teachers said that the principal participates in instructional planning with teams of teacher and only 62% of teachers said that the principal sets clear expectations for implementing what they learned in professional development. This year there will be more efforts made to ensure that leader is planning with teams of teachers and documenting professional learning expectations and monitoring the implementation of learning in the classrooms. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART– Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. As a result of the implementation of increased observation cycles focused on providing teachers with more opportunities for targeted feedback and support, by June 2019, there will be a 5% increase (from 65% to 70%) in the number of positive responses under instructional leadership on the School Survey. 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 33  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Frequent observation cycles will be provided to teachers in an effort to increase transparency about the feedback and observation cycles. Teacher Teachers will develop their own goals for improving their teacher practice and these goals will be revisited at least three times in the school year. September 2018– June 2019 Administration Teacher Leaders Administrators will engage teacher teams in instructional planning sessions to ensure instructional expectations are met and integrated into units of study. Teachers Administrators will follow up with professional learning goals and implementation of strategies learned and provide teachers with ongoing feedback and support. Teachers September 2018-June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 Administrators Teacher leaders Administrators Teacher Leaders Administration will work with the professional development team to create meaningful professional learning opportunities for teachers based on observation data and student data to ensure student engagement, which will lead to improved student outcomes. Teachers Teachers will be invited to facilitate professional learning sessions in an effort to build teacher leadership and capacity. Counselors and Admin staff will meet after each marking period to discuss trends in credit accumulation and to create action plans for improvement, which will be followed up by the guidance counselors. Parent outreach and emergency meetings will be instituted to address the urgency of credit accumulation and graduation goals. September 2018 – June 2019 Administration Professional development team Teacher leaders Students, teachers, counselors, and parents September 2018 – June 2019 Admin Counselors Parent Coordinator Teachers 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 34  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent Coordinator and Counselors will provide families with ongoing information on school updates, progress made, and areas in need of attention. AP will oversee the implementation of these meetings and communication efforts. Between the months of August 2018 through June 2019 parents are provided with information about SLT, meetings, calendar of events and activities, key information about parent leadership and engagement, as well as information on who they can contact for implementation and oversight. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Administration CBOs - CFES Parent Coordinator Guidance Team Per session and per diem will be used to ensure that support staff and teachers are able to meet with students and families to provide the appropriate intervention.- Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded X P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, the data on a teacher survey on effective school leadership, will show a 2% increase in positive results. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Teacher survey on Effective School Leadership Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 35  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement) Part 1 – Needs Assessment  Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 6 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 6.2 The school leader ensures that regular communication with students and families fosters their high expectations for student academic achievement. 6.3 The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders so that student strength and needs are identified and used to augment learning. 6.4 The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to support student success. 6.5 The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school community members centered on student learning and success and encourages and empowers families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their children. x x x x SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths: The April 11, 2018 Principal's Performance Observation, states that, “High expectations are communicated regularly through your post –observation feedback to teachers, as well as your weekly memo, school-wide announcements, pupil path, cohort meetings with counselors, bi-weekly updating Skedula, and incorporating practices into the curriculum that are connected to college and career readiness. Teachers and guidance counselors also have conferences with students to discuss grades, progress and next steps for improvement. There are events planned for students and their families to understand career pathways and the road to college.” In 2018-19, we are having our first annual Senior Induction Ceremony to celebrate on track seniors and to discuss information for seniors and their families. We are piloting Remind Me App with some classes to ensure students and parents receive important school reminders. We are updating our Website to include links to PTA information, surveys, clubs and events. Needs: 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 36  Results of the School Environment Survey 2017-18, specifically from parents regarding their involvement in the school, have shown a reduction in involvement and communication between teachers and parents regarding student progress. This year, according to the School Environment Survey, Parent Involvement in the school was assessed to be 81%. Last year, parent involvement garnered a higher score of 85% . This year, 80% of parents/guardians responded that since the beginning of the school year, they have communicated with their child's teacher about their child's performance sometimes or often. Last year, the figure was higher: 90% of parents/guardians responded that since the beginning of the school year, they have communicated with their child's teacher about their child's performance sometimes or often. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. As a result of our restorative professional development for parents, by June 2019 there will be a 5% increase in the strong family-community ties section of the learning environment survey. 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 37  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) A Restorative Room will be created to support parent workshops, parent meetings, and de-escalation supports for students and families. Parents Students Sept. 2018- June 2019 Educational Alchemy Professional development will be provided to our student support team, which includes our Social Worker, Guidance, SAPIS, dean, Peer mediator, and AP to deepen our ability to incorporate restorative practices into our interventions Coaching sessions will be provided to the student support team with timely and specific feedback on how to support parents and students in need of restorative supports. Admin, Dean, Social Worker, Guidance Counselors, Peer Mediator, SAPIS Parent Coordintor Admin, Dean, Social Worker, Guidance Counselors, Peer Mediator, SAPIS Parent Coordinator Administration SAPIS, Guidance Counselors, Soc.Wkr, Sept. 2018-June 2019 Educational Alchemy Principal Sept. 2018- June 2019 Administration Educational Alchemy 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 38  Monthly Parent Workshops will be provided to families exposing them to a variety of restorative practices Parents Continued implementation of Skedula with professional development for parents, teachers, and students, to provide data regarding student progress and needs Teachers Parents Students October 2018- June 2019 September 2018 – June 2019 Educational Alchemy Principal Assistant Principals Parent Coordinator Guidance Counselors Principal and assistant principals will ensure that all teachers are regularly updating Skedula by monitoring Skedula on a biweekly basis. Cohort teams will host regular meetings for parents to speak to their children’s teachers in person, during the school day. Students The parent coordinator and administrative cabinet will be responsible for producing a monthly calendar, in both English and Spanish, which updates families about school opportunities for all students and their families . Parents Counselors Parents Students Incentives, such as metrocards, and resources, such as childcare, will be offered to parents in an effort to support parent engagement. Students and families Incentives will be offered to students who bring parents to school meetings and events. Students and families A program of grade level attendance competitions will be implemented. Parent Coordinator, Guidance, Administration will review periodic data analysis regarding parent engagement and create action plans to continue to ensure parents are able to participate in the educational planning for their children. Donations will be solicited from community businesses for electronic items that can be used a give-aways at parent events. September 2018 – June 2019 Principal Assistant Principals Teachers Counselors September 2018 – June 2019 Parent Coordinator and Administrative Cabinet . September 2018 – June 2019 Administrative cabinet and department leads . Parent coordinator Guidance Administration Social worker 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 39  Personal phone calls will be made to at-risk families. Flyers for upcoming events will be distributed by mail and online through Skedula. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Educational Alchemy, IMCR Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Administration School leadership team Teachers Pupil Path Parent engagement time Metrocards will be provided to parents per session and per diem will be offered to appropriate staff to ensure they are available to provide students and parents support. Educational Alchemy IMCR Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded X X P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 40  By February 2019, there will be a 2% increase in the number of positive responses on the strong-families-community ties of our in-house survey. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Survey, Parent engagement logs, Skedula, will be used to assess progress. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 41  Section 6: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) Program Description Directions: Expanded Learning Time activities are directly aligned to the elements of the Framework for Great Schools, Rigorous Instruction, Supportive Environment, and Strong Family and Community Ties. ELT provides enriching educational experiences that happen outside of the traditional school day and blend skill acquisition, relationship-building and fun to foster academic and social-emotional growth. Summer learning, afterschool programming, and extended-day ELT models, when well-implemented, play a critical role in supporting students in all grades and ensuring that they graduate from high school, college and career ready. SED requires that Priority schools offer a minimum of 200 additional student contact hours as Expanded Learning Time in addition to the current mandated length of 900 hours of instruction per year (25 hours per week) in grades K-6 and 990 hours of instruction per year (27.5 hours per week) in grades 7-12. Effective ELT models will blend school staff with community partners, and will provide a balanced curriculum that can include ELA, Math, STEM, arts, physical activity, and leadership development. Complete the sections on this page to demonstrate how the school will meet these requirements. Part 1 – ELT Program Goal(s) Describe the summative goal(s) of the ELT program for the 2018-19 school year. Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. Students will be programmed for ELT based on scholarship data and need: ● Students who need credit-bearing courses in the core subjects will be offered these additional courses as a 6 th period class and on Saturdays, under the supervision of a licensed teacher. All courses must be approved, along with their curricula, by the Accreditation Committee. ● Academic enrichment clubs, such as book clubs, newspaper, poetry club, STEM opportunities, and debate will be offered after school. ● After-school and Saturday tutoring will be offered to students in small, targeted settings, so that they can receive the individualized support they need; these groups will be an outgrowth of the regular inquiry work. ● Teachers will have more aggressive intervention plans for at-risk students in each of the cohorts; this plan includes: home visits, regular emails and letters home, phone calls to report progress, and extension activities that parents must sign off on before students hand them in to teachers. Goal: 80% of the students who attend extended learning time will increase their credit accumulation by 5% by June 2019. Part 2 – ELT Program Type Is the ELT program voluntary or compulsory? X Voluntary Compulsory If the ELT program is voluntary, indicate how you will actively encourage the participation of all students, with the goal of serving at least 50% of students. Parent communication through newsletters, emails, phone calls and face to face meetings; leverage the CBO’s to create meaningful partnerships with parents and students; support staff and admin cabinet will engage in town hall, small group and individual meetings to create urgency and communicate incentives. Part 3 – ELT Program Description 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 42  Target Population: The ELT program will be offered to all students in the school, with the goal of serving a minimum of fifty percent of students. Describe how the school will meet the following SED requirements for an ELT program in a Priority School:  Integrate academics, enrichment, and skill development through hands-on experiences that make learning relevant and engaging.  Offer a range of activities that capture student interest and strengthen student engagement in learning so as to promote higher attendance, reduce risk for retention or drop out, and increase the likelihood of graduation.  Actively address the unique learning needs and interests of all types of students, especially those who may benefit from approaches and experiences not offered in the traditional classroom setting.  Contain components designed to improve student academic, social, and emotional outcomes, including opportunities for enrichment programs such as in music and art.  Ensure instruction in any core academic subject offered in the program will be delivered under the supervision of a teacher who is NYS certified in that particular content area.  Engage in outreach activities made to families. 100% of the students will have access to a variety of ELT choices during the school year. 100% of the teaching staff will be provided with the opportunity and the resources to provide extended learning to their students. In addition, all students who participate in any after-school clubs must attend ELT before their club activity. Part 4 – ELT Program Implementation and Oversight Part 4a. Who will implement the ELT program? Who will oversee the program? 1. Indicate the key personnel that will be responsible for implementing and overseeing the ELT program, including school-based staff and any high-quality community partners that will be involved. If applicable, describe the scope of involvement of all community partners and how the joint ELT program is structured. 2. 3. Explain how you will evaluate the program to assess impact on student achievement. The principal and the administrative cabinet will oversee the implementation of the ELT program. The guidance team will be responsible for reporting to administration and attending monthly meetings to monitor progress. In order for this program to be successful, all stakeholders must be involved; hence, parents will be invited to visit the ELT program, volunteer their time to tutor and work with students under the supervision of the teacher, and coordinate celebratory events for students who regularly attend. The program will be evaluated to determine effectiveness as it relates to student achievement via data tracking, specifically examining how students increased their Regents scores and class pass rates for the semester. Part 4b. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. September 2018: Orientation with families and staff to communicate high expectations and discuss ELT programming. October 2018: Begin ELT and Gather Data for Beginning of Program assessment. November 2018: 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 43  Parental outreach via meeting with staff and CBO members to discuss ELT results thus far. Conduct second cycle of inquiry. December 2018: Conduct third cycle of inquiry. Update parents on ELT success via mail. January 2019: Meet with accreditation team and cabinet to discuss possible ELT revisions based on three cycles of inquiry. Discuss final January Regents results and credit accumulation. Share successes and growth areas with families. February 2019: Begin second semester by holding another orientation. Conduct first cycle of inquiry for second semester. March 2019: Parental outreach via meeting with staff and CBO members to discuss ELT results thus far. Conduct second cycle of inquiry. April 2019: Parental outreach via mail to update families and staff on ELT results thus far. Conduct third cycle of inquiry. May 2019: Host a meeting for families to discuss ELT progress thus far as well as ways in which they can support their children for final exams and Regents exams. Conduct final cycle of inquiry. June 2019: Accreditation committee and cabinet meet with SLT to discuss the final results of ELT to begin crafting school-wide goals for the 2018-19 school year. Part 5 – ELT Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the ELT program. 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 44  Administrators to monitor program Teachers to teach the credit-bearing courses and ELT Parent coordinator to work with families to increase support Accreditation committee to approve all credit-bearing courses Using Data teams to provide updates on the inquiry process so that ELT is directly tied to the data trends and student needs. Per session and per diem will be provided to teachers and support staff to ensure they can provide students and parents with the resources they need to be academically successful in the school. Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support the ELT Program. Note: If the program is funded by 21st Century Community Center Learning Funds, it must be offered in conjunction with a high quality, high capacity community partner. 21st Century Title I 1003(a) X Tax Levy X Title III Title I SWP PTA Funded Title I TA X SIG Grant P/F Set-aside School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 6 – ELT Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, at least 50% of students who have attended ELT will have increased their credit accumulation by 3%. By February 2019, 50% of students taking mock regents exams will have passed as evidenced by mock ELA and Algebra common core results. Part 6b. Indicate the instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Mock exams for ELA and Algebra, Transcripts Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 45  Section 7: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) 9 th graders who scored at a level 1 and 2 on the middle school ELA and math assessments; 10 th graders who are missing credits and failed 1 or more Regents; 11 th and 12 th graders who are missing credits and who have failed 1 or more Regents exams. 9 th Grade. Failed course and failed latest Interim Assessment. 10 th – 12 th All students who have not passed the Int. Algebra exam. Any 10 th grader who failed the living environment exam, and any 11 th and 12 th grader who is missing a science Regents exam. All seniors who have not passed both of the Regents exam. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Repeated readings, interactive writings, /Hochman Small group instruction, tutoring, one-to-one. During and after school Targeted re-teaching; student tutors; numeracy support. Small group instruction, tutoring, one-to-one During and after school Targeted re-teaching on highest-frequency content and concepts on the Regents; peer tutoring. Repeated readings, interactive writings, Achieve 3000, using literature to provide context for students. Small group instruction, tutoring, one-to-one During and after school Small group instruction, tutoring, one-to-one During and after school 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 46  At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) All mandated IEP students; students who are referred by our SBST. Academic support meetings with social workers , counselors and CBO’s Individual and small groups. During and after the school day 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 47  Section 8: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) Currently we have 50 students in temporary housing. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Counseling, food/clothing/educational resources as needed on a case to case basis Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 48  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 49  Section 9: Title I Program Information Directions:  All schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. In order to recruit highly qualified teachers, the principal will: ● Partner with New York City Teaching Fellows, Teach for America, and universities/colleges with high-quality teacher education programs. ● Host interns during the school year. ● Host open houses for interested candidates. ● Request that candidates teach a demonstrative lesson for a hiring committee ● Request that candidates give a writing sample and lesson plan sample based on specific content and groups of students Highly qualified teachers will be specifically recruited to ensure they are appropriately licensed to teach the courses in the building. In order to retain highly qualified teachers, the principal will: ● Conduct frequent observations and provide high-quality feedback. ● Offer multiple professional learning opportunities that are both educational and engaging. ● Create opportunities to cultivate teacher leadership. In order to provide high-quality professional development, the principal will: ● Use data trends from Advance to structure professional development strategically. ● Allow for teachers to facilitate professional development. 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 50  ● Provide a menu of professional development workshops from which to choose, particularly on Chancellor’s PD day. ● Ensure there are opportunities for teachers to authentically engage with their content, such as establishing partnerships with museums and other organizations. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the strategies and activities for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, staff, and paraprofessionals that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Administration: ● Engage in book studies and inquiry projects around leadership and data trends. ● Provide learning opportunities and inter-visitations with outside schools and organizations. - Administration will work strategically with the Generation ready coaches in Math, Science, Special Education, ELA and History, to devise targeted professional learning experiences to teachers in the specific content areas. Focus areas will include differentiation of instruction, implementing the instructional focus, literacy across all content areas, data driven instruction and lesson and unit planning. Teachers: ● Using Data Framework for inquiry teams. Teachers will also take on leadership roles in providing professional learning in their teacher teams. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. Not Applicable 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). Not Applicable Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/information, early intervention services, etc.). NA 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 51  Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Teachers will design and agree upon assessments during their inquiry teams; they will then go to the administrative team for feedback and approval. All assessments must be aligned to the power standards that were selected by the accreditation team and reflect the rigor of their respective disciplines. Assessments include the Scantron reading baseline assessment, the Hochman writing baseline assessment, and Regents-aligned assessment tools. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds enables, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (SCEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Title I Part A (Basic) Title I School Improvement 1003(a) Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funds Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 400,000 64,000 0 0 0 4,000,000.00 x x x x Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) part 1-5 part 1-5 part 1-5 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 52  to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I School Improvement 1003(a): To support implementation of school improvement activities identified through the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) reviews or a school review with district oversight and included in the DCIP/SCEP.  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: To support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs.  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan.  Title I Priority and Focus School Parent Engagement Set-aside: Additional set-aside is to enable greater and  more meaningful parent participation in the education of their children. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs. 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 53   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process, including Title I 1003(g) SIG funds: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 54  Section 10: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Bronx High School for the Visual Arts , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students Bronx High School for the Visual Arts will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 55  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 56  ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand The school will ensure that parents are informed of all ELT opportunities, Regents prep opportunities, and Saturday Academy. School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 57  School-Parent Compact (SPC) Bronx High School for the Visual Arts, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 58  ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 59  ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 60  ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 61  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 11 School Name Bronx High School for the Visual Arts Borough Bronx School Number 418 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Iris Witherspoon Coach ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Rachel Michel Hopkins Teacher/Subject Area James Winslow/Special Ed. Teacher/Subject Area Irene Hilao/ELA Related-Service Provider Henry Wright Superintendent Carron Staple Assistant Principal Debra Logan Coach School Counselor Sasha Santiago Parent Pedro Villanueva Parent Coordinator Ileana Boden Field Support Center Staff Member Wladimir Pierre Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification 0 Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 62  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 450 Total number of ELLs 30 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 6.67% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 2 4 3 K Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 0 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Our school uses the results of the annual NYSESLAT Exam and a variety of teach-created assessments to assess the literacy skills of our ELLs. Data indicates that students need substantial support in reading and writing. Their scores in these skill areas are significantly lower than their scores on the speaking and listening components of both the NYSESLAT and Predictive Acuity exams. Students need support in fine-tuning their reading comprehension skills and organizing their essays. Instructional strategies need to focus more on developing reading and writing skills. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 63  We use the data we get from teacher created assessments to check in after each marking period to exam progress and discuss next steps. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? The success of our ELL Program is based on how our individual students advance to proficient levels of English. Based on annual NYSESLAT testing and ELL periodic assessments we can accurately evaluate how our students acquire the four components of learning English such as speaking, reading, writing, and listening. Beyond the high-stakes exams and universal diagnostic measures, the ESL Coordinator uses classroom assessments both formal and informal to measure the overall success of the ELL program. Student progress and performance, across the board, informs the success of their ELL instruction. The AMAO Estimator tool was used last year to calculate and track student progress. This tool was beneficial in evaluating the success of our programs and instruction. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? We meet with the counselors, parents, and ELL teacher and discuss next steps to ensure that students do not slip through cracks. Students who need more support are provided with extended learning time and Saturday support. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] N/A 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Data is consistent on both the NYSESLAT and NYSISTELL exams with respect to scores on the four modalities of listening, speaking, reading and writing. Students need substantial support in literacy. Their scores in these skill areas are significantly lower than their scores on the speaking and listening components of both the NYSESLAT and LAB-R exams. This is also consistent with students taking both exams at various grade levels. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? The ESL teacher works closely with the other content area teachers to discuss the scores and get feedback regarding the progress they have made and the areas in need of improvement. An action plan is devised and share with the team. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Freestanding ENL is provided to our Entering and Emerging ELLs as per CR Part 154.2. These students are programmed in a 90 minute block where they receive instruction on English Language Support along with grade level ELA, modified to accommodate their needs. Instruction is delivered through a focus on literacy which is carried out in a variety of ways. The ESL teacher uses materials that are modified for ELLs (e.g. high interest-low level reading, graphic organizers, guided reading…) and adapts/modifies the materials used by ELA teachers to ensure that ELLs are receiving instruction that is similar to the concepts, themes, and skills in the main stream ELA classroom. During 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 64  Integrated ENL, the ESL instructor works with ELLs throughout the content instruction in collaboration with the classroom teachers to provide language acquisition and vocabulary support, while retaining content instruction time. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Our staff is organized in a way that facilitates the most efficient programming of ELLs. Aside from the ESL Coordinator, all APs and Guidance Counselors are aware of the mandates for each proficiency level. This way any staff member holding a position that has any bearing on scheduling, is aware and compliant of the mandated minutes for each ELL. The mandated number of minutes is ensured through organizing the ESL teacher's program efficiently and appropriately, servicing all ELLs as their mandates deem necessary. As per CR Part 154.2, students are appropriately scheduled for mandated ELL instructional minutes based on the NYSESLAT and NYSISTELL results. Entering and Emerging students receive one unit of Stand-Alone ENL and one unit of Integrated ENL per week, in addition, the ESL teacher provides their ELA instruction. Transitioning and Expanding students receive one unit of Integrated ENL per week; their ELA instruction is delivered in the main stream classroom. Commanding students receive 90 minutes of Integrated ENL per week. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. In order to meet the demands dictated by the six instructional shifts as per the CCLS, we have redirected our focus and implemented new learning goals. We are working with more informational texts, familiarizing students with their formatting and language, and teaching how to interact with these texts. Some of the new areas of focus in this regard include: metacognitive awareness and questioning of the text/reading with a purpose, annotating a text, and development of academic language. In the push-in model of instruction, the ESL instructor works directly with the ELA instructor to make content comprehensible. The ESL teacher modifies and differentiates instruction to make it comprehensible to the ELL students. Content material is scaffolded to make it comprehensible to the ELL student. In the pull-out model, the ESL instructor collaborates closely with the ELA teachers to ensure that lessons and curriculum are closely aligned. In both models of instruction, the ESL teacher and ELA instructors make sure their reading, writing, speaking, and listening materials are either the same or modified versions of what is being taught in the regular ELA classes. In Self-contained models, language is learned through various content areas. The use of collaborative planning and thematic units marries the language and content areas in an authentic and balanced approach. In all three models, instruction is delivered in English and both language and content area development are enriched through the use of visual aids, smart boards, hands-on experiments, glossaries and small group or cooperative work in both target and native languages. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Our school is currently exploring various resources that will allow us to effectively evaluate each of our ELLs in their respective home languages. We are working to acquire staff, training, and materials that will provide our school with the means to both develop and evaluate our ELLs in their native language, especially in our low instance languages (Twi and Urdu). We anticipate partnering with outside programs or CBOs as the school year progresses, so that we may implement a system in which to effectively carry out this aspect of language development. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 65  c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Differentiation takes place in a variety of ways and is dependent upon the needs and abilities of each ELL. a. SIFE students are interviewed by the ESL Coordinator to determine their educational background and asked about their experiences outside of the formal classroom. The ESL instructor orally interviews SIFE students to ascertain their oral language skills. In addition, the ESL teacher has SIFE students submit a writing sample for the purposes of determining their writing ability.The ESL instructor works very closely with regular ELA instructors to follow up on the progress of SIFE students. SIFE students are programmed according to both the results of their respective NYSESLAT and LAB-R scores. Due to the nature of a SIFE background, often times there is a focus on penmanship, appropriate classroom behavior, and basic grammar/mechanics. The IEP and individual performance of each SIFE student are the primary influences in what drives differentiated instruction for this subgroup. b. Students with less than three years in US schools receive ongoing language development and support. Beginning students receive 540 instructional minutes of language development scheduled into their daily program. Beyond this, all newcomers are scheduled for after-school tutoring with the ESL teacher, where they are able to receive individualized instruction and assistance. They learn basic English ”Survival skills” and progress towards understanding the skills required to comprehend academic English. The concentration lies on grammar essentials and vocabulary. There is a great deal of modeling, consistent comprehension checks, and use of visual aids with these students. Beginning ELLs are also taught how to prepare for state mandated exams, through familiarizing them with test formatting, and teaching them universal test-taking strategies (context clues, eliminate answers on multiple choice questions, note-taking skills). c. ELLs with 4 to 6 years of service continue to receive modified instruction and consistent vocabulary development/support. They learn appropriate study skills, and continue to work on fine-tuning their reading, writing, listening and speaking skills. There is a focus on developing metacognitive awareness in these students, so that they may become active participants in their own learning processes. We attempt to develop these students' awareness of what their strengths and weaknesses are so that they may better manage their study time. In addition, we focus on self-correcting during the writing process so that students become aware of typical errors. We provide students with a variety of strategies in terms of vocabulary/reading comprehension, listening/note taking skills and guide them in discovering which process works best according to their particular learning styles. d. Long-Term ELLs are encouraged to transition out of the ELL program through on-going support and modified instruction. They are given more challenging and higher level assignments that help them improve their listening, speaking, reading, and writing skills. The common deficit among these students seems to be the acquisition of CALP. Therefore, the concentration lies in developing content-specific and academic language. At this point, much of the language support is delivered through a content-based approach. e. Former ELLs continue to receive moderate support within a designated content area via Integrated ENL. The ESL Coordinator also sends out a memo in September notifying the staff of the ELLs who have recently tested out, to inform them of the transitional supports they may still require for the next two years, as well as the testing accommodations that they are still entitled to. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Students With Special Needs are given appropriate instructional material and instruction based on their skill and ability levels. Instructional modifications and accommodations are based on the mandates listed in their IEPs. Special Needs students’ are scheduled for ELL instruction based on the results of either the NYSESLAT, NYSISTELL or alternative assessments. The mandates on the IEP drive the strategies, methods, materials and instruction chosen for these students. There are a myriad of online resources that are implemented in these settings that allow instructors to deliver academic content and develop/enrich language in ways that are appropriate for the grade/age level. These resources involve all four modalities and also facilitate critical thinking, (e.g. adapted newspaper/journal articles with reading comprehension, listening passages with comprehension questions, grammar/spelling games and activities) 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 66  Felxible programming is used to provide targeted support to students. Our school implements CTT in many of our classes, which also ensures that these students are given access to content while developing their target language. In addition, the Collections CCLS curriculum coupled with the Hochman writing method are integrated into our 9 th and 10 th grade content areas. These focused texts and strategies are modified to enable students to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. ELLs including newcomers, those with 4-6 years of instruction and long-term ELLs receive small-group tutoring in all content areas during their lunch period, three periods a week. These content area teachers along with the ESL instructor are available after-school to assist ELLs in obtaining extra-help in the above mentioned content areas. This year our school will offer an Extended Learning Time program which will be held after school for three days a week, along with Saturday School. All programs are conducted in English. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? We have implemented new programs for monitoring re-identified ELLs, we have established an LTE team to monitor the ELL-SWD subgroup and incoming students, we are exploring options and resources to create a strong HLA program, and we are in the midst of creating specialized programs to address the needs of parents. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? N/A 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs have access to all school programs including the numerous art internships offered at our school and other curricular programs that prepare them for state mandated examinations. ELL students participate in after school programs such as credit recovery programs to make up lost credits. There are extra curricular activities at our school such as talent shows, dance, martial arts, cooking and additional art programs. All ELLs and students at our school are encouraged to participate in these extra-curricular activities. For example, the goal and rationale of the dance program is for students to become exposed to another art form and develop certain talents. Students also realize that they have another outlet for engaging in a fun filled after-school activity, with students and teachers that they don't normally engage with throughout their scheduled day. These programs are aimed at establishing a school-based community that integrate all students and teachers. Extended Learning Time, Academic Intervention Support, and Saturday Academy are supplemental programs offered to all students in our school community. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Students at the newcomer, 4-6 year level and long-term ELLs have equal access to technology in our school including the use of a MAC Lab and laptop PCs. They use the Internet in various classes for the purposes of conducting research on a variety of topics in ELA, Social Science, Art, and Science classes. Students have access to certain educational software for the purposes of enriching their language skills. Some of this software is available in Spanish. In addition, many teachers use overhead projectors, PowerPoint presentations, informational videos, and smart-boards for the purpose of presenting content material instruction. All students are able to access and track information from each of their classes through Pupil Path. This program allows students, teachers and parents to communicate easily with each other. In addition, it keeps a running record of student progress, previous assignments, attendance, and grades. Our school also provides all students, teachers, and parents with access to BrainPop. This is a supplementary learning tool that helps our ELLs to comprehend both language and content through visual aids. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 67  Within our ENL program model, our ELL students who share the same native language are given the opportunity to work in pairs/small groups. We also provide books, glossaries/dictionaries, and technological resources in various languages to support the native language our ELLs.The ESL teacher devotes instructional time to familiarizing students with how to use these resources, especially the native language glossaries. Whenever applicable, the ESL teacher draws upon similarities that can be seen between students' target and native languages (e.g. recognizing cognates). In addition, the ESL teacher includes each represented heritage/culture of her students through thematic units, projects, and research; this fosters native language support, cultural awareness, and parental involvement. In some cases there may be bilingual paraprofessionals to assist the needs of our ELL-SWDs. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. All ELLs work with resources and receive support that is aligned to their ages and levels. Content and language that ELLs must work with is driven by the CCLS and therefore, ensures that they are receiving the appropriate level of work for their age and grade. The ESL teacher makes the support and resources accessible to ELLs in terms of their proficiency levels, through adapting materials, designing scaffolds, and creating assessments to monitor and increase comprehension. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Students at the newcomer, 4-6 year level and long-term ELLs have equal access to technology in our school including the use of a MAC Lab and laptop PCs. They use the Internet in various classes for the purposes of conducting research on a variety of topics in ELA, Social Science, Art, and Science classes. Students have access to certain educational software for the purposes of enriching their language skills. Some of this software is available in Spanish. In addition, many teachers use overhead projectors, PowerPoint presentations, informational videos, and smart-boards for the purpose of presenting content material instruction. All students are able to access and track information from each of their classes through Pupil Path. This program allows students, teachers and parents to communicate easily with each other. In addition, it keeps a running record of student progress, previous assignments, attendance, and grades. Our school also provides all students, teachers, and parents with access to BrainPop. This is a supplementary learning tool that helps our ELLs to comprehend both language and content through visual aids. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Before the beginning of the school year, students are placed in appropriate courses based on either their NYSESLAT scores and/or results of the NYSISTELL. Students then meet with both the Guidance Counselor and ELL coordinator to determine the most suitable program based on their mandates, needs and the requirements for school graduation. Some of the activities our ELLs take part in include: Summer Bridge program, New/Transfer Student Orientation, and Town-Hall or Class meetings. Newly enrolled students who arrive throughout the year are generally paired with an upper-class men who serves as their "buddy". This student helps to get the new arrival acquainted with the school. The ESL Coordinator also gives these students a personalized tour of the school and orientation of standing programs and clubs, along with upcoming activities and trips that the school may be offering at the time. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Advanced Spanish and Literary Drama. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 68  Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? All teachers are required to attend the FBSC PD sessions that focus on best strategies to support ELLs in ELA, Math, Social Studies, and Science. Science, Math, and Technology teachers are sent to the various STEM workshops held by the OELL that address the particular needs of LEP students in these content areas. ELA and History teachers are sent to workshops that focus on how to address the literacy needs of ELLs while engaging with grade level, Common Core aligned texts. Teachers are encouraged to attend any PD offered that is related to the services they provide. In addition, PL is built into our school-wide PD plan. The OELL runs content and grade specific workshops that address the complexities of delivering instruction that is both accessible and rigorous to LEP students, as per the CCLS. We require our teachers to attend these workshops when offered in their content area for secondary schools. We also require teachers to attend any workshops that are offered on addressing vocabulary with second language learners, as all content areas must utilize and teach vocabulary in order for students to be successful across the curriculum. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. The ESL teacher works with staff to provide them with supports as students begin their program at school. An initial memo is sent to teachers outlining the ELLs and their proficiency and grade levels, as well as the former ELLs. Professional development is delivered by the ESL teacher to assist staff in differentiating instruction, modifying tasks, selecting vocabulary, and creating various points of entry throughout instruction. In addition, the teachers have the option to submit work to the ESL teacher for assistance with modification, adaptation, and differentiation. All teachers are required to attend a minimum of 15% of total hours of their Professional Development on workshops or seminars that address ELL instruction, including a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for ELLs. Part of this ELL specific PD is delivered during the school-wide professional learning time. Additional PD will take place via webinars, outside courses and workshops offered by the OELL, the UFT, or another DOE approved vendor. We have allocated money in our budget to encourage our teachers to sign up for these outside courses, offering per-session for their time spent outside of the school hours. 50% of the ENL teacher's PD hours are dedicated to language acquisition in alignment with core content areas instruction, including a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for English Language Learners. Our school partners with PACE via the Teacher Leader Quality Partnership Grant, in which teachers engage in Inquiry Learning Collaborative. Within this program our content area teachers, ESL teacher, and special education teachers conduct inquiry work based upon their collaborative efforts in the classroom, focusing on intervention strategies for particular ELL subgroups. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? The ESL Coordinator holds meetings for the parents of ELLs to inform them of any program changes, proficiency levels, and academic progress. Translation and interpretation is provided as needed, usually within the building through our bilingual staff 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 69  members. For low instance languages, the school will contact the Language and Interpretation Unit to arrange for these services. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. The ESL Coordinator holds meetings throughout the year, specifically for the parents of ELLs. These meetings are designed to acquaint parents with the culture of the school and encourage them to be an active member of our community, regardless of their language ability. Our school is currently developing a program to empower parents by giving them direct information and language that will allow them to engage in academic conversations with their child. We feel that parents may become more involved in their children's' studies if they are given the necessary information and tools to conduct this type of dialogue. We also offer workshops for parents of ELLs to help them to navigate the Pupil Path system that our school uses, as well as informing them of the various resources that are available to them within the community, through the DOE, and CBOs. All workshops are conducted in the parents' preferred language. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 70 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Iris Witherspoon, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 71  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: BHSVA School DBN: 11X418 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Iris Witherspoon Debra Logan Ileana Boden Title Principal Assistant Principal Parent Coordinator Rachel Michel Hopkins ENL/Bilingual Teacher Pedro Villanueva Parent James Winslow/Special Ed Teacher/Subject Area n/a n/a n/a Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Sasha Santiago School Counselor Carron Staple Wladimir Pierre n/a n/a n/a Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Wladimir Pierre Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 06/27/17 06/27/17 06/27/17 06/27/17 06/27/17 06/27/17 n/a n/a n/a 06/27/17 06/27/17 06/27/17 n/a n/a n/a 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 72  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 11X418 School Name: Bronx HS for the Visual Arts Superintendent: C. Staple The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary)Kelly Johnston Kelly Jeanette Ileana Johnston DeJesus Boden ESL teacher ESL Teacher Secretary PC No No Yes Yes yes Yes Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Our school uses the Home Language Identification Surveys, the blue Emergency Information Cards, and the RAPL/RPAL reports on ATS to assess the language needs and preferences of all parents. We use the information rendered from these documents/reports to designate the appropriate language in which all correspondence is conducted with parents. We generate this information into a spread-sheet. This is a living document used to track and meet the LTI needs of our parents. 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 73  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral The preferred languages (both written and oral) of our parent population include: Albanian, Arabic, Bengali, French, French-Kmer, Greek, Swahili, Twi, and Yoruba. 50% 50% Albanian, Arabic, Bengali, French, French-Kmer, Greek, Swahili, Twi, and Yoruba. Albanian, Arabic, Bengali, French, French-Kmer, Greek, Swahili, Twi, and Yoruba. n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Spanish, English, Arabic Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. By using staff and the translation unit Families • Annual handbooks (September) • Newsletters (Monthly) • Calendars (Monthly) • Parent-teacher conference announcements (As needed) September 8, 2017 August 31, 2017 August 31, 2017 September 8, 2017 September 19, 2017 January 3, 2018 As necessary • After-school program information (As needed) • NYS Testing dates (As needed) 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 74  • Letters from the school leadership (As needed) n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to We have a total of six formal meetings with parents, including parent-teacher conferences and curriculum night, which span from September to May on the assigned dates that have been determined by the NYC DOE. In addition, there are two meetings held specifically for the parents of ELLs, conducted early in the fall term and later in the year prior to the administration of the NYSESLAT. Staff members contact parents informally on a weekly basis to inform parents of any academic concerns that may be affecting their child's progress. n/a n/a n/a See above provide interpretation service(s)? By using staff and the translation unit n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Skedula/Pupil Path, School Messenger Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 75  Professional Development sessions during PD time and common planning time. ESL teacher will also support the implementation of the regulations. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Our school uses the data mentioned above in Part A to designate parents who have requested to receive information in a language other than English. We use this list to ensure that all parents receive mailings and information distributed by the school and DOE, in their language of preference. We send out a mailing to these parents, at the start of each year, describing our translation and interpretation services and protocol. In this letter, we also notify parents that they have the right to bring their own interpreter. These letters are sent in the parent's language of preference. In addition, we distribute copies of the Expect Success Guide (provided by the DOE) to all of these parents in the language that they have requested. We are sure to display the Welcome Poster and Language Access Guide at the security desk so that parents can utilize these resources upon entering the building, and we use that information meet their needs and provide them the language services they need. We have copies of the Parents' Bill of Rights in the various preferred written language of parents' based upon the RAPL report. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? We intend to gather feedback on the quality and availability of these services through the use of parent surveys, along with the information rendered from Parent-Teacher Conferences and Pupil Path. 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 76 
