2018-19 RENEWAL SCHOOL COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (RSCEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 08X424 School Name: THE HUNTS POINT SCHOOL Principal: DAVID VAZQUEZ 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 1  Renewal School Comprehensive Educational Plan (RSCEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: Executive Summary and Organizing Principles Section 3: Community Engagement Team and School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 4: Renewal School Narrative Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) Section 7: Community School Description Section 8: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 9: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 10: Title I Program Information Section 11: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 2  Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Bronx Academy for Multi-Media (BAMM!) 320800010424 6-8 School Number (DBN): 08X424 730 Bryant Avenue, Bronx, NY 10474 718.328.1972 718.328.7330 Phone Number: David J Vazquez Fax: Email Address: dvazque4@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Community School CBO: Principal: Community School Director: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): ASPIRA of New York David J Vazquez Ralph Germaine Richard Sellati Sharlene Velez Alan Reiff Ciara Cruz N/A District Information Geographical District: 08 Superintendent’s Office Address: Dr. Erika Tobia Superintendent: 1230Zerega Avenue, Room 6-10 Bronx, NY 10462 Etobia@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-828-6653 Phone Number: 718.828.6239 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 3  Bronx FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Nancy Saffer Executive Director: 1230 Zerega Ave Bronx NY 10462 nsaffer@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-828-7776 Phone Number: 718-828-3113 Fax: 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 4  Section 2: Executive Summary and Organizing Principles The Objective The intent of this Renewal School Comprehensive Educational Plan (RSCEP) is to continue to frame a three-year process for each Renewal school and design a comprehensive plan that outlines a strategic path to a paradigm shift in each school at every level. The motivation driving this work is our commitment to providing every child with a school that meets their academic and social-emotional needs. Closely accompanying this imperative is our belief that every school can be renewed and foster a community based culture of learning. The job of the district is to use our position to provide the systemic vision, strategies, and resources to facilitate school renewal through a collaborative effort including all stakeholders. The core values held as essential for the success of the School Renewal Program:  A “learning stance” must be held by all community members (district leaders, school leaders, school staff, community-based partners, students and families). The work should be approached with humility and integrity. We must all be willing learners.  A “theory of action” must guide the work to ensure clarity and coherence.  Authentic teams that collaborate in the spirit of trust, within and across the various levels of the school community, are prerequisites for successful school renewal  Schools will be places of robust engagement, anchored in positive youth development, ensuring that the school environment is welcoming and empowering for students, families and community members.  Strong professional development/learning is a fundamental part of our work.  The school renewal implementation must be simultaneously dynamic and responsive as well as sustained over the three year period of renewal. The organizing Theory of Action that guides the School Renewal Program strategy: By using the Six Elements of the Framework for Great schools as our improvement structure, we seek to align instructional coaching and leadership development with structural supports in order to build staff capacity. Using schools instructional foci, school leaders and staff will implement changes in curriculum, instruction, school culture and structures so that there are sustainable improvements in student outcomes and school culture. The arc of the School Renewal Program strategy: In order to attain high levels of achievement for all students in Renewal schools we must build capacity to increase student achievement through the adoption of new attitudes and behaviors, research based strategies that improve teacher practice, coupled with the use of clear data driven supports for building students’ skills in the content areas and increasing student engagement. We are particularly prioritizing reading and writing across the curricula. The use of student learning data will drive instruction through strong teacher teams; onsite, job embedded professional learning and problem solving, and accountability at all levels of the system: central, district and school - for results. Renewal schools are provided with intensive training, leadership and pedagogical coaching, and structural supports, monitoring of implementation and ongoing feedback and revisions as needed. Further, each Renewal school will become a Community School and strategically partner with community based organizations (CBO) to integrate social services and expanded learning time into the fabric of the school to help them better serve the needs of students. These schools will stand as centers of opportunities where families can get the supports they need to make sure students come to school ready and able to learn. School Receivership In April 2015, state lawmakers and Governor Andrew Cuomo created section 211-f of the State Education Law, which established the School Receivership program as a new intervention strategy to turn around struggling schools. This new law, and Commissioner’s regulation 100.19, requires that “Persistently Struggling Schools,” defined as Priority Schools that have been in the most severe accountability status since the 2006-07 school year, be given an initial one or two-year period under a “Superintendent Receiver”. These schools were placed in receivership under the New York City Schools Chancellor. Each school must make demonstrable improvement on specific benchmarks or it will be placed under an independent receiver. Under the Chancellor’s Receivership Plan, the School Renewal Program is NYCDOE’s 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 5  core strategy for turning around struggling schools. Renewal Schools have already begun implementing significant interventions and are receiving additional resources and support to accelerate student performance and help close achievement gaps reflected in this RSCEP. Structure of the Renewal School Comprehensive Educational Plan (RSCEP) The Renewal School Comprehensive Educational Plan (RSCEP) will serve as the organizing and overarching document for each Renewal school and will be directly aligned and developed around the elements of the Framework for Great Schools, New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, and Strong Schools, Strong Communities, including the following:  Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks: Demonstrable improvement benchmarks located in the 2018-19 RSCEP, in the Data and Accountability Snapshot page. Receivership benchmarks have been closely aligned with the Renewal benchmarks so that schools will have one coherent set of improvement benchmarks to meet. All Receivership Benchmarks are a subset of Renewal Benchmarks. While the targets for these overlapping benchmarks are not always identical, the Receivership Benchmark targets are always equal to or lower that the Renewal Benchmarks targets. That means that any school that meets its Renewal Benchmarks targets have by definition also met its Receivership Benchmarks targets. For additional information on Receivership demonstrable improvement benchmarks go here.  Establishing an overarching summative vision aligned with elements of the Framework for Great Schools and documenting key areas of celebration and renewal through analysis of assessments and by envisioning what the desired outcome for each school will be at the end of the School Renewal process.  Setting interim assessment benchmarks that create the path for improvement by focusing on desired outcomes and goals. In this way, the plan will be mapped to the overarching summative vision. In addition to the five discrete goals formed around the elements of the Framework for Great Schools, each school will create an action plan.  Transformation into a community school in order to increase student and family access to physical and mental health services and other social-emotional supports made available in or near the school.  Expanded learning opportunities for all students, including additional instruction provided during afterschool  and/or summer programming provided in collaboration with community partners. Intensive professional development for all staff to ensure effective implementation of curriculum and instruction aligned to the Common Core State Standards (CCSS) and to support staff in effectively responding to the differentiated academic and social-emotional needs of all students.  Additional, focused strategies to increase parent and family engagement. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Information on the Framework for Great Schools and the DTSDE Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 6  The Department has established programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students supports to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and RSCEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint for continuous improvement that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to increase student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five (5) goals and action plans that align with the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. Accountability Tools and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is informed by the New York State Education Department’s (NYSED) Diagnostic Tool for 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 7  School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) Tenets, the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Rubric, School Quality Guide and other quantitative and qualitative data tools. NYSED’s Six DTSDE Tenets To strengthen the existing system, the NYSED has developed a tool that captures the best practices from each of the current tools called the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness. This new tool encompasses multiple instruments such as interviews, classroom observations and surveys. The protocol will begin with a clear and cogent statement of the optimal conditions of an effective school and the instruments comprising the protocol will measure how close or far away a particular school is to the optimal conditions identified. Once reviewed, the school and district will create a strategic plan to address the areas in need of improvement. All current Priority and Focus Schools and Focus Districts must use the tool; districts that are required to submit District Comprehensive Improvement Plans and Comprehensive Educational Plans also will use the tool. The DTSDE protocol includes a rubric, which identifies clear and coherent expectations of the optimal conditions of an effective school and school district across the following six tenets: 1. Tenet 1: District Leadership and Capacity 2. Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions 3. Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support 4. Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions 5. Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health, and 6. Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 2017-18 Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Structures for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the RSCEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the RSCEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 8  Next Steps for RSCEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists in every Renewal school and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the American Institute of Research (AIR) needs assessment, the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: In Part 1A of the Section 5: Needs Assessment indicate the Statement of Practice (SOP) from the DTSDE Tenets that will be addressed in the action plan. Schools that received an Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) School Review should use the recommendations from the review to select their SOPs. Schools that did not undergo an IIT review should select SOPs informed by the major findings/recommendations from your most recent Quality Review (QR) or Central-led Review (CLR), and other qualitative and quantitative data.  Step 4: Create a summative vision for the elements of the Framework for Great Schools.  Step 5: Revisit your school’s current goals, and strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you have identified, and will let your school community know when you have reached your goal.  Step 6: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 7: Update your school’s AIS section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 8: Complete the Expanded Learning Time (ELT) and the Community School sections.  Step 9: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether strategies and activities outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust practices along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 9  Section 3: Community Engagement Team and School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Directions: All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Renewal School Comprehensive Educational Plan (RSCEP). SLT members’ signatures indicates that they have been consulted with and given the opportunity to provide feedback on the plan and the plan’s alignment with the school-based budget to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Expanded Learning Time, Community School initiative, Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. On the chart below: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the second column. 2. 3. In the first column, indicate using an “X” if the person is an SLT member. In the third column, record the position and constituent group represented such as staff, parent, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), or other contributor. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 4. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the RSCEP, not approval. 5. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Signature (Blue Ink) Check if SLT x x x x x X x x Name Position and Constituent Group David J Vazquez Richard Sellati Sharlene Velez Michelle Camacho Ciara Cruz Ralph Germaine Represented *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Community School Director (staff) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 10  Check if SLT Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Nakia Colon Millie Colon Jasmine Bosch Roberta McBride Alan Reiff Natasha Hernandez x x x x Parent Parent Parent Parent SLT Chair Faculty Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Community Engagement Team (CET) Signature Page Directions: Please fill out this form and indicate members of your Community Engagement Team. On the chart below: 1. List the names of each Community Engagement Team member in the first column. 2. Record the position and constituent group represented in the second column. 3. Community Engagement Team members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If a Community Engagement Team member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original signature page. Name Position and Constituent Group Roger Ball Ralph Germain David J Vazquez Desiree Vega Michelle Camacho 2018-19 RSCEP-PF Represented AP Community School Director (CSD) Principal Parent Coordinator School Aide Signature (Blue Ink) 11 Signature (Blue Ink) Name Position and Constituent Group Wanda Cabrera Sharlene Velez Ciara Cruz Nakia Colon Millie Colon Jasmine Bosch N/A N/A N/A N/A Represented Secretary Parent Parent Parent Parent Parent N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 12  Section 4: Renewal School Narrative In a brief narrative, describe the current state of the Renewal school addressing the following: 1. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including your school’s mission statement and a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. 2. What are the school’s beliefs about student learning? 3. 4. Describe your school’s approach to family engagement and progress made with establishing families as Identify any special student populations that the school has and what their specific needs are. partners in furthering student achievement 5. Describe how your school is leveraging community school partnerships to support progress in elements of the Framework for Great Schools and indicate where this has been a challenge. 6. Summarize the Expanded Learning Time (ELT) opportunities that have been offered to your students this year. At the close of the 2016-2017 academic year, the Hunts Point MS (08X424) held the distinction of being amongst the lowest overall performing middle schools in New York State and on the persistently dangerous list. With the full support of the Chancellor’s Office and superintendent (district 8), 424 was re-branded in August 2017, and a school-wide improvement plan was drafted and initiated four weeks later September 2017. The Bronx Academy for Multi-Media (BAMM!) school-wide improve plan rests on three cornerstones: (a) rebuild the instructional core, (b) reset the school’s tone, culture, and physical environment, and (c) transform the mindset of every adult practitioner in our learning community (growth v. fixed). How do students learn best? Highly effective instruction is the essential ingredient to close the achievement gap and cultivate high school, college and work-ready Scholar-Activists. Great teaching rarely, if ever, emerges in a vacuum, or by accident. Highly effective instruction is the product of well-trained, purposeful teachers and data-driven teacher teams adopting a common language (Danielson), sharing a common instructional philosophy and working in sync with an equally dedicated cohort of creative and constructive instructional leaders and coaches toward a manageable set of common, clear and S.M.A.R.T. goals. As a school and district, we embrace the "workshop model" across all grades and disciplines. Via the workshop model,  Students learn best by doing i.e., tackling a succession of increasingly complex tasks and sitting at the center of the cognitive action as frequently as possible across the duration of a single or double instructional period.  Teachers are invited to teach/model, then gradually release students to grapple with a cognitively rigorous  task independently and in purposeful groups. Student independence is cultivated by teachers manufacture opportunities for teachers to customize instruction and support; a particularly important characteristic given our relatively high, special needs populations across our MS (31% students with disabilities, 31% ELLs).  We practice our learning community’s (a) purposeful, ongoing, shift from teacher-centered, whole-group, instruction to student-centered, text-based, small group, collaborative instruction, and (b) increasing philosophical alignment with the overwhelming body of research which places the highest premium on 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 13  providing students extended opportunities to critically read, write, speak, and problem solve across disciplines over the course of each instructional day. The increasing alignment of MS summative assessments with the common core instructional shifts demands we place a high premium on strengthening our students’ capacity to: (a) marshal text-based evidence, (b) understand increasingly complex concepts and vocabulary to successfully defend an oral and written argument, (c) establish authentic connections across multiple topics and disciplines, and (d) successfully apply their emerging skills and conceptual knowledge to simulations which replicate the highly dynamic, ambiguous, and unpredictable character of the “real world.” The ability to effectively summon evidence in written and verbal argument, for example, rests on a foundation of highly specific,. cognitively rigorous tasks or highly visible thinking routines that “stretch” students, cognitively speaking, create intellectually dynamic classroom environments, and ensure college and career readiness. So this year we’ve begun to guide faculty to include the following thinking routines in their daily instructional plan:  A close reading of engaging and increasingly complex fiction and non-fiction texts that requires students to  underline and annotate Scaffolded questioning that requires students to reference text in their written and verbal responses and defend their point-of-view  Highly participatory, text-based classroom discussions in which students address and challenge one another as well as their teacher(s). Each of these thinking routines are partially assessed by CCLS-aligned tasks that demand students produce short and extended evidence-based, written responses in class and for HW. Our school-wide instructional focus this year is the following: In an effort to increase the number of students attaining a score of proficient (Level 3) or better by 10% in ELA and mathematics by June 2019, we will strengthen every teacher’s capacity to deliver targeted, small group instruction and increase every student’s ability to read critically, write well, speak clearly and independently problem solve. Planning & Refining Curricula Cognitive engagement is the direct by-product of well-planned, rigorous tasks presented in succession across all grades and subjects. “Task predicts performance.”[1] A primary objective of our department teams over the last eight months has been to strengthen the alignment of our ELA, Math, Social Studies, and Science curricula with the CCLS to increase cognitive engagement and improve student performance on both the NYS ELA and Math standardized assessments; with an increased focus on our students with disabilities and ELLs; thus, ensuring rigorous instruction for all students. The BAMM! faculty are supervised by a designated Assistant Principal (AP) for Instruction, who along with the Principal, a part-time Literacy coach and an Instructional Coach for each core subject, are charged with providing timely, relevant and actionable feedback to faculty on their unit plans at the opening of each cycle (or marking period) and employing a widely circulated checklist of five essential components to support instructional coherence across all disciplines and each grade — sixth through eighth. BAMM’s instructional core rests on the following curricula unpacked and implemented last September 2017:  Teacher College (TC) Reading & Writing Curricula immerse students in a minimum of four (4) units of study inclusive of narrative, informational, poetry and argumentative writing within a 90-minute block of ELA instruction 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 14   NYC DOE Passport to Social Studies curricula drives students to analyze and support arguments and their point of view by utilizing a blend of primary and secondary historical and literary texts inclusive of graphs, photographs, artwork and  NTN KEMS Mathematic curricula  For science the Glencoe middle school Science curricula emphasizes inquiry and hands-on application of scientific concepts THE five (5) essential daily instructional components WILL CONTINUE TO BE SUPPORTED AND IMPLEMENTED ACROSS ALL CLASSROOMS. THEY ARE: 1. Learning targets (LTs), which are standards-based aka CCLS-aligned lesson objectives, integrated throughout the lesson and posted prominently in the classroom, and written in highly accessible language to all students. 2. A minimum of three (3) observable checks for understanding (CFUs) explicitly and seamlessly embedded in daily lesson plans. 3. Scaffolds and supports for ELLs and students with disabilities (SWDs) included In the lessoN plan AND observable to the naked eye. 4. The authentic and effective utilization of all paraprofessionals assigned to each class; particularly, with respect to supporting our SWDs (student with disabilities) and ELLs. 5. Exit slips issued and attached to the lesson plan no fewer than three times per week. Each of these five expectations are in direct service of providing every student a steady diet of cognitively rigorous tasks across all subjects that place premiums on:  close and critical reading of non-fiction and fiction texts that includes every student underlining and annotating. student-to-student text and/or evidence-based discussions, text or evidence-based extended written responses composed by each student independently, and    opportunities for students to apply the aforementioned cognitive skills in the service of addressing authentic, "real world" challenges. IT'S ALL ABOUT RIGOR AND RELEVANCE. In addition to the exit slips referenced above, we ADMINISTER THE following interim assessments quarterly TO TRACK AND MONITOR all students' performance AND GROWTH THROUGHOUT THE SCHOOL YEAR: I-Ready ELA and Math DIAGNOSTIC BENCHMARK; 3x/yr Teachers College performance-based assessments, I.E. BASELINE AND ENDLINE, ON-DEMAND WRITING PROMPTS; 3x/yr NTN KEMS pre- and post-unit assessments; approx. 6-10x/yr Fountas & Pinnell running records; 3x/yr ReadyNY INSTRUCTION post assessment; varies per student 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 15  Teacher-created mid- and final QUARTERLY exams correlated with grade-level specific, NYS ELA and Math Power Standards and the standardized, NYS ELA, MATH AND SCIENCE summative assessments. [1] Elizabeth A. City, Richard F. Elmore, Lee Teitel, Sarah E. Fiarman, Andrew Lachman (Foreword by), Instructional Rounds in Education: A Network Approach to Improving Teaching and Learning. Cambridge: Harvard Education Press, 2009. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 16  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 08X424 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 309 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 56 57 10 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 14 15 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 94.0% % Attendance Rate 92.9% % Reduced Lunch 24.3% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.3% 73.5% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 1.0% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 7% 21% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 11.1% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No No Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District Yes Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A NO N/A NO NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A NO N/A N/A NO High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Yes N/A 30 30 90.7% 1.6% 30.1% 23.0% 1.3% 1.3% 6 28% 8.8 5.6% 13% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No NO N/A N/A NO NO NO N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A YES NO N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 17  2018-19 RSCEP-PF 18  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 3 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 3.2 The school leader ensures and supports the quality implementation of a systematic plan of rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of students. Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction (DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and address student achievement needs. The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. 3.3 3.4 3.5 SOP(s) Addressed x x x x Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? Given the overall performance of all students across all sub groups, the instructional leadership's overarching goal is to continue to build and strengthen the instructional core. See the disaggregated components of our action plan below. In the 2016-2017 academic year less than 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 19  5% of Hunts Point Middle School (HPMS) students scored proficient (Level 3) or better on either the NYS ELA or Math. And in 2017-2018, we observed very modest increases in both 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 20  ELA and Math. Our overall 2017-18SY statistical snapshot has prompted us to re-establish BAMM’s annual S.M.A.R.T. goals, and thoughtfully align them with our District's 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 21  goals, the Chancellor's Priorities and with our 2017-18 NYSED Receivership Benchmarks. By June 2019, we seek to attain or exceed the following student performance benchm2018-19 RSCEP-PF 22  arks:  Ten percent (+10%) increase in number of students attainin2018-19 RSCEP-PF 23  g proficiency on the NYS 3 - 8 ELA and Math exams.  Three percent (+2018-19 RSCEP-PF 24  3%) increase in our school-wide attendance  Overall decrease i2018-19 RSCEP-PF 25  n number of incidents classified as violent and worthy of a supe2018-19 RSCEP-PF 26  rintendent suspension. Factors that have contributed to such low outcomes over the last five years have included, though, were 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 27  not limited to:  Annual curricula changes  RSCEP goals not aligned to the N2018-19 RSCEP-PF 28   YS P - 12 CCLS Little to no collaborative inquiry by teacher tea2018-19 RSCEP-PF 29  ms  Approximately 50% of teachers consistently rated ineffect2018-19 RSCEP-PF 30  ive or developing over the last 4 years Inconsistent observati 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 31  ons, feedback and coaching of teachers across all grades and co2018-19 RSCEP-PF 32   re subjects Lack of meaningful professional development alig2018-19 RSCEP-PF 33  ned to school-wide and District goals, NYSED instructional sh2018-19 RSCEP-PF 34  ifts and teachers’ specific needs based upon Danielson rubr2018-19 RSCEP-PF 35  ic Moreover, there was an absence of both, a strategic and robust academic, and behavior RTI plan in place to address all students’ individual learning needs. Also, there was no me2018-19 RSCEP-PF 36  aningful differentiation of instruction to address the learning needs of our significant ELL and SWD student populations. Historic enrollment data shows a majority of our students arri2018-19 RSCEP-PF 37  ve from feeder Elementary schools performing well-below grade level -- the bulk from our neighborhood feeder school PS 48. Our learning community’s success this academic year 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 38  will rest on our ability to assemble and lead our instructional teams, which we have purposefully organized and explicitly designed in order to strengthen each teacher’s capacit2018-19 RSCEP-PF 39  y to:  Unpack, modify and deliver CCLS-aligned units of study in E2018-19 RSCEP-PF 40  LA (Teachers College Reading & Writing), Math (NTN), Science (2018-19 RSCEP-PF 41  Glencoe), and Social Studies (NYC DOE Passport to Social Studi2018-19 RSCEP-PF 42  es Units of Study) to fidelity,  Establish common, academic and 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 43  personal classroom behavior and school-wide norms and consis2018-19 RSCEP-PF 44  tently execute school-wide, student behavior and academic ma2018-19 RSCEP-PF 45  nagement techniques, and  Envision and create meaningful oppo2018-19 RSCEP-PF 46  rtunities for all students to emerge as Scholar-Activists in o2018-19 RSCEP-PF 47  rder to succeed in high school, college and beyond; regardless 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 48  of classification, history, conduct and/or past performance 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 49  (growth mindset). Each department team, led by one of two instructional APs, is charged with the task of leading multiple rounds of less2018-19 RSCEP-PF 50  on and unit study designed to strengthen the planning of highly rigorous performance tasks aligned with CCLS at the opening of the year. Our APs also lead their respective teams in succ2018-19 RSCEP-PF 51  essive rounds of data analysis, including examinations of student work and interim assessment results, which will in turn result in instructional, programmatic and scheduling modificatio2018-19 RSCEP-PF 52  ns designed to improve teacher practice and student outcomes. A data point worth noting: eleven of our Colleagues, are first-year teachers (40% or 11/27). Eighteen me2018-19 RSCEP-PF 53  mbers, or 66% of the faculty (18/27) remain un-tenured i.e. have taught for three years or less. Thus our next steps for improving learning and instruction include:  Com2018-19 RSCEP-PF 54  mon planning time scheduled within the contractual day for eve2018-19 RSCEP-PF 55  ry content area team to deepen their understanding of curricul2018-19 RSCEP-PF 56   um. Four instructional coaches from the Bronx Field Support Ce2018-19 RSCEP-PF 57  nter will work with teachers and students within their specifi2018-19 RSCEP-PF 58  c content area speciality, i.e. ELA, Math, Science, and Social 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 59  Studies; each coach will be charged with the task of unpacking c2018-19 RSCEP-PF 60  urricula, lesson planning, modeling and coaching each teache2018-19 RSCEP-PF 61  r in order to provide timely, job-embedded and targeted, actio2018-19 RSCEP-PF 62  nable feedback aligned with our Instructional Focus and align2018-19 RSCEP-PF 63  ed school-wide goals  Ensure daily double block of ELA and Math t2018-19 RSCEP-PF 64   o grades 6 thru 8 (90-minutes) Increased the number of special e2018-19 RSCEP-PF 65  ducation licensed teachers to support our rising number of stu2018-19 RSCEP-PF 66  dents with disabilities assigned to core ICT classrooms, and 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 67   Principal and APs provided FREQUENT informal and formal timel2018-19 RSCEP-PF 68  y, relevant, actionable and targeted feedback to teachers dur2018-19 RSCEP-PF 69  ing each 4-week cycle of support.  Provide teachers ongoing sch2018-19 RSCEP-PF 70  ool-based and district-wide professional learning opportun2018-19 RSCEP-PF 71  ities aligned to school goals and the selected curriculum. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 72 Given  all of the above, we feel confident that our collective effort with all of the above will result in:  Teachers being provided the o2018-19 RSCEP-PF 73  pportunity to engage in coach-led investigations of curricul2018-19 RSCEP-PF 74  ar materials for their subject area during common planning.  Te2018-19 RSCEP-PF 75  achers receiving targeted job-embedded coaching and support 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 76  via the Borough Instructional Coaches each week throughout th2018-19 RSCEP-PF 77  e school year.  Principal and two instructional APs leading and 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 78  maintaining 4-week cycles of support and supervision to provi2018-19 RSCEP-PF 79  ding timely and relevant and actionable feedback to each of our 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 80  27 teachers.  Teachers benefiting from district-wide profess2018-19 RSCEP-PF 81  ional learning opportunities to further advance their practi2018-19 RSCEP-PF 82  ce and network with colleagues across the district  Bronx Field 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 83  Support Center (BFSC) instructional liaisons reinforce the w2018-19 RSCEP-PF 84  ork of the school and reinforce discipline-specific pedagogi2018-19 RSCEP-PF 85  cal and management techniques within a specific, core content 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 86   area. School-based instructional leadership i.e., Principa2018-19 RSCEP-PF 87  l, APs and Director of School Renewal (DSR) participate in ongo2018-19 RSCEP-PF 88  ing, district-based professional learning to strengthen the2018-19 RSCEP-PF 89  ir skills w/respect to providing (a) clear, targeted, and acti2018-19 RSCEP-PF 90  onable feedback and (b) supporting teacher implementation of 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 91  that feedback. The admin team’s efforts to strengthen daily instruction and school culture have been enhanced since our launch last September 2017 by 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 92  the expanded number of reliable indicators on our data dashboard, which includes metrics and data our community of learners regularly collects and consults to make curricular, instruct2018-19 RSCEP-PF 93  ional and organizational adjustments as well as offer teachers concise actionable next steps and plan our professional development activities. These metrics include:  Teache2018-19 RSCEP-PF 94  r observation data obtained from Advance, which provides a sum2018-19 RSCEP-PF 95  mary of each teacher’s performance on each of the Danielson com2018-19 RSCEP-PF 96  ponents throughout the academic year Interim assessment data  2018-19 RSCEP-PF 97  including the results yielded from the tri-annual administra2018-19 RSCEP-PF 98  tion of the i-Ready Diagnostic Benchmark assessment in readin2018-19 RSCEP-PF 99  g and Mathematics, teacher-created pre- and post-unit tests2018-19 RSCEP-PF 100  , simulated NYS 3-8 ELA and math exams and student course pass r2018-19 RSCEP-PF 101  ates throughout each cycle or marking period. Then after regularly analyzing this dat2018-19 RSCEP-PF 102  a, we determine and devise a plan for specific additional learning and instruction for student intervention services and teacher practice supports. In addition, we have invested in Skedul2018-19 RSCEP-PF 103  a, a web-based platform that includes an electronic grade book that permits both students and their family members to monitor 24/7 students' academic progress. It also pro2018-19 RSCEP-PF 104  duces mid-cycle progress reports every 4-5 weeks that keep all stakeholders - Admin, Advisors, parents, and students – informed, and up-to-date with of students' standing in 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 105  each subject class mid-way through each cycle or marking period. Moreover, the Datacation platform has enhanced our Science team’s efforts to better align interim assessments to 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 106  Next Generation and NYS Science standards and analyze student understanding of foundational science skills and concepts by content, student and/or cohort. The Admin team 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 107  regularly triangulates data during weekly Instructional Leadership Team (ILT) meetings in order to monitor our efficacy in fulfilling our Instructional Focus and all students' pro2018-19 RSCEP-PF 108  gress. The ILT also conducts school-wide walk-throughs focused by content and/or grade along with the Director of School Renewal (DSR) to observe "from the balcony" if the 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 109  agreed-upon learning expectations and instructional moves are happening and effective and consider next steps. At the close of Cycle I, for instance, the ILT will assess data 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 110  yielded from the completion of Individual Planning Conferences (IPCs), teacher self-evaluations and inaugural round of mini observations and concluded the best means of strengthen2018-19 RSCEP-PF 111  ing daily instruction is to focus our job-embedded supports, feedback and ongoing professional learning community activities around strengthening Danielson components 1A, 1E and 3C, empha2018-19 RSCEP-PF 112  sizing strengthening the quality and consistent implementation of daily learning targets (LTs). Strengthening our department teams will no doubt accelerate our efforts to norm our 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 113  faculty’s collective understanding of the Danielson Framework, and provide us with a highly reliable stream of data points to accurately address and attend to faculty’s ability to engage 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 114  students every day in each lesson (Danielson 3C) to motivate and support all students learning. Teacher observation data, along with our feedback to teachers for nex2018-19 RSCEP-PF 115  t steps for improvement, guide our professional development efforts and ensures that our school-based and external professional learning workshops are aligned, targeted and appropriate bas2018-19 RSCEP-PF 116  ed upon teachers' need. While next steps in our school-wide improvement plan include SUSTAINING, though not limited to, the following: 1. Our school-2018-19 RSCEP-PF 117  wide instructional focus each year as it explicitly establis2018-19 RSCEP-PF 118  hes the expectation that year-to-year all of our efforts will 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 119  be directed towards increasing the number of students attain2018-19 RSCEP-PF 120  ing a score of proficient (Level 3) or better by 10% in both ELA a2018-19 RSCEP-PF 121  nd mathematics by strengthening every teacher’s capacity to 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 122  deliver targeted, small group instruction and increasing ev2018-19 RSCEP-PF 123  ery student’s ability to read critically, write well, speak c2018-19 RSCEP-PF 124  learly and independently problem solve. 2. Triangulating teac2018-19 RSCEP-PF 125  her support from school-based instructional leadership, co2018-19 RSCEP-PF 126  aches, and BFSC that is timely, targeted, and actionable arou2018-19 RSCEP-PF 127  nd unit/lesson planning and effective instruction and class2018-19 RSCEP-PF 128  room management. 3. Deepening professional learning for schoo2018-19 RSCEP-PF 129  l-based instructional leadership centered around providin2018-19 RSCEP-PF 130  g timely, targeted and actionable feedback to teachers. 4. Dist2018-19 RSCEP-PF 131  ributive Leadership through the establishment of departmen2018-19 RSCEP-PF 132  t and grade level teams that are teacher-led. 5. SMART goals, whi2018-19 RSCEP-PF 133  ch include benchmarks assessments to continually monitor ou2018-19 RSCEP-PF 134  r progress, and the efficacy and impact of learning, instruct2018-19 RSCEP-PF 135  ion, collaboration, partnerships and family empowerment at 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 136  BAMM! and also support all students' social-emotional learn2018-19 RSCEP-PF 137  ing. Part 2 – Summative Vision for Rigorous Instruction What is your school’s instructional focus? What is your vision for promoting the instructional focus consistently across classrooms? Our school-wide instructional focus this year is the following: In an effort to increase the number of students attaining a score of proficient (Level 3) or better by 10% in ELA and mathematics by June 2019, we will strengthen every teacher’s capacity to deliver targeted, small group instruction and increase every student’s ability to read critically, write well, speak clearly and independently problem solve. The end of each unit, or cycle will culminate in a performance task which challenges students to: (a) grapple with an authentic challenge or "real world" problem, operating in ways similar to adults outside, (b) apply knowledge and skills Presented and prioritized in the unit, (c) share their learning with audiences that could benefit from their learning, and (d) reflect upon their learning and partake in peer and self assessment. What is your vision for the implementation of CCLS-aligned curricula that meets the needs of your diverse learners, personally, academically, and culturally? BAMM! Scholar-Activist mission is to prepare every young scholar we serve to (a) succeed in high school and college, (b) thrive in the 21st century economy, and (c) leave a lasting, positive impact on her/his home and school communities. We actualize the Scholar-Activist mission by immersing our young scholars daily in a highly customized and supportive, values-based, college preparatory learning environment which places the highest premium on strengthening their critical reading skills, text-based writing, public speaking skills and independent problem solving across the curriculum. Our comprehensive vision for school improvement in respect to rigorous instruction entails the following components: 1. Introduce CCLS-aligned curricula across all four core content areas. ELA: Teachers College Reading & Writing Math: KEMS by National Training Network (NTN) Social Studies: Passport to Social Studies (NYCDOE) 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 138  Science: Glencoe middle school science curriculum aligned to national and NYS Next Generation P-12 Science Standards and NYCDOE's Science scope-and-sequence 2. Provide job-embedded Instructional Specialist coaching and modeling in each core content area to support the thoughtful unpacking, customization, pacing and execution of the aforementioned CCLS-aligned curricula in light of our school-wide learning expectations and instructional norms. 3. Embed 90-minutes of common planning time, by discipline/department, within the school day, once a week. Weekly common planning time devoted to: (a) ongoing rounds of unit/lesson study, (b) studying student work, (c) sharing effective classroom practices, and (d) launching multiple rounds of peer classroom visitations. 4. Introduce a common lesson planning template,a school-wide grading policy and incorporate "SMART Board" instructional technology. 5. Re-design extended learning time (ELT) and introduce ENRICHMENT HOUR, which includes 2 days of independent reading, I day of Scholar-Activist Life-skills Building, a day of Extended Math Problem Solving and Flocabulary Fridays. 6. Utilize the i-Ready computer-adaptive assessment tool and reports to form strategic groupings and provide appropriate and authentic scaffolds and supports for ELLs and SWDs. What is your vision for diverse program offerings that allow students to develop skills, habits, and behaviors to be career and college ready? How are instructional shifts embedded in this vision? B.A.M.M. students are immersed in the traditional academic core subjects eight periods a day, five days a week.  Ten 45-minute periods of ELA  Ten 45-minute periods of Math    2-3 45-minute periods of Art  2-3 45-minute periods of PE/Health Five 45-minute periods of Social Studies Five 45-minute periods of Science Additionally, students are immersed in any number of extended learning time offerings, 2-4 times per week, 75-minutes each day. Fine Art   Elevate NY Leadership  ENL Enrichment  Theater  Rock the Boat  Holistic PE & Mindfulness  HW Help 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 139  Each core offering supports the acquisition of content and "real-world" knowledge by exposing students to vocabulary and increasingly complex academic tasks and texts (CCLS ELA Instructional Shifts 2, 3, and 6). There is also an expectation that students are challenged to partake evidence-based conversations with one another and on an ongoing basis (Shift 4) and marshal evidence from text and evidence-based sources to inform both verbal and written arguments (Shifts 4 and 5). What do you envision the delivery of instruction to look like so that all students are set up for success? Students learn best when the sit in the center of cognitive action. Our school-wide expectation is that all faculty, across each core content area, will execute the components of workshop model to fidelity-- inclusive of a mini lesson, independent practice and share.  The mini lesson, when executed effectively, provides students explicit, teacher-centered, instruction that (a) presents the unit's essential question and lesson's learning target (LT), (b) introduces academic vocabulary, (c) shares a model or mentor text, (d) models a specific text-based reading, writing, speaking, or problem skill, and (d) checks for student understanding. Independent practice, the heart of the model, provides an opportunity for customized, or differentiated instruction, through a blend of one-on-one conferencing, targeted small group instruction, based in formative assessment station work, and independent work time.   The share serves the dual function of a recap, or opportunity to revisit the lesson's EQ(s) and LT(s), and check for understanding by welcoming students to share their learning in written and/or verbal form. How do you envision teachers using multiple entry points to ensure the success of every child? Independent practice, the heart of the workshop model, provides an opportunity for customized, or differentiated instruction, through a blend of one-on-one conferencing, small group instruction, station work, and independent work time on a daily basis in all core content areas. Select extended learning time opportunities (ELTs), including Integrated Algebra, ELA & Math enrichment, ENL support, for example, provide select students customized enrichment and remediation opportunities twice a week, or 150 total minutes. What is your vision for the use of a comprehensive assessment strategy (diagnostic, formative, benchmark, and summative) to drive curricular, instructional, and organizational decisions that impact student outcomes? THE five (5) essential daily instructional com2018-19 RSCEP-PF 140  ponents WILL CONTINUE TO BE SUPPORTED AND IMPLEMENTED ACROSS ALL CLASSROOMS. THEY ARE: 1. Learning targets (LTs), which are standards-based aka CCLS-2018-19 RSCEP-PF 141  aligned lesson objectives, integrated throughout the lesson and posted prominently in the classroom, and written in highly accessible language to all students. 2. A minimum of three (3) 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 142  observable checks for understanding (CFUs) explicitly and seamlessly embedded in daily lesson plans. 3. Scaffolds and supports for ELLs and students with disabilities (SWDs) incl2018-19 RSCEP-PF 143  uded In the lessoN plan AND observable to the naked eye. 4. The authentic and effective utilization of all paraprofessionals assigned to each class; particularly, with respect 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 144  to supporting our SWDs (student with disabilities) and ELLs. 5. Exit slips issued and attached to the lesson plan no fewer than three times per week. Each of these five exp2018-19 RSCEP-PF 145  ectations are in direct service of providing every student a steady diet of cognitively rigorous tasks across all subjects that place premiums on:  close and c2018-19 RSCEP-PF 146  ritical reading of non-fiction and fiction texts that includ2018-19 RSCEP-PF 147  es every student underlining and annotating. student-to-st 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 148  udent text and/or evidence-based discussions, text or evide 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 149  nce-based extended written responses composed by each stude2018-19 RSCEP-PF 150  nt independently, and  opportunities for students to apply th2018-19 RSCEP-PF 151  e aforementioned cognitive skills in the service of addressi2018-19 RSCEP-PF 152  ng authentic, "real world" challenges. IT'S ALL ABOUT RIGOR AND RELEVANCE. In addition 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 153  to the exit slips referenced above, we ADMINISTER THE following interim assessments quarterly TO TRACK AND MONITOR all students' performance AND GROWTH THROUGHOUT 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 154  THE SCHOOL YEAR: I-Ready ELA and Math DIAGNOSTIC BENCHMARK; 3x/yr Teachers College performance-based assessments, I.E. BASELINE AND ENDLINE, ON-DEMAND 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 155  WRITING PROMPTS; 3x/yr NTN KEMS pre- and post-unit assessments; approx. 6-10x/yr Fountas & Pinnell running records; 3x/yr ReadyNY INSTRUCTION post asse2018-19 RSCEP-PF 156  ssment; varies per student Teacher-created mid- and final QUARTERLY exams correlated with grade-level specific, NYS ELA and Math Power Standards and the standardize2018-19 RSCEP-PF 157  d, NYS ELA, MATH AND SCIENCE summative assessments. The impact of these measures is collected on a blend of digital and paper-based platforms which are easily accessible and 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 158  readily available to view upon request. These five components are in direct service of providing every student a steady diet of cognitively rigorous tasks across all subject 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 159  areas. Please indicate below the specific assessments that you are implementing and their purpose for each grade. Assessment Name Assessment Type Grades Implemented Purpose (diagnostic, formative, benchmark, summative) i-Ready ELA & Math diagnostic & benchmark 6, 7, and 8 establish performance level, target instruction and assess growth Simulated NYS 3-8 ELA & Math exams formative 6, 7, and 8 practice and measure performance Pre- and post-module math exams Baseline and End-line, on-demand writing prompts Part 3 – Annual Goal diagnostic & summative 6, 7, and 8 diagnostic & summative 6,7 and 8 assess prerequisite knowledge and skills, adapt curricula and assess student understanding establish performance level, adapt instruction and assess student understanding Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Renewal Benchmarks and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks. By June 2019, there will be a 10% increase in the average level of students’ proficiency rates on the NYS 3 - 8 ELA and Mathematics exams, across all grades and subgroups, by focusing on teachers' capacity to deliver targeted, small group instruction in order to to improve all students' ability to read critically, write well, speak clearly and independently problem solve, as measured by all students' level of performance on the NYS 3 - 8 ELA and Mathematics exams. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Rigorous Instruction Annual Goal: Which Renewal benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Rigorous Instruction Annual Goal? Framework: Rigorous Instruction Framework: Collaborative Teachers 3 - 8 ELA All Students Level 2 and Above 3 - 8 Math All Students Level 2 and Above 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 160  Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Principal, Instructional APs and job-embedded, external Instructional Specialists and consultants All BAMM! Scholar-Activists All Classroom Teachers Teachers will utilize CCLS-aligned curricula and targeted, supplemental instructional programs/materials to support all students' foundational, content knowledge, practice key skills and learn new strategies and plan for multiple entry points so all students may learn and receive instruction to match the individual learning needs. 3 - 8 ELA All Students Level 2 and Above Sept ’18 – June ‘19 3 - 8 Math All Students Level 2 and Above Framework: Rigorous Instruction Continuously administer checks for understanding and use outcomes to adapt and/or modify instruction in order to improve all students' learning All BAMM! Scholar-Activists All Classroom Teachers 3 - 8 ELA All Students Level 2 and Above Sept ’18 –June ‘19 3 - 8 Math All Students Level 2 and Above Framework: Rigorous Instruction Principal, Instructional APs and job-embedded, external Instructional Specialists and consultants How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) i-Ready Diagnostic Benchmark assessment 3x/yr; Quarterly exams in each core content area; administer simulated NYS 3 - 8 ELA & Math exams 2x/yr before Spring admin.; Regularly review lesson plans; Conduct frequent informal and formal observations i-Ready Diagnostic Benchmark assessment 3x/yr; Quarterly exams in each core content area; administer simulated NYS 3 - 8 ELA & Math exams 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 161  Frequent formal and informal classroom observations aligned to BAMM! "quarterly" cycles All Classroom Teachers Framework: Rigorous Instruction Sept '18 - June '19 Principal, Instructional APs and job-embedded, external Instructional Specialists and consultants 2x/yr before Spring admin.; Regularly review lesson plans; Conduct frequent informal and formal observations i-Ready Diagnostic Benchmark assessment 3x/yr; Quarterly exams in each core content area; administer simulated NYS 3 - 8 ELA & Math exams 2x/yr before Spring admin.; Regularly review lesson plans; Conduct monthly audits of Advance data disaggregated by supervisor, grade and content area 4b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Our caregivers and families remain BAMM’s most valuable and loyal partners. We’ve taken the following steps to strengthen our ties with families and the community:  We utilize Skedula to improve communication and collaboration between parents, students, teachers, and school leaders and support each student’s ability to self-monitor her/his academic progress 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 162   District 8’s Family Support and Leadership Coordinators provide on-going, hands-on, support for our newly elected Parent Association (PA) and PA president  Parent Coordinator (PC) partakes in monthly district-wide PDs and works closely with administration, district liaisons, our PA president, elected representatives, and CBO partners to strengthen outreach to families  Our PC, community school partner, ASPIRA of NY, and Advisors utilize the following vehicles to maintain open lines of communication with caregivers and families: monthly phone calls home, coupled with school-wide “robo” calls, text communications and quarterly parent-student-teacher conferences  Utilize our Community Engagement Team (CET) to increase our capacity to effectively devise and assess the means by which we engage BAMM! parents and caregivers. The impact of these measures are collected on a blend of digital and paper-based platforms and readily available to review upon request. Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, lead CBO’s community school budget, etc. The following resources will be used as leverage to achieve this goal: ● Scheduling will include teacher planning, department and grade meeting times ● Human resources from within our school (teachers, administration, cabinet, and additional staff) and community (parents and CBO)as well as other partners (Generation Ready, and IDE) Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded X P/F Set-aside SIG Grant X 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By February 2019, 40% of all students will demonstrate an increase of 1 level from the first Writing Unit of Study on-demand, END-LINE writing prompt to the second Writing Unit of Study on-demand, END-LINE writing prompt using the Writing Pathways, Performance Assessments and Learning Progressions by Lucy Calkins. The learning progressions describe development in three aspects of writing: structure, development, and language conventions. These progressions are meant to show the path writers take moving step by step along a continuum of development. The rubrics stem from the learning progressions and allow teachers to score a piece of writing, based on the corresponding grade level expectations. Rubric scoring is done by adding up scores from components of a student's writing to find a raw score, then converting that raw score into a scaled score. All student data will be dissaggreagted by grade, class, sub group and aspect of writing comparing the END-LINE administered in October 2018 with the same administered in Decemeber 2018. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 163  Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Each of BAMM!'s five school-wide instructional expectations referenced above are in direct service of providing every student a steady diet of cognitively rigorous tasks across all subjects that place premiums on:  close and critical reading of non-fiction and fiction texts that includes every student underlining and annotating. student-to-student text and/or evidence-based discussions, text or evidence-based extended written responses composed by each student independently, and    opportunities for students to apply the aforementioned cognitive skills in the service of addressing authentic, "real world" challenges. Think relevance. In addition to the exit slips referenced above, we presently rely upon the following interim assessments for quarterly student performance data: I-Ready ELA and Math, Teachers College performance based assessments, NTN KEMS pre- and post-unit assessments, Fountas & Pinnell running records, ReadyNY workbook post assessment, and teacher-created mid-term and final exams correlated with the NYS ELA and Math power standards and standardized summative assessments. The impact of these measures has been collected on a blend of digital and paper-based platforms that will be readily available to the reviewer upon request. Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 164  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 5 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 5.2 The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. 5.3 The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students. 5.4 All school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health supports tied to the school’s vision. 5.5 The school leader and student support staff work together with teachers to establish structures to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental health needs. x x x x Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: SOP(s) Addressed 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? 5. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? Our re-branded community school was founded on the pre2018-19 RSCEP-PF 165  mise that every student is capable of attaining success in high school, college, the workplace, and beyond through dedication, hard work, honest self-reflection, timely and targeted guidanc2018-19 RSCEP-PF 166  e from adults, and sustained exposure to highly effective teaching across grades and disciplines. Every BAMM! stakeholder - faculty, staff, caregivers, CBO partners, and admin – 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 167  recognizes the crucial importance of providing our young Scholar-Activists leadership opportunities, academic and socio-emotional scaffolds and supports - in and outside the classro2018-19 RSCEP-PF 168  om, and, equally important, thoroughly exposing them to a values-based mental model that celebrates high school, college and work readiness, student voice, and highly purposeful 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 169  action on behalf of self (self advocacy) and others (community service and activism). Each member of the BAMM! professional family commits her/himself to working alongside eac2018-19 RSCEP-PF 170  h young scholar she or he may encounter, regardless of their assigned grade or class, and inspiring her or him to exceed our collective academic and character expectations. Und2018-19 RSCEP-PF 171  er no circumstances do we accept a student’s past academic history, emotional challenges, learning disabilities, linguistic proficiency, or socio-economic status as an excuse not to me2018-19 RSCEP-PF 172  et our collective mission to cultivate generations of community-based, high school, college and work bound, Scholar-Activists committed to leading wide-awake, literacy-rich lives and 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 173  improving the quality of the world around them. Scholar-Activism at BAMM! rests on five core values. Our commitment, first and foremost, to: (1) achieve academic excellence, 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 174  (2) extend a helping hand to those in need, (3) maintain a peacekeeping culture, (4) summon the courage to express our creativity (“think differently!”), and (5) demonstrate pride in our 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 175  school work as well as the accomplishments and gains of others (school spirit). Advisory serves as the primary community-wide vehicle for transmitting those values and expectations to 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 176  students. The overarching practical function of Advisory is to strengthen our faculty & staff’s capacity to establish authentic and meaningful relationships with students, caregivers, and 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 177  fellow Advisors across grades and disciplines. Our 6-8 Advisory system ensures every student is known well by at least one adult, every caregiver has an adult contact or point pers2018-19 RSCEP-PF 178  on at the school, and students play an active leadership role in constructing and maintaining a highly promotive, physically and emotionally safe, college bound culture for all. Two day 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 179  retreat was held with our learning partner Power Tool to train advisors around mentoring and curriculum. Equally important, Advisory is designed to (a) cultivate high school, college & care2018-19 RSCEP-PF 180  er awareness and socio-emotional maturity, (b) introduce our young scholars to coping and conflict resolution skills, (c) immerse our young scholars in highly formative service learnin2018-19 RSCEP-PF 181  g experiences, (d) establish the importance of academic and personal goal setting and monitoring, (e) impart essential time management & organization skills, and (f) challenge ever2018-19 RSCEP-PF 182  y student to assume authentic leadership roles throughout their respective communities. This year we’ve taken the following measures to raise overall behavioral and wor2018-19 RSCEP-PF 183  k expectations, increase the percentage of young scholars attaining proficiency on the NYS ELA and Math standardized exams, and strengthen the overall quality of our high school, coll2018-19 RSCEP-PF 184  ege and work bound culture:  Continued refinement of 6-8 Advisory curriculum b2018-19 RSCEP-PF 185  y an ad hoc committee of faculty and staff.  Maintain Advisory s2018-19 RSCEP-PF 186  izes of 8-12 students each.  Appoint a single dean of student li2018-19 RSCEP-PF 187  fe for each grade; three in total.  Establish one assistant pri2018-19 RSCEP-PF 188  ncipal (AP) singularly devoted to the support and supervisio2018-19 RSCEP-PF 189  n of attendance, deans, guidance, and socio-emotional perso2018-19 RSCEP-PF 190   nnel and partnerships. Introduction of Scholar-Activist co2018-19 RSCEP-PF 191  ntract and core values.  Cycle of Support i.e. a ladder of refer2018-19 RSCEP-PF 192  ral that revolves around four key steps of intervention and an2018-19 RSCEP-PF 193  chored by Scholar-Activist mission and core values. Launch o 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 194  f Child Study Team composed of campus-based personal and part2018-19 RSCEP-PF 195  ners including our LMSWs, GCs, Astor Child Services, three so2018-19 RSCEP-PF 196  cial work interns, and ASPIRA of New York. These initiatives to improve overall the quality of sch2018-19 RSCEP-PF 197  ool culture are coupled with our ongoing measures to convey high expectations to faculty, staff, and students. Each year we place a high premium on revisiting BAMM’s mission2018-19 RSCEP-PF 198  , core values, and professional expectations to new and returning faculty and staff:  First, during our first annual Se2018-19 RSCEP-PF 199  ptember Faculty Institute (SFI 2017), two days of extended pr2018-19 RSCEP-PF 200  ofessional development workshops co-led by admin and instru2018-19 RSCEP-PF 201  ctional coaches.  The school-wide instructional and cultura2018-19 RSCEP-PF 202  l priorities presented at SFI are unpacked during each Collea2018-19 RSCEP-PF 203  gue’s Individual Planning Conference (IPC), and  Reinforced 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 204  by the circulation of our BAMM! Monday Morning Memo (MMM), our 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 205  weekly round-up of news, events, and instructional prioriti2018-19 RSCEP-PF 206  es. We communicate high expectations to students by providing timely and targeted interventions and opportunities for student engagement, student voice, and leader2018-19 RSCEP-PF 207  ship before, during, and after school.  Advisors meet with their Advisees regularly to r2018-19 RSCEP-PF 208  eview their attendance, monitor ongoing progress via Skedul2018-19 RSCEP-PF 209  a, revisit their academic and personal goals, and celebrate i2018-19 RSCEP-PF 210  mprovements and successes.  Our burgeoning student governme2018-19 RSCEP-PF 211  nt provides middle school students opportunities to mentor a2018-19 RSCEP-PF 212  nd re-direct their classmates and organize school-wide comm2018-19 RSCEP-PF 213  unity-building events including student elections, dances2018-19 RSCEP-PF 214  , and fundraisers.  Elevate NY offers a daily leadership cours2018-19 RSCEP-PF 215  e designed re-direct and mentor a segment of our most challeng2018-19 RSCEP-PF 216  ing students; behaviorally speaking. In addition, of course, we expect all BAMM! faculty & staff to 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 217  set the highest behavioral and work expectations for students by:  "Establishing the threshold" at the d2018-19 RSCEP-PF 218   oor at the onset of each class. Launching class with a quick wri2018-19 RSCEP-PF 219  te that's strengthened by the inclusion of the RACE visible th2018-19 RSCEP-PF 220  inking strategy.  Enforcing S.L.A.N.T. and the 10/10 Rule.  Re2018-19 RSCEP-PF 221  maining highly promotive of every student’s best efforts, a2018-19 RSCEP-PF 222  nd  Utilizing the BAMM! voice meter, and two ladders of consequ 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 223  ences, as needed. And, constructing welcoming and positive work environments by:  Posting student wo2018-19 RSCEP-PF 224  rk that includes rubric-based feedback that's succinct and t2018-19 RSCEP-PF 225  imely.  Archiving each student's work in folders, and  Consist2018-19 RSCEP-PF 226  ently maintaining a physical environment that's clean and we2018-19 RSCEP-PF 227  ll organized.  Welcoming students at the classroom door. This year 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 228  we have also placed a renewed emphasis on monitoring attendance and suspension data.  This year our school-wide Atte2018-19 RSCEP-PF 229  ndance Team will work smarter, not harder as three stand-alon2018-19 RSCEP-PF 230  e teams organized by grade.  Each team meets weekly and utilize2018-19 RSCEP-PF 231  s our school-based system of checks and balances to record, mo2018-19 RSCEP-PF 232  nitor, disaggregate, analyze and circulate pertinent stude2018-19 RSCEP-PF 233  nt data by Advisory and identify trends, devise supports for o2018-19 RSCEP-PF 234  ur chronically absent students and capture interventions su2018-19 RSCEP-PF 235  ch as phone calls home, one-on-one counseling and home visits 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 236  by our part-time, Centrally-funded itinerant attendance te2018-19 RSCEP-PF 237  acher and developed incentives to improve attendance.  Our at2018-19 RSCEP-PF 238  tendance teams work in collaboration with our new Community S2018-19 RSCEP-PF 239  chool Director (CSD) and develop positive incentives to bols2018-19 RSCEP-PF 240  ter student attendance such as Advisory competitions, month2018-19 RSCEP-PF 241  ly raffles and possible trips to Washington, DC, and Philadel2018-19 RSCEP-PF 242  phia. Once again our caregivers and families remain BAMM’s most valuable and loyal partners. We’ve taken the following steps to strengthen our ties with families and 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 243  the community:  Utilize Skedula to improve communication and collabo2018-19 RSCEP-PF 244  ration between parents, students, teachers, and school lead2018-19 RSCEP-PF 245  ers and support each student’s ability to self-monitor her/h2018-19 RSCEP-PF 246  is academic progress.  Enlist the direct support of the Distri2018-19 RSCEP-PF 247  ct 8’s Family Support and Leadership Coordinators to provide 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 248  on-going, hands-on support for our PC and newly elected PA pre2018-19 RSCEP-PF 249  sident. Based on the results of the 2018 DTSDE the school received ratings of developing and ineffective for 5.2, 5.3, 5.4, and 5.5. However, adjustments have been made this year in SOPs 5.2, 5.3, 5.4 and 5.5 which enabled the school to show improvements as developing as based on our 2018 Quality Review results as follows: 5.2 The Leadership Group provides a curriculum that supports young people’s social and emotional learning (SEL) that involves all adults in the school via our school's Advisory program. The Advisory curriculum offers lessons to improve social and emotional skills, attitudes, behavior, college and career, and academic performance. Providing students with Advisory in an attempt to foster, and develop a foundation for increased social adjustment, and academic performance should result in more positive social behaviors, fewer conduct problems, less emotional distress, and improved test scores and grades. Within the advisory space we utilize several researched-based curriculum aimed at improving the five core Social and Emotional Competencies: 1. Self-awareness 2. Self-management 3. Social-awareness 4. Relationship skills and 5. Responsible decision-making 5.3 Because of the unique level of poverty, homelessness and unemployment rate within the Hunts Point Community, our Leadership Group has worked to form partnerships and deployed intentional human capitals to attend to these historical needs. As a result we have hired hired guidance counselors, social workers and have also partnered with Graduate Schools of Social Work (Hunter and Adelphi) to provide social work interns to address the social, emotional and mental health of our students and families. Additionally we have partnered with two clinical agencies within our school to provide clinical and psychiatric services to students and families. These two agencies are Urban Health that operates a full clinic in our school as well as Astor Services for Children and Families that provides clinical counseling. The school uses PBIS to reward young scholars that are complying with our scholar-activist community practices such as:  Meeting or exceeding our school-wide daily attendance goal of 92%  Arriving to school on time and prepared to learn  Completing homework, class work and projects thoughtfully and timely  Honoring our dress-cope policy of the seventh graders wearing navy blue shirt and eighth graders white shirt  co-creating a safe learning environment with teachers, parents, faculty and the school leadership where all students feel a sense of belonging These values are taught and promoted in all learning spaces within our school community including classroom, hallways, grade level community meetings and within counseling spaces. 5.4 The principal and teachers have developed a clear vision to prevent and deescalate negative social behaviors through the implementation of the Student Support Team, utilizing Restorative practices that will impact student behavior, their social and emotional competency, their academic performance, resulting in a better classroom climate for learning. Additionally, the SIT, Counseling Team, Student Support Team, cabinet and Advisory Team are 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 250  representative of the entire school community, and meet on a weekly basis to set goals, monitor progress, discuss challenges, and plan next steps in improving our social-emotional progress. This is especially evident with our weekly case conference meeting with the Student Support Team, Guidance and counseling team that meet and develop behavioral support plan for students that need additional academic and behavioral support. We are intentional in having the above stakeholders at these important meetings so as to ensure that students have access to wrap around services aimed at promoting SEL well being. 5.5 This academic year our principal has been intentional in hiring support staff to support each grade band to monitor hallways and classroom environments as well as provide students and teachers will support within those spaces. The Student Support Team and Assistant Principals work closely with teachers to norm rituals and routines for students from the first day of school. Nuts and bolts around classroom management and escalation techniques are covered in professional development sessions with teachers and classroom para-professionals. We also work closely with our SFC in district 8 to conduct Emotional First Aide and Therapeutic Crisis Intervention in Schools (TCIS) training. These students will meet regularly with the Principal/Assistant Principals and the Community School Director to support efforts to address social-emotional, developmental, and academic needs. The school uses RTI - Multi-Tier System to support and prioritize the needs of our young people as seen in anecdotal, teacher referrals, attendance records, and shared parent concerns. Professional development surrounding the restorative approach to discipline will be provided to all teachers, staff members, students and parents. The goal is to continue to articulate procedures, systems, and accountability for all stakeholders. Our goal is to leverage our building-wide resources and partnerships to find solutions to reduce the amount of young people having re-occurring incidents. Part 2 – Summative Vision for Supportive Environment What is your vision for a supportive school environment? How will you in partnership with each CBO and families enact your vision? As a Community School, we believe that our school environment needs to be supportive, creating culture and climate that makes all young people feel safe and prepared to embrace the challenges of learning. Our ASPIRA partnership is truly a seamless extension of our school, embracing our mission, vision and instructional foci. They will continue to provide numerous supports for programming, curriculum, social emotional development, extracurricular activities, and advanced placement learning opportunities. Student voice and leadership will be cultivated and heard through the Student Government, our Student Support Center, PBIS Team and the SLT. The school will continue to have clear rules and consequences for all young people as measured through the Chancellor's Regulations and Code of Student Conduct. The school will continue to have high expectations for teachers and young people as collaboratively created in the staff and student handbooks. Our focus is to strengthen the engagement and participation of parents through intensive parental involvement, training, and organized activities to meet the goal. Our mission is to enable parents to be proactive problem solvers, to engage in effective decision making, to partner with our school, and to become advocates for their children’s educational and social needs. Our goal is to increase attendance by four percent and decrease serious OORS incidents by 50%. The Instructional Cabinet along with the Culture and Climate Team will use and analyze a wide range of data sources to develop intervention plans to address the needs of our young people. These data sources will include progress reports, report cards, standardized tests, informal assessments, behavioral intervention plans, conduct sheets, teacher/parent 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 251  /student rating scales, screening data, classroom observations, behavioral logs, disciplinary referrals, and attendance data. And, finally, we've re-launched Assertive Discipline PD to strengthen the daily classroom management of novice and veteran faculty alike.(September 2018). This PD will continue for the duration of the 2018-2019 academic year. To improve the culture and climate at Bronx Academy For Multi-Media (BAMM!), we will develop and strengthen the following program delivery to staff and students: Advisory for all students, weekly Community Meetings and Elevate . During the winter semester, 7th and 8th grade students will be trained in conflict resolution and peer mediation. In the spring, students will co-facilitate mediation sessions with counseling team and dean team. Who are your CBO partners? How will each CBO sustain and support the social-emotional and academic growth of your students? CBO Partner ASPIRA ASPIRA will play an intergal part in sustaining and supporting the social-emotional and academic growth of our students by focusing attendance, student and family food insecurity and school-wide student behavior management. CBO Focus Elevate New York (NY) Elevate New York is a high-quality youth development program accredited by the NYC Department of Education that supports our weekly Scholar-Activist Skills Building ENRICHMENT HOUR programming. Via Elevate NY students learn about character, quality and life skills. Graham Windham is our BEACON SITE partner. Since 1961, Graham Windham has been helping make a difference in the lives of children, youth and families who are overcoming some of life’s most difficult challenges and obstacles. Monday through Saturday, they run after-school and weekend programs and create a safe and loving family-like atomosphere so all students in our community may have the opportunity and preparation to thrive in school and in the world. Graham Windham How will you in partnership with your CBO will create a supportive environment and engagement for your students’ families? Parent and community workshop offerings will be provided on our Positive Behavior Intervention System. Our Culture and Climate Team will meet weekly to discuss socio-emotional strategies students will utilize to deescalate conflict and how all staff will receive training and work together. Additionally, because our school is a community school, our building is open until 9:00 PM in the evening. This allows us to provide after-school enrichment to our students as well as educational program like GED classes to our families. Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Supportive Environment. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Renewal Benchmarks and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks. By June 2019, there will be a 50% decrease in classroom OORS reported incidents as a result of implementing Assertive Discipline practices, PBIS, individualized incentives in the class and collaborating with our partners such as ASPIRA, Astor Services For Children, Urban Health Plan and the use of social work interns in the school as measured by our 2018-19 OORS data. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 252 Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Supportive Environment Annual Goal: Which Renewal and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Supportive Environment Annual Goal? Student Attendance 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 253  Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. Parent and community workshop offerings will be provided on Positive Behavior Intervention System (PBIS), RTI and other SEL strategies to support parent home/school collaboration Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) All Family members Student Attendance Sept 2018 June 2019 Culture and Climate Team member, Parent Coordinator, All Classoom Teachers/Advisors, Deans, APs, Social Work Interns Strengthen school-wide PBIS All BAMM! Scholar-Activists All Classroom Teachers Strategic coordination of human capital, external partners and all SEL-related resources (Skedula, Advisory, Elevate NY) All BAMM! Scholar-Activists Student Attendance Sept 2018-June 2019 Culture and Climate Team member, Parent Coordinator, All Classoom Teachers/Advisors, Deans, APs, Social Work Interns, ASPIRA Student Attendance Sept 2018 - June 2019 Principal, APs, CSD and Culture and Climate Team How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) Parent Empowerment Workshop Attendance Sheets OORS report & data Class Section Sheets OORS report & data Class Section Sheets Student attendance rates Analyze Attendance Team Student Data Tracker and 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 254  All Family members 4b – Parent and Family Engagement Interventions each cycle OORS reports How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Our caregivers and families remain BAMM’s most valuable and loyal partners. We’ve taken the following steps to strengthen our ties with families and the community:  We utilize Skedula to improve communication and collaboration between parents, students, teachers, and school leaders and support each student’s ability to self-monitor her/his academic progress.  District 8’s Family Support and Leadership Coordinators provide on-going, hands-on, support for our newly elected Parent Association (PA) and PA president.  Parent Coordinator (PC) partakes in monthly district-wide PDs and works closely with administration, district liaisons, our PA president, elected representatives, and CBO partners to strengthen outreach to families.  Our PC, community school partner, ASPIRA of NY, and Advisors utilize the following vehicles to maintain open lines of communication with caregivers and families: monthly phone calls home, coupled with school-wide “robo” calls, text communications, quarterly parent-student-teacher conferences. The impact of these measures has been collected on a blend of digital and paper-based platforms that will be readily available to the reviewer upon request. Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Prinipal, APs, Parent Coordinator, all teachers, school-wide support staff (paraprofessionals, school aides, Deans, office staff), School Safety Agents, PA President, ASPIRA and all other external partners Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded X P/F Set-aside SIG Grant X 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 255  By February 2019, there will be a 25% decrease in classroom OORS-reported incidents, as a result of the consistent and effective implementation of PBIS, individualized incentives and collaborating with our partners such as ASPIRA as measured by our OORS-reporting data Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. OORS reported incidents, daily occurrence data , Classroom Environment Observation Checklist, and summative results of annual School Survey. Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 256  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 4 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 4.2 School and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. 4.3 Teachers provide coherent, and appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. 4.4 Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences and tailored to the strengths and needs of all students. 4.5 Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, and progress monitoring). Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: SOP(s) Addressed x x x x 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? Based on the SOP's selected above, the school has made adjustments for the 2018-2019 school year in order to show improvements in these areas, as proficient, based on our 2018 Quality Review as well as our June Instructional Report. These adjustments will be made to address the needs of our students through teaching practices that include, planning coherent instruction with an emphasis on questioning and discussion and the use of formative assessment data in order to increase student engagement within our classrooms. 4.2 – In collaboration with our partners, Teachers College, NTN, Teaching Matters, the coaches will continue the work begun in supporting and exposing teachers to practices around developing and utilizing standards-based subject units of instruction. Through programming, a double period, subject specific weekly common planning block will be implemented throughout the year. During teacher common planning periods, teachers will use student data to make unit adjustments, plan assessments and analyze student work/data trends. A New Faculty Institute will be implemented bi-monthly to support our new teaching staff. Beginning in September 2017, there will be a Peer Collaborative Coach in the Math department who will lead department teams in planning units, lessons, assessments, and addressing student goals. A model classroom will be utilized in order for our PCT to model and share best practices in supporting our teaching staff through differentiated professional development. ·4.3 – Since January 2016, teachers have been implementing the Teachers College Writing Workshop with some fidelity in ELA. Continuous work needs to happen surrounding multiple entry points and providing access for all students. The coaching partners and in-house coach will continue to work with teachers on differentiation, and professional development. During common planning, teachers will analyze daily formative assessments to target specific learning trends in order to provide multiple entry points for upcoming lessons. We will continue to support our teachers implementing this information within their lesson in the form of scaffolded instruction and student grouping and 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 257  regrouping. We will continue to work with our content specific coaches and PCT, as well as provide differentiated staff professional development surrounding the use of scaffolded tasks to meet the needs of our students. 4.4 – In collaboration with the partners mentioned above, as well as with anticipated support from Teachers College, and in-house coaches, the learning environment will be constantly reviewed. Our administration, coaching staff and PCT will be supporting teachers in creating a learning environment through the implementation of our Teacher College Writing curriculum, the National Training Network's KEMS program in Math and the implementation of our hands on science curriculum, LabAides. . Lit Life's Core Ready reading program will also be used as the ELA reading curriculum beginning September 2018. These programs will be monitored and supported by coaches and administration through regular communication, our subject specific common planning times and differentiated staff professional development to ensure our programs are tailored to the strengths and needs of our students. 4.5 – Continuing this year teachers will implemented pre/post unit assessment practices, and Teachers College on-demand writing assessments. After analyzing the pre-assessment data, teachers will be able to inform their planning, purposefully group, as well as, plan differentiated activities. Additionally, teachers will use daily formative assessments (such as exit slips, quizzes, etc.) to monitor and measure growth and provide feedback for planning purposes during their common planning blocks. Additional benchmark assessments, such as iReady for ELA and Math, paper Ready for ELA and Math, as well as interim subject specific assessments will be given throughout the year. The use of Skedula and Datacation will also be instrumental in students’ self-monitoring of their progress, as well as keeping parents abreast of their child’s academic progress. This data will be used in class for students to analyze in order to set their own personal subject specific goals, which will be monitored by the student throughout the unit and reassessed at the end of each unit. Part 2 – Summative Vision for Collaborative Teachers What is your vision for collaborative teaching? The school uses the workshop model for teaching and learning, with blended learning and technology tucked in. Teacher teams will use a weekly student focused common planning block to revise units and lessons based on students' writing samples across content areas with a focus on citing evidence to support one's ideas. The school’s core values will be used to aid in revising units along with alignment to state standards and the Grades 6-8 scope and sequence for social studies (Passport) and science (Lab Aides). The school has a protocol and safety intervention ladder of referral. The protocol begins with classroom interventions, counseling to mediate any scholar misunderstandings as an attempt to refocus the scholars, and culminating, if necessary in a Dean’s referral. The school community, including parents, the deans, counselors, social workers and administration is kept in the safety information loop through teacher's postings to Skedula. We have hired a full time Assistant Principal whose specialty is social emotional work. The focus for data review will be regular and ongoing beginning with reviewing and synthesizing data (pre/post unit assessments, Beginning of Year MOSL iReady, item analysis from state examinations, and in class assessments, such as running records, conference notes, scholar products, exit slips) unit/lesson development, inquiry-based activity planning, and revising (as necessary), lesson and activity planning. Teachers will identify a focus group of scholars that crosses grades and includes all subgroups to assess school academic needs, plan lessons, assess scholar outcomes, and revise craft moves; this will be done in a cyclical process using a protocol agreed upon by teachers within the specific content area teams (ELA, math, social studies, science, Special Education, ENL). The school will continue to work toward having department teams engaged in the practices described. Through sources such as Engage NY, professional development, coaches and aforementioned curriculum programs, creating model 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 258  classrooms and encouraging inter-visitation along with using the challenge of the Common Core standards, instruction will deepen and become differentiated to meet the needs of scholars. The work will be done through the collaboration of teachers, with the support of the administration, Borough Field Support Center Instructional Specialists and an external instructional coach and ASPIRA How do you envision collaboration amongst your School Instructional Cabinet to improve teacher practices and student learning? The Instructional Cabinet will improve teacher practice and student learning via distributive leadership. The instructional cabinet will collectively bring problems and issues to the table and make decisions. Curriculum and assessments will constantly be reviewed during our Instructional Cabinet and adjustments will be made as needed. How do you envision collaboration within teacher teams to improve teacher practices and student learning? Collaboration within teacher teams will utilize student data trends. In addition to the exit slips referenced above, we pres2018-19 RSCEP-PF 259  ently rely upon the following interim assessments for quarterly student performance data: I-Ready ELA and Math, Teachers College performance based assessments, NTN KEMS 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 260  pre- and post-unit assessments, Fountas & Pinnell running records, ReadyNY workbook post assessment, and teacher-created mid-term and final exams correlated with the NYS 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 261  ELA and Math power standards and standardized summative assessments. The impact of these measures has been collected on a blend of digital and paper-based platforms that 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 262  will be readily available to the reviewer upon request. When analyzing student data, this makes instructional next steps clear. Teachers will use this information within their teacher teams to inform their instruction, resulting in meeting the needs of their specific students, creating lessons with specific scaffolds, planning for authentic questioning and discussions as well as grouping and regrouping students to increase student engagement. Through this analysis of student data and tailoring their lessons as needed, it is our belief that student learning will increase. How do you envision collaboration across teacher teams to improve teacher practices and student learning? Specific teacher leaders across teacher teams will meet weekly in the Instructional Cabinet to share updates on student learning and teaching practices. Additionally, teachers across teacher teams will meet to collaborate on cross curricular units and assignments during professional development. What data will teachers and the School Instructional Cabinet regularly review to ensure that they are reflecting upon their teaching practices and meeting individual student learning needs? What is the intent for reviewing each piece of data? (ex. Teachers will regularly review student IEPs when developing lessons in order to ensure that tasks are appropriately scaffolded.) Intent Ensure all lessons include multiple entry points and targeted, small group instruction is planned for daily. Modify/adapt curricula to ensure the students' learning needs are being met Instructional Leadership Team will analyze teachers' Advance data to plan for professional learning, reinforce key, school-wide instructional strategies and aanlyze if PLC impacting not only teacher practice but all student outcomes Get feedback from teachers and confirm or disconfirm if professional learning useful, timely and relevant; consider next steps and/or revise PL Plan Data Reviewed Lesson Plans Teacher Advance Ratings "EXIT SLIPS" from Monday and Tuesday PLCs Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Renewal Benchmarks and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 263  By June 2019, all students will increase their overall points on the TC Writing Assessments by at least 6 points from pre- to post on-demand writing prompts for each of the four units of study as a result of teacher collaboration as measured by Lucy Calkins' Writing Pathways Learning Progressions rubrics. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Collaborative Teachers Annual Goal: Which Renewal and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Collaborative Teaching Annual Goal? Framework: Collaborative Teachers Framework: Rigorous Instruction Performance Index on State ELA Exam Performance Index on State Math Exam 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 264  Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Classroom teachers Performance Index Sept 2018 – June 2019 on State ELA Exam Principal, Instructional APs and job-embedded, external Instructional Specialists and consultants Teachers will utilize CCLS-aligned TCRWP ELA curricula and targeted, supplemental instructional programs/materials to support all students' foundational, content knowledge, practice key skills and learn new strategies and plan for multiple entry points so all students may learn and receive instruction to match the individual learning needs. Conduct regular/frequent informal and formal supervisory support visits, timely and actionable feedback and job-embedded, subject-specific coaching and modeling Weekly Common Planning by SUBJECT How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) Improved student performance from one unit to the next Artifacts from teacher teams' cycles of collaborative inquiry Original and drafts of Professional Meeting Calendar by Cycle throughout All Classroom teachers Performance Index on State ELA Exam September 2018 - June 2019 Principal, Instructional APs and job-embedded, external Instructional Specialists and consultants Advance data, quarterly data, and i-Ready data All Core Subject Classroom teachers Framework: Collaborative Teachers Instructional APs September 2018 - June 2019 Weekly Professional Learning sessions All teachers Framework: Collaborative Teachers September 2018 - June 2019 Instructional Leadership Team 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 265  4b – Parent and Family Engagement the year; PLC Reflection Sheets; teachers' advance ratings How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Our caregivers and families remain BAMM’s most valuable and loyal partners. We’ve taken the following steps to strengthen our ties with families and the community:  We utilize Skedula to improve communication and collaboration between parents, students, teachers, and school leaders and support each student’s ability to self-monitor her/his academic progress.  District 8’s Family Support and Leadership Coordinators provide on-going, hands-on, support for our newly elected Parent Association (PA) and PA president.  Parent Coordinator (PC) partakes in monthly district-wide PDs and works closely with administration, district liaisons, our PA president, elected representatives, and CBO partners to strengthen outreach to families.  Our PC, community school partner, ASPIRA of NY, and Advisors utilize the following vehicles to maintain open lines of communication with caregivers and families: monthly phone calls home, coupled with school-wide “robo” calls, text communications, quarterly parent-student-teacher conferences. The impact of these measures has been collected on a blend of digital and paper-based platforms that will be readily available to the reviewer upon request. Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The following resources will be leveraged to achieve this goal: ● Scheduling will include teacher team common planning -- 2-periods; 90-min block and 1x/week -- for subject specific department meetings. ● Human resources from within the school (teachers, administration, cabinet, and staff), community (parents and CBO), and other partners (TC, NTN, Teaching Matters and Counseling in Schools. Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded X P/F Set-aside SIG Grant X 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 266  Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By February 2019, teachers will have completed three (3) pre and post assessments that represents all scholar subgroups using TC Writing as the measurement. We will also use iReady Diagnostic Benchmark #2 in reading and math to assess our mid-year progress. By February 2019, all students, including three major sub groups at BAMM! - ELLs, SWDs, and STH - will demonstrate quarterly gains as measured by TC and NTN performance tasks, i-Ready Diagnostic Benchmark performance and ELA and Math BAMM! Quarterly results. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. At weekly Instructional Cabinet Meetings and quarterly commonly planning meetings, the principal and the Instructional APs will review the following: (a) Advance data with a targeted emphasis on components 1A, 1E, and 3C, (b) disaggregated results of TC and NTN summative units, (c) I-Ready data and (d) ELA and Math quarterly results. Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 267  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 2 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 2.2 The school leader ensures that the school community shares the Specific, Measurable, Ambitious, Results-oriented, and Timely (SMART) goals/mission and long-term vision inclusive of core values that address the priorities outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (RSCEP). Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital resources. 2.3 2.4 The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district's Annual Professional Performance Review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. 2.5 Leaders effectively use evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve critical individual and school-wide practices as defined in the RSCEP (student achievement, curriculum and teacher practices; leadership development; community/family engagement; and student social and emotional developmental health). x x x x Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: SOP(s) Addressed 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? Based on the results of the 2018 DTSDE the school received ratings of developing and ineffective for 2.2, 2.3, 2.4, and 2.5. However, adjustments have been made to this year in SOP 2.2 which enabled us to show consistency and maintain gains achieved as based on our 2018 Quality Review results as follows : ● 2.2 - According to the 2016 Quality Review Report “Administrators consistently communicate high expectations for achievement and success by students and are developing systems by which staff can be trained and held accountable for such goals…” The school has an extended cabinet comprised of a variety of staff/ stakeholders that make up its school community which, along with the staff development committee (SDC) members review school accountability data, and use it to assess strengths and needs as outlined in the RSCEP. The school community generated a motto / ‘core values’. The core values are: Trust, Accountability, Bravery, Perseverance, and Integrity. The cabinet will continue to improve by seeking to closely monitor the highlighted areas cited as developing, and revise approaches not yielding expected results. ● 2.3 - Members of the SDC review a variety of school accountability data (city and state included), share this analysis, implications, and suggestions with members of the extended cabinet, administration, the school leadership team, and other community stakeholders. After reviewing the contributions, administration then decides how to best organize programs, human and fiscal resources. A part of each Monday’s professional development is set aside to share these decisions and get feedback from the school learning community. A vision board was created as a constant visual reminder of the school’s focus. Administration will continue to develop and hone its craft in seeking to be increasing 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 268  proficient with Galaxy, and utilizing benchmarks to track fiscal expenditures (grants and school funding), in an effort to maximize budget dollars to support the school community and scholar achievement . ● 2.4 – Administration shares the responsibility of conducting observations and providing feedback to teachers, using the DOE Advance system. Observations are not just held to the regulated amount of formal and informal observations mandated, but include additional feedback that cycles back to support identified instructional concerns. (outside of the DOE mandate) in efforts to support improved teacher practice. The observation data is one of the sources that drive the work of the staff development committee (SDC) which in turn plans the targeted support teachers receive. Engaging scholars in learning is an area of focus with teacher practice. Going forward, additional and targeted support will be provided to improve the effectiveness of teachers in order to evidence authentic standards-aligned instruction which will result in differentiated work products to improve scholar engagement. 2.5 – The school has the following evidence-based systems to examine and improve individual and school-wide practices as defined in the RSCEP: Student achievement, curriculum and teacher practices: ● NYS ELA and mathematics Item Data Analysis ● MOSL ● Schoolnet ● DataCation ● Pre/post unit assessment ● Other class and student work products Leadership development: ● Administration attend and participate in on all professional development provided to staff and facilitated by partners and other vendors ● DOE, union and other outside school professional development are selectively chosen for attendance by administration ● Feedback by Principal to AP’s and from Superintendent to Principal are adhered to via Goals and Objectives and PPO ● Administration also adheres to feedback provided from state, city, school accountability tool reports like (QR, SQR, IIT) Community/family engagement; and Student social and emotional developmental health: ● Skedula ● OORS ● Teacher anecdotal and incident reports 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 269  ● Child Study Team (CST) and the referral process and forms ● IEP / SESIS and School Based Support Team (SBST) process ● PBIS The school realizes that more support is needed to improve how the data is analyzed used to inform instructional next steps of teachers and scholars. The overall leveraged need is to improve the effectiveness of teachers within the instructional core components of the teacher evaluation system (ADVANCE): 1e-Designing Coherent Curriculum, 3b-Questions and Discussion techniques, 3c- Engaging Students In Learning, 3d- Using Assessments In Instruction. Part 2 – Summative Vision for Effective School Leadership What is your vision for effective school leadership at your school? The principal shares his vision with all stakeholders on a regular basis. We will continue to utilize a shared calendar between the principal and assistant principals to organize our classroom visits, and work with Advance to provide accurate, timely and actionable feedback to all teachers. The data collected during these observations will help in developing professional development trainings geared towards areas in which the school community shows where growth is needed. The principal regularly meets and discusses personal objectives, growths and next steps with assistant principals, both formally and informally. In our weekly cabinet meetings, the Principals Weekly is reviewed and responsibilities are parceled out in an attempt to build internal leadership capacity. On which aspects of your own leadership do you plan to focus for the upcoming school year? Distributive Leadership What is your vision for ensuring that everyone in your schools has a normed and shared understanding of the school’s vision, mission, and instructional focus? Through transparency, the staff and student/parent handbook, The Weekly Point, multiple leadership teams, parent letters and monthly meetings - breakfast and tea time with Mr. David -- as well as SLT. What is your vision for developing differentiated leadership throughout your school? How will you utilize teacher leaders to build broad capacity within your school? Expanding our school-wide leadership teams How will the leader foster collaborative school governance processes, and ensure full family participation together with other stakeholders? 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 270 Collaborate with ASPIRA and Graham Windham, principal will hold monthly meetings - breakfast and tea time with Mr. David How often will the school leader conduct observations? How quickly will school leader share actionable feedback with teachers? How will school leader ensure accuracy and provide support to teachers based on observation feedback? Frequency Feedback Turnaround Accuracy one week departmentbased cycles 10 days Administration Normingactivities What kind of evidence based systems would a school leader put in place to ensure that the school and individuals continues to improve? What kind of supports? Who would he/she collaborate with? Evidence-Based System Support(s) Collaborator(s) MOTP rating scores Weekly job-embedded Boro FSC Instructional Specialist support Administration How will you organize student and teacher programs to ensure students’ needs are met? Fiscal capital? Hiring of staff necessary to start our bilingual program in the 6th and 7th grades. Through the use of ASPIRA incorporating a student Advisory period to allow for built in professional development blocks. Common planning/department meetings are programmed into every teacher's schedule. Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Renewal Benchmarks and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks. By June 2019, on average teachers will improve .4 pts on their rating of Danielson component 3C: Engagement as a result of timely, meaningful and actionable feedback, developing collaborative leadership and fostering professional learning that focuses on student learning outcomes as measured by MoTP score in Advance. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Effective School Leadership Annual Goal: Which Renewal and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Effective School Leadership Annual Goal? Framework: Rigorous Instruction Framework: Collaborative Teachers 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 271  Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. Administration will continue to receive professional development on the use of research based programs, and systems (i.e. ADVANCE, Danielson Framework for teachers) in efforts to be highly effective in what does great teacher practice looks like and how do we get teachers to evidence it, thus improving the school Continuously Plan, Deliver and Revise Professional Learning Plan each cycle - using recorded students' learning needs along with observed teachers' instructional needs -- to guide this work Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Principal Framework: Collaborative Teachers September 2018 - June 2019 Principal Instructional APs Framework: Rigorous Instruction Instructional APs All teachers Framework: Collaborative Teachers Sept 2018 and June 2019 Principal Instructional APs Framework: Rigorous Instruction Job-embedded coaches/Instructional Specialists How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) Teachers' ratings in Advance throughout the year Teachers' ratings in Advance throughout the year 4b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 272  TBD in consultation with SLT and Instructional Cabinet Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Instructional Leadership Team and DSR calibrate and build shared understanding around the Danielson framework and roll out and review with staff throughout the school year Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded X P/F Set-aside SIG Grant X 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By February 2019, on average all teachers will improve .2 points on their rating of Danielson component 3D as a result of timely, meaningful, and actionable feedback as measured by teachers' Advance ratings from Sept 2018 - Jan 2019 Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Advance Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 273  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 6 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 6.2 The school leader ensures that regular communication with students and families fosters their high expectations for student academic achievement. 6.3 The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders so that student strength and needs are identified and used to augment learning. 6.4 The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to support student success. 6.5 The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school community members centered on student learning and success and encourages and empowers families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their children. x x x x Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: SOP(s) Addressed 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? Based on the results of the 2018 DTSDE the school received ratings of ineffective for 6.2, 6.3, 6.4, and 6.5. However, adjustments have been made this year in SOPs 6.2, 6.3, and 6.5 which enabled us to show gains achieved after noted as developing as based on our 2018 Quality Review results as follows: 6.2, 6.3 and 6.5 – According to the 2018 Quality Review Report “Administrators consistently communicate high expectations for achievement and success by students and are developing systems by which staff can be trained and held accountable for such goals and parents can be given feedback regarding student progress toward those goals.” The school offers parents weekly opportunities to have reciprocal communication when attending parent engagement Tuesdays. This is where teachers engage in communicating to parents the high expectations of the school from a menu of items; thus sharing scholar academic and socio-emotional progress. Parents then can share how best the children learn and what they feel they can do at home to support the cause. Report cards are given four (4) times a year. Parents have access to Skedula’s Pupil Path system which is used to enter grades, post anecdotals, and communicate through e-mail between staff and guardians. The school has a strong Parent Coordinator that is involved in the community, and attends the CEC meetings to share and disseminate information discussed at the meetings. The PC also plans ESL Parent Workshops using computer technology, and exposes parents to the Common Core, all in support of helping parents to help their children meet the communicated high expectations. The schools administration, parent coordinator, and parent association president all have open door policies to enable parents the opportunity to have in person discussions. ASPIRA, our PC and PA will collaborate with other stakeholders within the school to see how opportunities 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 274  can be improved to ensure regular and increased communication is evidenced to help parents assist their children meet academic and socio-emotional milestones. However, the following SOP remains an area of challenge: 6.4 – The school has a variety of data sources (attendance, academic and socio-emotional) that teachers and school make available to parents in support of empowering families to understand the expectation and process it takes for a scholar to succeed. Although the above three (3) statements of practice showcases a variety of things the school is doing to evidence reciprocal communication of high expectations in support of parent engagement and scholar learning success, the school continues to struggle around maintaining current contact information and effective ways to have increased parent involvement. Lastly, increasing support needs to be placed on how best to support parent / members of the community around their housing and health related concerns. The school’s overall leveraged need is to develop effective strategies to support, and successfully navigate parent / community interactions, while providing interest driven activities, which would increase parent involvement in the school leading to greater scholar academic progress. Part 2 – Summative Vision for Strong Family and Community Ties What is your vision for having strong family and community ties at your school? Through our partnership with ASPIRA we will provide a greater range of services to our families, community and students. Provide and communicate weekly structured time for teachers to meet one on one with parents ·Develop and expand parent leadership through the Parent Teacher Association, participation on the BAMM Community School Team and School Leadership Team. Development of the BAMM Webpage and facebook like page to help communicate through social media with parents. All postings will be bilingual. Monthly school based and BAMM Community School Newsletter and school events calendar will be sent home via backpacks, email and traditional USPS mailings. Continued usage of an email & text blast list utilizing "School Messenger"and a electronic mass parent email group. The development of Parent Cohort groups to help better manage grade level events and locate and provide resources to parent the needs of their grade level cohort of parents. Through the use of a BAMM Webpage parents will be able to create and engage with other parents through discussion groups and platforms and parent blogs. ASPIRA and the school will plan activities that give families information around the concept of the school as a Lighthouse. Information will also be provided that outlines ASPIRA’s partnership with the school, and the school’s mission and vision. School safety officers will be a part of the roll out and information sessions to define their expanding role in the school community. Workshops and hands-on demonstrations will be offered to families that outline the expectations of the common core, the school’s shift to a humanities-based lens, inquiry work, and the expanded learning time initiative. There will also be literature and website information (including DOE) provided so that families can do further research on their own. In collaboration with ASPIRA, the school will create a Parent Welcome Center outfitted to meet the needs of parents. Parents will be invited in to volunteer and to participate in school activities. Parents will be supported by the staff being open, welcoming and knowledgeable of the procedures of the school. Parents will also be encouraged to attend CEC meetings and citywide trainings. In addition, the school will continue its collaboration with Mercy College who provides parents opportunities for district wide networking. The school will partner with ASPIRA in joint decision making to ensure that the parents are welcomed and celebrated on a monthly basis. The school will implement a monthly “Chat and Chews with the Principal” outlining the direction the school is going in, and addressing any concerns of the parents. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 275  Within the Community School model, how will families be welcomed into the school and made a part of the school community? What support will administrators, teachers, school staff and school safety officers be given to help create a welcoming environment? Will there be a dedicated space for families in the school? Welcome signs and directions have been placed on main floor to direct parents to the Parent Welcome Center. School Safety personnel have been trained and inculcated in our parent engagement practices and are briefed daily, on all of our family and parent events and activities as to better direct visiting BAMM parents upon entering the school, to the Parent Welcome center. Upon arrival at the BAMM Parent Welcome Center either a member of the Parent Association, the Parent Coordinator and or lead CBO staff can assist visiting parents with their queries or concerns. · If a member of the PA or the Parent Coordinator are with another parent or unavailable, the School Safety Staff will contact a someone from the School Support Team to come main entrance greet and escort the parent(s) to the student support center to render assistance. Interpretation services will be made available for all parents during the facilitation of parent workshops, conferences and meetings. Families will be encouraged to explore the school building and classrooms, and partake in a gallery walk to view scholar work products. The school will maintain its open door policy wherein parents are always welcome to meet with administration, schedule appointments to see staff, and work with the parent coordinator to address concerns and celebrate scholar learning. With the assistance of ASPIRA, the school will create a comprehensive and thoughtful calendar of Parent workshops offerings and other parent and community engagement offerings. How will the school identify and develop families to take leadership roles in school decision making/school governance structures? The school will partner with ASPIRA in joint decision making to ensure that the parents are welcomed and celebrated on a monthly basis. The school will implement a monthly “Chat and Chews with the Principal” outlining the direction the school is going in, and addressing any concerns of the parents. We also will provide an opportunity for BAMM parents to take on leadership roles in the decision making process through their involvement in the PA and SLT structures. How will the school engage the community and families? How will they ensure that teachers are able to learn from families about the children being taught? Workshops and hands-on demonstrations will be offered to families that outline the expectations of the common core, the school’s shift to a humanities-based lens, inquiry work, and the expanded learning time initiative. There will also be literature and website information (including DOE) provided so that families can do further research on their own. In addition we will be engaging our parents through school wide engagement events including but not limited to: 1. Family Night Curriculum Night– (September 2018) 2. Monthly Parent “Chat and Chews” with the Principal – Where Parents can enjoy an audience with the principal in an small group setting for the purpose of having meaningful dialog centered around topics including but not limited to, student programming, trending school climate concerns and or instructional clarity. In School Student Showcases, Talent Shows, Holiday Celebration Pot Lucks 3. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 276 4. Utilization of a PTA created needs assessment survey to gather parent feedback that will used to adequately gauge the areas and topics of interests for monthly parent workshops, adult education offerings and assistance programs that our school community provide to BAMM families. · 5. Parent College readiness trips and conferences (Lehman College, Hostos Community College, Monroe College, Boriqua College, Bronx Community College, etc.). 6. Through our CBO partnerships, provide GED, ESL and Immigration services for families in need of those services. 7. Job readiness training – Resume Writing and Preparation to appropriately prepare our parents to negotiate the ever-changing job market through partnerships with BronxWorks, WorkForce 1 and US Department of Labor. 8. Through our CBO Partners we will provide housing support and assistance for our BAMM families that are chronically homeless or in temporary housing through our Partnership with Astor Services for Children & Families Family Resource Specialist. · 9. Partner with local businesses and corporations to open more job opportunities for families 10. ASPIRA led Quarterly Community Resource Fairs during parent teacher conferences to expose students and families to neighborhood and city CBOs, agencies, both city and state, with resources to support families with housing, insurance, health screenings, mental health, afterschool opportunities, etc. · 11. Through the creations of community service partnerships we will expose students and families to the realization of one of BAMM’s most tried and true core values “Helping Hand”, as both BAMM parents and scholars attend to and address the the needs in our surrounding community. 12. Provide referrals to mental health education and counseling for both BAMM parents and scholars through our onsite Mental Health Providers (Astor Services and Urban Health.) 13. Through our SBHC (School Based Health Clinic) currently provided by Urban Health care inc., both scholar and parent can have regular access to quality medical attention. 14. Teachers outreach to parents will be entered in SKEDULA and Pupil Path tutorial sessions will be offered in the school computer lab during Parent-teacher Conference day and other events. 15. We're building social and emotional relationships with parents, students and the school by planning workshops and activities that encourage family engagement. 16. With the support of ASPIRA the following will be implemented: “Mother's group”; creating a discussion group, allowing them to reflect and share information amongst one another and building their parenting skills; giving them the ability to understand and encourage their children with the knowledge they take away from the discussion group. Moreover, a male and female Young Scholars Discussion Group will be created to give our students a platform where they can share and receive the support from their peers. What types of supports does the school provide to families to encourage them to take an active role in what their child is learning? Type of Support Rationale Parent Town Halls CBO Skedula/Pupil Path Collaboration between parents and teachers for academic success to share information parent workshops Parent monitor students academic performance in real time. How do families partner with the school and CBO to support student success? Will there be dedicated space for families? Family partnerships with school: ASPIRAand the school will plan activities that give families information around the concept of the school as a Lighthouse. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 277 Family partnerships with CBO: Workshops and hands-on demonstrations will be offered to families that outline the expectations of the common core, the school’s shift to a humanities-based lens, inquiry work, and the expanded learning time initiative. There will also be literature and website information (including DOE) provided so that families can do further research on their own. Is there dedicated space for these partnerships? TBD What is your vision for the role the school will take in providing access adult education classes within the community? ASPIRA will collaborate with our Graham Windham operated Beacon program to offer our Parents and Community Adult Education (GED) and ESL classes at our building during the evening hours. What data and student progress feedback loops will be present at the school to ensure that families knowledgeable of their children’s scholastic success? Skedula, progress reports, teacher- student conferences, teacher -parent conferences, Curriculum nights, Advisory, phone blasts, email blasts Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Renewal Benchmarks and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks. By June 2019, 75% of parents will have participated in a parent-teacher conference as a result of targeted parent engagement by the Parent Coordinator and CSD, and an increase in academic-focused and engaging family activities as evidenced by sign in sheets. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Strong Family and Community Ties Annual Goal: Which Renewal and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Strong Family and Community Ties Annual Goal? Implement Community School Model 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 278  Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Plan and execute regular visits to the neighboring community to share / communication of school events In collaboration with ASPIRA outreach will be done to vendors, religious organizations, and parents to solicit ideas on how the school can best support identified needs. Provide workshops, and other offerings that are of interest to the school community Parents of our scholars-activists Implement Community School Model September 2018 - June 2019 community businesses/ organizations Parents of our scholars-activists Implement Community School Model September 2018 - June 2019 community businesses/ organizations Parents of our scholars-activists Implement Community School Model September 2018 - June 2019 community businesses/ organizations Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Culture and Climate Team members, Parent Coordinator, Attendance Team, SLT, ASPIRA, Graham Windham How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) Attendance, sign in sheets, Agendas Culture and Climate Team members, Parent Coordinator, Attendance Team, SLT, ASPIRA, Graham Windham Attendance, sign in sheets, Agendas Culture and Climate Team members, Parent Coordinator, Attendance Team, SLT, ASPIRA, Graham Windham Attendance, sign in sheets, Agendas Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 279  Parent Coordinator, Parent Association President, ASPIRA, teachers, and other partners from grant sources. Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title I TA Title III X PTA Funded X X P/F Set-aside SIG Grant X 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By February 2019, 50% of families will have communicated with school staff regarding their child's progress as a result of parent engagement resources provided by our Community Based Organizations and measured by attendance taken. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Use of Skedula and parent teacher conference attendance Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 280  Section 6: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) Program Description Directions: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) activities are directly aligned to the elements of the Framework for Great Schools, Rigorous Instruction, Supportive Environments, and Strong Family and Community Ties. ELT provides enriching educational experiences that happen outside of the traditional school day and blend skill acquisition, relationship-building and fun to foster academic and social-emotional growth. Summer learning, afterschool programming, and extended-day ELT models, when well-implemented, play a critical role in supporting students in all grades and ensuring that they graduate from high school, college and career ready. SED requires that Priority schools offer a minimum of 200 additional student contact hours as Expanded Learning Time in addition to the current mandated length of 900 hours of instruction per year (25 hours per week) in grades K-6 and 990 hours of instruction per year (27.5 hours per week) in grades 7-12. Effective ELT models will blend school staff with community partners, and will provide a balanced curriculum that can include ELA, math, STEM, arts, physical activity, and leadership development. Complete the sections on this page to demonstrate how the school will meet these requirements. Part 1 – ELT Program Goal(s) Describe the summative goal(s) of the ELT program for the 2018-19 school year. Goals for ELT should align to the Renewal Benchmarks. How will the school will ensure that all students’ individual needs are served during the Renewal ELT and how the school’s vision for ELT will impact both academic achievement and social emotional growth? Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. In alignment with our school's instructional focus "engage every student, across grades 6-8, with a sequence of theme-based, interdisciplinary units of study across all core content areas", ELT was created to offer student choice as well as academic support in alignment with our Renewal Benchmarks. The Bronx Academy of Multi-Media not only moving to embed the use of technology/social media/media arts within the school day, but also reinforcing this within our extended learning time. For example, we are offering our student this year Coding/Robotics, Maker, Digital Photography, Graphic Arts, as well as accelerated Math enrichment, Math AIS, Homework Help, ENL enrichment, Rocking the Boat, Dance, Hollistic Physical Ed./Yoga, Flag Football, Theatre and Elevate NY/Student Empowerment. Students were given the opportunity to sign up for the extended learning time class that interested them as well as being assigned an AIS class on a rotating basis. ELT is a collaboration between the school, the lead CBO (ASPIRA) and our Beacon Program (Graham Wyndam). Part 2 – ELT Program Type Is the ELT program voluntary or compulsory? Voluntary X Compulsory Renewal ELT – Describe what accountability structures the school will employ to ensure participation of all students, including special populations, will participate fully in Renewal ELT. Additional ELT - If there is a voluntary ELT program in addition to the compulsory Renewal ELT, indicate how you will actively encourage the participation of all students, with the goal of serving at least 50% of students. Our school's student program includes ELT built within the day. During zero period all students participate in ENRICHMENT HOUR M - F. Part 3 – ELT Program Description Target Population: The ELT program for a Renewal School will be offered to all students in the school. Describe how the school will meet the following SED requirements for an ELT program: How will the school integrate academics, enrichment, and skill development through hands-on experiences that make learning relevant and engaging? How will CBO staff and the school’s teachers be integrated to provide a seamless learning day?  Offer a range of activities that capture student interest and strengthen student engagement in learning so as to promote higher attendance, reduces risk for retention or drop out, and increases the likelihood of graduation. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 281   Actively address the unique learning needs and interests of all types of students, especially those who may benefit from approaches and experiences not offered in the traditional classroom setting.  What new content areas and opportunities will be offered to students? How will the school ensure all IEP and language mandates are met during ELT?  Contain components designed to improve student academic, social, and emotional outcomes, including opportunities for enrichment programs such as in music and art.  Ensure instruction in any core academic subject offered in the program will be delivered under the supervision of a teacher who is NYS certified in that particular content area.  How will community educators receive professional development? Are there plans to provide joint PD to school faculty and community partner staff?  What content will be led by pedagogical staff and what content will be led by CBO partners?  How will the school best utilize CBO partners to impact student achievement?  How will effective outreach be conducted to families?  How will programming be made easily accessible to students and families in order to encourage participation? The school and ASPIRA will use multiple data sources to identify student interest, strengths, and needs in order to prioritize and schedule a range of activities. Interest surveys will be offered quarterly to keep a pulse on student interests. The Bronx Academy of Multi-Media not only moving to embed the use of technology/social media/media arts within the school day, but also reinforcing this within our extended learning time. For example, we are offering our student this year Coding/Robotics, Maker, Digital Photography, Graphic Arts, as well as accelerated Math enrichment, Math AIS, Homework Help, ENL enrichment, Rocking the Boat, Dance, Hollistic Physical Ed./Yoga, Flag Football, Theatre and Elevate NY which is a student empowerment program, focusing on the social emotional well being of our students. Students were given the opportunity to sign up for the extended learning time class that interested them as well as being assigned an AIS class on a rotating basis. All academic ELT offerings are provided by a licensed NYC pedagogue. ELT is a collaboration between the school, the lead CBO (ASPIRA) and our Beacon Program (Graham Wyndam). Students with disabilities as well as our ENL population will attend a rotating ELT schedule, which provides either academic enrichment or language support through a licensed DOE pedagogue. Dream Yard (a program provider contracted through ASPIRA) provides professional development for the licensed teachers that collaborate with their teaching artists which includes theatre, maker, digital photography and poetry. Teachers and teaching artists meet once a week to plan instruction collaboratively. All ELT classes are led by licensed pedagogues except the programs led by our Beacon provider such as Rocking the Boat, Coding, Dance and Bookmaking. Parents will kept informed through workshops, newsletters and PA meetings. ELT is part of the school day program and is scheduled in STARS. Parents are informed via report cards and progress reports on how their child is performing within their ELT class. All students participate in ELT as it is part of the school day. Part 4 – ELT Program Implementation and Oversight Part 4a. Who will implement the ELT program? Who will oversee the program? 1. Indicate the key personnel that will be responsible for implementing and overseeing the ELT program, including school-based staff and any high-quality community partners that will be involved. If applicable, describe the scope of involvement of all community partners and how the joint ELT program is structured. How will the school assess the impact of ELT on individual student achievement and social emotional development? 2. 3. ELT will be built into the school's academic schedule and overseeing will take place collaboratively between the school's administration, ASPIRA and our Beacon program. ELT is a collaboration between the school, the lead CBO (ASPIRA) and our Beacon Program (Graham Wyndam). Student behavior and attendance will be monitored through the new visions data sorter throughout the school year. Student progress will be monitored through quarterly progress reports and report cards. OORS report incidences will be monitored by grade level deans during the school 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 282  day including ELT time. Student progress in math who are receiving AIS during ELT will be monitored by their Math teacher. Students will be rotated in and out of AIS during ELT based on class performance data. Part 4b. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. September 2018 – June 2019 Part 5 – ELT Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the ELT program. DOE certified teachers will be used for ELT instruction as well as our CBO partner ASPIRA and Beacon Program Graham Windndam. Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support the ELT Program. Note: If the program is funded by 21st Century Community Center Learning Funds, it must be offered in conjunction with a high quality, high capacity community partner. X 21st Century Title I 1003(a) Tax Levy X X Title III Title I SWP PTA Funded Title I TA X SIG Grant P/F Set-aside School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 6 – ELT Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound and aligned to the school’s Renewal Benchmarks By February 2019, there will be a 5% increase in the average level of students’ proficiency rates as a result of ENRICHMENT HOUR programming as measured by mid-year benchmark for ELA and Mathematics, across all subgroups, grades 6-8. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. School Based interim Benchmark Assessments, iReady data, Student Report Card Data, Pre/Post Unit Assessment data in Math and ELA. Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 283  Section 7: Community School Description Directions: The Community School program is directly aligned to the Framework for Great Schools element – Strong Family and Community Ties. Part 1 – The Community School Program Goal(s) Indicate the summative goal(s) of the Community School program for the 2018-19 school year. Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Renewal Benchmarks and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks. The Community School SMART goals for the 2018-2019 school year are: 1. Provide integrated and quality ELT utilizing vetted and proven providers. (ELT to start by the second full week of school). 2. Create a Mental Health Plan that earmarks all mental health funding. ( Have a finalized MOU before the first day of school). 3. Hire a MSW to assist with the identification and coordination of students between the mental health clinic and the school. This individual will serve as our Mental Health Coordinator (MHC) and support in leading small group sessions, restorative circles, and one on one sessions based on need. The Mental Health Coordinator will also support in attendance efforts i.e. home visits, outreach, & providing students with the resources they may need to attend school every day. ( Person to be hired at the conclusion of September) 4. Provide a sound curriculum for the school advisory to support social-emotional learning. (Advisory curriculum to be implemented by first full week of school). 5. Structure family engagement in two tiers. Tier 1 to provide resources for parents such as NYC ID, ESL, Job fairs, GED programs. Tier 2 is to provide workshops of interest to parents to reinforce skill sets and to engage them in fun activities with the school community. ( Tiers 1 and 2 is scheduled to start in October). 6. Create and sustain a PBIS program with the school student support team to reward good behavior/attendance. Implementing the PBIS system will begin in October after a full month of data. 7. To support the school community to contribute in every possible school function event and activity. This also includes day to day school operations such as lunch and hallway support. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Community School Program Annual Goal: Which Renewal and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Community School Program Annual Goal? Implement Community School Model Provide 200 Hours of Extended learning Time Attendance Part 2 – Community School Program Description Part 2a. Identify the CBO partnerships that you will develop, their target student population(s), and scope of the services provided. As well as supporting schools’ supportive environment and attendance work, CBO’s should be helping to support your school’s instructional focus. CBO Partnership Target Population Scope of Service Rocking the Boat ASTOR Red Bull Theater Company: Targeted Students Targeted Students Targeted Students Both academic and SEL Socio/Emotional services Academic Support Shakespeare in Schools 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 284  2. 3. 4. Part 2b. Describe how the school will meet the NYCDOE requirements for a Community School in the School Renewal program. 1. Renewal Schools are expected to partner with a community-based partner organization (CBO) and together with members of the School Leadership Team, hire a Community School Director. The Director will lead implementation of the asset and needs assessment process, and other critically important coordinating activities. Indicate how you will leverage this aspect of the work. Renewal Schools are expected to personalize the needs of all students, through strategic programming and services, as determined by the asset and needs assessment, and must also offer Expanded Learning Time (ELT) and mental health programming. In completing this section, ensure that you think about how: (1) the right services are provided to the right students and families at the right time; and (2) how you will seamlessly coordinate services with instructional programming happening throughout and outside of the school day. Indicate how you will implement this work, and describe other programming you anticipate to be in place to strengthen this initiative. Renewal Schools are expected to emerge as Partnership Schools, which are places where parents and families feel welcome, actively participate in the conversation and decision-making around the renewal of their schools, and have many opportunities to advocate for their children. Monthly meetings and Community School Forums engaging families and community stakeholders will be a critical part of this family engagement strategy. Describe how you will implement this aspect of the work. Renewal School Principals are expected to meet on a weekly basis with their Community School Director, select Assistant Principals, key staff, and other CBOs, to analyze trends in data and case manage individual students. Data tools – including the New Visions Data Sorter - and training will be available for schools to use. Indicate how you will implement this aspect of the work. 1. Community School Director has been hired and is working closely with Principal to ensure all goals are aligned with the school’s mission. 2. Extended Learning Time will be scheduled into the student's calendar. We will alternate the push in services so the 2.students of each grade can participate in all ELT offerings through the course of the school year. This School year we will be exploring ways to strengthen mental health support services in the school. We will be working with power tools to develop an advisory program for students. This program is designed to empower scholar activists. We will also work to strengthen our partnership with ASTOR and offer more informational workshops for families. This will be coupled with ASPIRA hiring a mental health coordinator whose primary task will be to identify the needs of the students and families, and identify ways to meet them. We are scheduled to bring in ESL and GED classes for the school community. We are also seeking to build relationships with local organizations to provide more to our school community such as The Point, YMCA, Hunts Point Alliance and SOBRO. 3. We will be looking for creating a robust family engagement strategy that this year is parent-driven. I seek to shift ownership of the family engagement to the parents. Step one will be to utilize our current parent leaders to reach out and contact every parent and see what they will like to see from workshops and ways to be more engaged at the school. In collaboration with the school, we will find ways to engage parents and raise participation along with fostering stronger and more positive relationships with the school. Our goal is to diminish the historical negative perception the community may have of the school. Part 3 – Community School Program Implementation and Oversight 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 285  Part 3a. Key Staff and Partners 1. Name and describe the scope of involvement of all community partners working in the school (include partners supporting ELT, counseling, enrichment, etc.) 2. Name the members of your Community School Team and how meetings will be organized and structured to engage all stakeholders and be focused on results. 3. Explain data strategies including the use of the data sorter, and steps that the school will take to ensure that the appropriate interventions are provided to the right students 1. ASPIRA is the lead CBO supporting the school in coordinating ELT activities via subcontractors. ASTOR will be providing mental health supports in collaboration with ASPIRA’s MHC. Graham-Windham provides after-school enrichment offerings to middle school students in the community. 2. Our Community School Team will consist of CSD, MHC, Community Coordinator, Parent Coordinator, PTA President, & representation from school administration. Our meetings will focus on key community school events, attendance strategies, and key stakeholder partnerships that need to take place. 3. We will use the date sorter during our weekly attendance meetings to review and look for patterns related to chronically absent students, and we will assign targeted interventions to each student, and assign Success Mentors/use advisory time to check-in with chronically absent students. Part 3b. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the Community School program. We are working in collaboration with school day to ensure we are all on the same page in regards to Community School programming. All adjustments are made in accordance with school administration. Additional funding in the community school budget will be required to allow for greater enrichment of the instructional curriculum and ELT. Part 3c. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. Extended Learning Time ( Dream Yard) September 21, 2018 - June 2019. Mental Health (ASTOR ) - July 2018 - June 2019. Mental Health (Mental health Coordinator) September 2018 - June 2019. Family Engagement (workshops) September 2018 - June 2019. Part 3d. Mental Health Work Plan Separate from this RSCEP, schools will complete a Mental Health Work Plan that will become an addendum to this document. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 286  Section 8: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) English Language Arts (ELA) Formative and summative Assessments, running records, Teacher recommendation anchored in data, Unit Benchmark Reciprocal Teaching, Decoding Strategies, metacognitive strategies, Targeted guided reading, writing workshop Small group, one to one .Tier 1 Scholars who are approaching grade level standards that require ongoing, differentiated instruction. Tier 2 provided up to 3 times per week for 45 minutes. Tier 3 Small group instruction pull out/ push in Cooperative Teaching provided by SETSS Teacher Assessments, Report card When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) During school and after school Formative and Unit Benchmark Assessments summative Assessments,Unit Benchmark assessments Multiple measures such as state/or criterion reference test, Unit benchmark assessments Formative and summative Assessments, running records, Unit benchmark Mathematics Science Social Studies 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 287 Prescribed instruction anchored in data Prescribed instruction anchored in data Small group Tier 1 students who ae approaching grade level standards that require on going differentiated instruction. Tier 2 provided up 3 times per week for 45 minutes. (small group). Tier 3 group instruction pull out/ push in Cooperative Teaching provided by SETSS Teacher Small group instruction pull out . During school and after school During school and after school Prescribed instruction anchored in data Small group instruction pull out. During school and after school  At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Child Study Team, Parents, Teacher referrals. recommendation will be anchored in data: teacher anecdotal Formative and Sumativedata Provide a strong system assistance to seek help. The school counseling program will provide strategies to assist students in healthy goal setting and redefining positive life roles. Preventing school violence through character education, peer mediation, social skills and behavioral interventions, such as anger management and bullying prevention. Mentoring programs, after-school activities, intramural sports programs, skills in making positive choices . Upper level 1 students will receive A.I.S. During school and outside agencies after school Step One – Tier I “Universal Screening” All students at the beginning of the year are placed in assigned classes. This is based on age, promotion grade level, transfer-in grade, parental decision and/or involvement, and I.E.P. and any mandated programs already in place. Once classes have started, the classroom teachers and all out of classroom/service provider staff who come in contact with students, start a 6 – 10 week observation and assessment period to evaluate the current educational setting/program. The following measures are used for initial assessment:  Teacher’s College flexible is referred to the CST (Child Study Team) for possible Tier II applications.   groupings Formal Data (NY State testing scores –ELA, Math,Sci,NYSESLAT,NYSITEL, Spanish LAB, and item analysis documentation) Informal Data -classwork, homework, behavior and social interactions, conversations, parent meetings, input from service providers, comparing incoming scores to observable work, use of the American Reading Company’s Reading Program and assessment protocols in theirIRLA(English) andENIL(Spanish). 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 288   After the initial observation period where various methodologies and practices were tried, and no change or gains have been observed, the student is referred to theCST(Child Study Team) for possible Tier II applications. Step Two – Tier II “ Small group Target Teaching” Groups of 8 to 10 students are created who demonstrate a similar challenge point/deficit in a specific content area or a social/behavioral need. Specific teachers/specialists are assigned to work with a group based on scheduling. A 6 – 10 week observation and assessment period to evaluate the improvement, no movement, or regression of the students in the target group. At the end of this period, theCSTmeets to evaluate the data presented. If no movement is seen, another 6- 10 weeks of contact can be assigned for those students who need it. If improvement is evident in some students, they may be dismissed from the small group targeted instruction grouping of Tier II. Tier II instruction must be given in a different setting from the regular classroom environment. It can be administered at a separate table/area in the back of the classroom by the classroom teacher as a separate and additional instruction time. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 289  It can also be administered in a separate location by a specialist or by the classroom teacher as additional instruction time. The parent/guardian is kept abreast of the status and progress of their child at regular intervals. The following services are offered:  ENL/ESL  AISfor E.L.A.and MATH  AISin Spanish for MATH   At risk small group SETSSfor all content areas Counseling  Step Three – Tier III “Intensive ONE on ONE targeted teaching.” At this level the student has demonstrated minimal and struggling ability to progress in the focus subject area of challenge after multiple reapplications and various strategies at the Tier II level. The student is placed with a specialist in a ONE to ONE (sometime although rarely TWO to ONE) situation. Instruction must be given in a different setting from the regular classroom environment. It can be administered at a separate table/area in the back of the classroom by the classroom teacher as a separate and additional instruction time. It can also be administered in a separate location by a specialist or by the 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 290  classroom teacher as additional instruction time. Intensive care is given to the individual student to help them show progress and understanding in the target/subject area. A 6 – 10 week observation and assessment period to evaluate the improvement, no movement, or regression of the student is set. At the end of this period, an addition 6 – 10 weeks of instruction at the Tier III level can be conducted. After the agreed to number of reapplication sessions has been completed, theCSTmeets to evaluate the data presented. If no movement is seen at the Tier III level, the next step is to advise the parent and forward with an Official Evaluation for the possibility of a special education program and the incorporation of an Individual Education Plan (I.E.P.). The parent/guardian is called in for an in person meeting and all findings and possible next steps are discussed together. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 291  Section 9: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. 67 Students Students in Temporary Housing (STH) are serviced at 08X424 in a variety of ways. The School Attendance team identifies the students in temporary housing and monitors their attendance in a weekly basis .The school attendance teacher will contact parents when attendance starts to decline and offer support and help arrange for example transportation to school. The Office of Community Schools is presently supporting the school with materials such as boo bags and school materials outside of the title 1 allocation of the school. The schools social work team will meet individually with students in temporary housing to identify students and family needs and attempt to meet them. School Guidance Councilors will have a caseload of students in Temporary Housing to check- in with these students. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). n/a 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 292  n/a 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. n/a 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 293  Section 10: Title I Program Information Directions:  All schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. To ensure staff retention we provide ongoing differentiated professional development opportunities in an effort to build capacity. In the event that we have to replace a staff member, we take the following steps: ● Current staff member recommendations ● The Principal’s Secretary works closely with the network Human Resources point person to ensure that anyone who is not deemed highly qualified submits all required documentation and meets assessment deadlines. ● Mentors are assigned to support first year teachers in curriculum development, classroom management and professional enhancement. Content Area Specialists are assigned to assist teachers with the implementation of new Department of Education curriculum mandates 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the strategies and activities for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, staff, and paraprofessionals that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). To ensure that teachers’ professional skills are current with latest curriculum and instructional practices, the Cabinet works diligently with the Staff Development Committee to offer professional learning workshops facilitated by school-based staff, partners and consultants to all staff members based on the results of our needs analysis. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 294  N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/information, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. The school developed a Measurement of Student Learning Committee prior to the summer session. The committee’s directive is making decisions about assessments and growth measurements that will be instituted throughout the coming year. The committee performs the research and analyzes the best fit for our students and the effective use of available human/systems resources. The final recommendations are reviewed by the teaching staff to obtain consensus and awareness. In addition an internal scoring committee was developed to perform all rubric based assessments and systematize the flow of item analysis data into various systems. The information gathered from the various assessments are consolidated in the school data repository. The Staff Development Committee analyzed data from multiple sources to identify needs, and collaborated to plan professional learning support for our staff in support of those identified needs to improve instruction for all students. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds enables, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (RSCEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 295  Title I Part A (Basic) Title I School Improvement 1003(a) Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funds Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Local (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) 291,039.00 N/A $47,962.00 0 12,366 0 2,488518.00 references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) 22-25 18-21, 26-30, 31-34 13-16, 26-30, 31-34 22-25, 26-30 x x x 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH). 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 296   Title I School Improvement 1003(a): To support implementation of school improvement activities identified through the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) reviews or a school review with district oversight and included in the DCIP/RSCEP.  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: To support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs.  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan.  Title I Priority and Focus School Parent Engagement Set-aside: Additional set-aside is to enable greater and  more meaningful parent participation in the education of their children. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process, including Title I 1003(g) SIG funds: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 297  Section 11: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. 08X424 The Hunts Point School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students BAMM! will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 298  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home;  provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 299   host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) 08X424 The Hunts Point School, , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 300  programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas;  providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 301  ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 302   advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 303 III. Student Responsibilities  ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 304  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): K 6 1 7 2 8 3 9 4 10 5 11 12 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 305  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: Part B Rationale: Our Title III Direct Instruction Program will consist of two elements. The first will be three Saturday ELL trips during the school year. These three trips will be for new arrival ELLs to learn English by doing, seeing, and connecting real life experiences to curriculum. The second will be an after school program two days a week for new admit/new arrival ELLs to improve their English usage in all four modalities using written texts, as well as technology. Based on the NYSITEL results, our new arrival ELLs are entering with very low literacy skills in English. We also feel that the 360 mandated ENL minutes of instruction per week isn’t fully meeting their needs. Also our 8th grade ELLs showed no growth on the Science Baseline MOSL to the End of year MOSL. Therefore, a focus on science will be integrated into the program. Subgroups and grade levels of students to be served: ELLs in 6th, 7th, and 8th grade who are new admits as well as continuing ELLs up to two years in the system. NYSESLAT/NYSITEL levels to be considered will be ENTERING, EMERGING and TRANSITIONING. In the event any long term ELLS show a desire and motivation to participate, they will be considered for inclusion based on space limitations and availability. We expect 20 students to participate in the after school program, and 25 to 45 students to participate in the Saturday trips. The groups will mixed levels. There will be ONE teacher in the after-school classroom facilitating the mixed groupings. The number of teachers accompanying the Saturday trips will vary depending on the number of students that receive parental permission to attend. The current ratio is 1:10 so we could have from 1 to 5 teachers attending. The attending teachers will all have ESL or B.E. licenses. Schedule and duration: The three Saturdays will be spaced throughout the school year. The trips will run from 10:00am till 2:00pm. The trips will consist of approximately 25-45 students with accompanying teachers based on the mandated ratio of 1:10. Accompanying teachers will be ESL and/or B.E. certified. If more accompanying teachers are needed, funding will come from alternative sources and not this grant. The first trip will be scheduled for October/November. This will be at the NY Botanical Gardens. The topic area is Earth Science. Student will have to collect data to describe two of their favorite flowers or plants seen. I.E. – note taking, sketching/rendering, taking pictures, etc. The will have to find out the origin of their choice flower and plant as well. Upon return to school, they will have to present their data in a manner differentiated to their level. (a project board, a graphic organizer, a written report). Students in the after-school program will have time during the two after-school sessions to work on the final product. ELLs not in the after-school program can complete the final project on their own time. The second trip will be scheduled for January/February. This one will be to the Rose 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 306  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Planetarium. The topic area is Space Science. Students will be collecting data to support the statement “I would like to be an astronaut” or “I would not like to be an astronaut.” They must collect supporting evidence to back up their choice. Again using note-taking, sketching/rendering, taking pictures, etc. They will also attend the winter Sky Show in the planetarium auditorium. Upon return they will have to present their findings in written form based on their differentiated linguistic ability. The post trip production finalization will be the same as the first trip. The third trip will be scheduled for May or June after testing. This one will be to the 911 Memorial Park and to go to the top of the Observatory. The focus will be Social Studies: history & geography. Students will see the footprint of the original World Trade Center towers and see the fountains. They will see the names of those who died and be able to attach a location to something they have just heard about. They will then go to the top of the Observatory. Each student will have a map of the City of New York. They will have to locate things on the map that they see from the observatory windows and write down the names of the missing objects. They will also see and hear a brief multi-sensory production produced by the Observatory. Upon return they will have to write a review of this trip. By the end of the year they should all be able to produce a two or more paragraph written piece. The post trip production finalization will be the same as the past two trips. Due to the regulations on student teacher ratio on trips, for 45 students we will need to have 5 teacher chaperons. Each teacher will be paid for 6hours of Per Diem. All entrance fees, and transportation for the students and teachers will also be paid for. Teachers acting as chaperons who are not entitled to Title III funds, will be covered by other school funds. Student attendance upon entering the after school sessions and on all trips, will be taken at arrival to the classroom or to school prior to departing for the trip. Attendance will be kept in a TItle III Supp Grant Data Binder. Parents will be notified about the trip and asked for permission in English and their Home Language as her the HLIS surveys. Our parents speak Spanish and French and we have in-house translators available. For Arabic we will use the Translation and Interpretation Unit services. The after school program will be held on Tuesdays and Thursdays for 60mins after the school day ends based on scheduling for September 2016. These after school sessions will run from notification of grant approval till the end of the school year: June 2017. If funding from the grant is depleted, additional/special renewal school funding can be used for per-session. Currently the scheduled time is proposed to be 3:45pm till 4:45pm. During these sessions students will be able to use ENL software like www.educationcity.com, and www.rosettastone.com or other programs to improve their English skills. These software programs are independent work programs, and students can continue their work at home in the evenings and on weekends. They also produce reports on student progress. In addition, students will engage in English vocabulary building activities I.E. – sentence building blocks, flash cards, and reading NEWSFORYOU - an ESL weekly news periodical. Students will also be able to do content area homework and received assistance by the ENL certified teacher in the room. The two afternoons will be taught alternatively by the two ENL certified teachers on staff. Students attending the ENL after-school will sign in when they arrive and sign out when they leave. A maximum of 20 students will be able to participate on either day due to space and staffing restrictions. Groupings will be mixed levels based on 2016 NYSESLAT level or the NYSITEL. The content they are working on, and the number of students actually attending each session will vary. Our goal is to hold 40 sessions by the end of the school year that will end in June 2017. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 307  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Language of Instruction: The language of instruction will be in English. However, based on the fact that the majority of our ELL population speaks Spanish and French, we will use these home languages to assist the instruction when the students' frustration level hinders student progress. Our ENL Coordinator functions in both Spanish and French, and we have support staff on hand to also assist in both languages. Types of certified teachers: Currently M.S. 424 has two certified ENL Teachers and two Bilingual Education certified teachers on staff. We do not expect any staffing changes for September 2016. In addition to these four educators, we will use the Bilingual Guidance counselor for support services as needed as no additional cost to Title III funds. If additional support staff is needed, funding will come from alternative sources. Types of Materials: a) annual license for Educationcity.com software b) 15 individual licenses for Rosettastone.com software c) Achieve3000.com software – no expense to the Title III grant d) subscription for NEWSFORYOU weekly printed periodical. E) internet access to google.com using ipads and laptops in the ENL lab – no expense to the Title III grant F) trip log books G) colored pencils and sketch pads H) cameras – no expense to the Title III grant I) smartboard technology installed in the ENL Lab – no expense to the Title III grant Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Part C – Professional Development Rationale: Effective September 2016 every teacher will have to have 100 hours of PD within a five year period. The NYC DOE requires 15% of such Professional Development to be related to ENL/ELL instruction for general education teachers. In addition, 50% of all Professional Development must be in ENL/ELL for ENL/Bilingual Ed. certified teachers. 33% of our student population at M.S. 424 identify as ELLs. Professional development is built into the weekly schedule for all teachers with one day of 65 minutes - Monday, and one day of 40 mins. (7th period selection once a week). To assist teachers develop their pedagogy for ELLs, finding links in the CCLS and ELL lesson planning, and finding ways to differentiate lesson plans to provide multiple entries for ELLs, the title III Supp funds will enable us to bring in sub-contractors to facilitate professional development. Also we will be able to send teachers to the Annual UFT Middle School Conference in NYC which offers ENL/ESL specific workshops. In addition, in house professional development will be offered by the ENL Coordinator on various ENL strategies to increase understanding in the ENL classroom, at no additional cost to the grant. Topics will include but not limited to: Differentiation of lesson plans for ELLs, and Scaffolding reading & writing texts for ELLs, All training scheduled will be facilitated in conjunction and 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 308  Part C: Professional Development coordination with the school PLC. The ENL Coordinator will participate with the PLC at no cost to the Title III grant. Specific dates and topics of the trainings will be advised upon confirmation by the PLC. Each session will be a one time learning experience. The subcontracts to be used are (but not limited to): American Reading Company -100 Book Challenge: MS 424 has already purchased the 100 Book Challenge reading program. One of the pre-reading components consists of site-words, phonemic awareness, and high frequency word charts. Also sound/symbol correspondence visual clue cards. This component can be implemented into the ELL ENTERING and EMERGING level students’ lesson planning. To properly use this facet of the 100 Book Challenge, ELA and ENL teachers working with ELLs need to be trained on how it works. Two 1 hour sessions will be scheduled on a Monday or Tuesday. Educationcity.com software usage Training: This software will be purchased to be used during after-school, weekends, and at home by students. This software is an independent work program that increases English vocabulary and understanding of content area work in English, Math in Spanish, and a separate “Learn English” for new arrival ELLs. To properly use this software I.E. – understand the structure, how to manipulate the modules, how to track progress and run reports, etc, ELA, MATH and ENL teachers working with ELLs need to be trained on how it works. One 1 hour session will be scheduled on a Monday or Tuesday. Rosettastone.com software usage Training: M.S. 424 will be purchasing approximately 15 licenses for new arrivals to learn English with this software. This software is internationally acclaimed to teach a new language. It is an independent program that tracks and increases the rigor level of the modules as students’ levels increase. The software allows teachers to track progress and offer additional support in trouble spots. ENL teachers overseeing the usage of this program need to be trained on how it works. One 1 hour session will be scheduled on a Monday or Tuesday. Achieve3000.com software usage Training: M.S. 424 will be purchasing a school license to use the Achieve3000.com software. The software automatically places students at their entry level “lexial reading level” and automatically increases the rigor level as they complete reading tasks. This software has an English component, a Spanish component and a blending of both languages component. It is an excellent tool to increase reading levels of ELLs in ENL and Dual Language programs. Due to the fact MS 424 has applied for a Dual Language program for September 2016, this software will be integral. ELA and ENL Teachers need to be trained on how it works. Two 1 hour sessions will be scheduled on a Monday or a Tuesday. TEQsmart “smartboard” software and equipment Training: Each classroom at M.S. 424 is equipped with smartboard technology. The software that comes with this equipment is multi-faceted with activities to increase English language competency. There are also ENL specific manipulatives included. Both of these components can be integrated into a blended learning classroom environment. TEQsmart offers at school location training by their support staff on how to manipulate the software and use the actual equipment. Teachers need to be trained on how to use this software fully and to use the equipment better as well. Two 1 hour sessions will be scheduled on a Monday or Tuesday (or scheduling will be based on the contract provisions offered by TEQsmart). 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 309  Part C: Professional Development UFT Middle School Conference – registering for ENL workshop track For the past three years, in collaboration with the NYC DOE, the UFT has organized a city wide Middle School Conference. Each year M.S. 424 has sent teachers who work with our ELL population to the conference to attend the ENL track workshops. This conference was approved as professional development under the Title III in past years. Our teachers have returned and turn-keyed the information on a few occasions. The actual course work has been incorporated into the attending teachers’ lesson planning as well. It has been a beneficial experience and one that should be continued. The registration is $30.00 per teacher and the Per Diem (per UFT contract pay schedule) for the day is 6 hours per teacher in attendance. The 2017 conference is tentatively scheduled to take place on Saturday March 4th from 9:00am till 3:00pm. In-house ENL Training Sessions The ENL Coordinator on staff will conduct a minimum of three professional development sessions each lasting approximately 60 minutes on best practices in a classroom that has multi-level ELLs. Topics for instruction will consist of, but not limited to: a) differentiating using of anchor texts in the ELA content area b) pre-loading key vocabulary in all content area classrooms c) process charts made of visual clues d) labeling classroom equipment e) using graphic organizers for pre-reading and pre-writing f) the structure and implementation of CR-154 and how it effects all teachers. This training will be at no additional cost to the Title III grant, and will take place on Mondays from 2:45 till 3:40pm. Attendance for specific ESL P.D.s will be taken at the start of the session. Agendas will be distributed to all participants as well. These attendance sheets and agendas will be kept in the Title III ENL Supp Grant Data Binder. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Part D – Parent Engagement Activities 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 310  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Rationale: The Title III grant would minimally be used to implement Parent Engagement due to the fact that M.S. 424 is a Community school and has designated ASPIRA our Renewal School CBO to facilitate and finance many of these programs. Programs related or not related to the Title III grant, will be notated accordingly. All Parent Engagement is scheduled and coordinated in conjunction with the Parent Coordinator and the ASPIRA/CBO programmer. Due to the fact that 33% of our students are ELLs and approximately 50% of our Parents speak another language at home rather than English, ASPIRA/CBO does a great deal of ELL Parent education and assistance. Many of the programs and events are covered by ASPIRA/CBO and general Renewal School funding, and not by Title III ENL Supp Grant funding. The rationale for the mandated engagement activities is self-evident. For the two Title III ENL Supp Grant activities, we found that taking our parents out of Hunts Point, increases participation and involvement. The two conferences being sited, I.E. DOE Parent Conference, and the UFT Parent Conference, will give parents a chance to network with other parents out of Hunts Point. In addition, based on parents verbally surveyed at Parents' Association meetings, they enjoy and prefer to take "small trips" more than in house learning opportunities. Schedule, Duration, Topics, Provider, Notification: All correspondence (invitations, notices, advisement, sign-in sheets, agendas) with parents: in writing and verbally, is done in English and the Home language of choice by the Parent. We have in-house Spanish and French speakers who assist with this. For Arabic, we use the Translation and Interpretation Unit services. The Parent Coordinator also works closely with the ENL Coordinator in regard to parents of ELLs. A monthly calendar is distributed to parents showing all activities planed. In addition, we sent letters home as well use "ROBO-Call" to remind parents by leaving automatic messages on their phones. ASPIRA/CBO and the Parent Coordinator maintain sign in sheets and distribute agendas where applicable. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) n/a  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. n/a Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental. n/a 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 311 Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. n/a n/a na  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 312  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 08 School Name Hunts Point Middle School M.S. 424 Borough Bronx School Number 424 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Steeve Traversiere Coach Alberto Cruz ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Alan Reiff: ENL Coordinator Teacher/Subject Area n/A Teacher/Subject Area Wanda Cabrera/Attendance Sec. Related-Service Provider Yaser Jaber Superintendent Dr. Karen Ames Assistant Principal Michelle Suhkdeo Coach n/a School Counselor Jeanette Rivera Parent Jennifer Hernandez/P.A. Pres. Parent Coordinator Desire Vega Field Support Center Staff Member type here Other (Name and Title) Yaser Jaber: ESL Teacher C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 2 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 2 0 D. Student Demographics 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 313  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 280 Total number of ELLs 88 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 31.43% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): Spanish If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown Program TBE Lang. Spanish School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 2017-2018 K 1 2 3 4 5 0 TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 1 6 1 7 8 9 10 11 12 Tot # 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Our school uses the following assessment tools to assess the early literacy skills of our ELLs: NYSITEL results, Spanish LAB results when applicable, American Reading Company's IRLA in English and ENIL in Spanish, Teacher's College Running Records, and the LENS to evaluate if a student is a SIFE when applicable. Informally we use oral interviews, content/classroom teacher observations/collected date , first making period results (first 6 weeks), outcome of classroom and homework assignments, and service provider input where applicable. By using the data, in conjunction with data from other assessments such as the state ELA, math and science exams, MOSL exams and class grades, teachers can create an appropriate individualized action plan for future instruction of the student The insights from the data these tools provide help to group by language level for scheduling. Also it provides data to know 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 314  how many new incoming students might be SIFE as well as which students may have literacy in another language other than English. The Spanish LAB assesses the level of Spanish proficiency at entry as well. We utilize these results to plan our AIS/Small group, general ed. and enrichment programming of our ELL population. Data from our beginning/mid and end of year periodic assessment is also utilized to inform instruction and movement. Former ENL students will also continue to receive support from the ESL teacher. The individual needs of former ENL students will be assessed through cluster meetings involving the core content teachers and the ENL provider. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? The ENL coordinator meets with each incoming student and family to begin to assess the language needs of the student. Classroom teachers are trained in how to administer assessments. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? Teachers College on demand writing tasks will be used for baseline and endline assessments, as well as the ELL Periodic Assessment, iReady diagnostic assessments, and teacher created unit baselines and endlines. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Once the data is gathered, the ENL teachers and Peer Collaborative Teachers will analyze the data to determine what interventions need to take place. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] N/A 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Historically, the data shows that the majority of our newly arrived students are pre-literate and/or SIFE in their first language, based on the NYSITELL. The NYC ELL Periodic Assessment is also a tool to show trends, as well as the NYSELAT. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Structures in place include shared common planning periods, weekly extended cabinet meetings, and the placement of the data on a central file in google drive. This allows for teachers to analyze data and plan/make adjustments to curricula and programs. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. ENTERING and EMERGING level ELLs will receive their ENL stand-alone instruction in the ENL Language Lab. in a mixed proficiency level setting. It will be a homogeneous grouping of these two levels that will be ungraded and solely based on language level. The pull-out schedule will not take place during ELA or MATH time. They will receive their ENL integrated instruction by one of the two ENL certified teachers pushing-in during content area teaching. The ELLs will be grouped together in the general education setting and receive direct assistance to in the Gen. Ed environment 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 315  (360 minutes per week). The push-in structure will be homogeneous by grade and levels will be mixed. TRANSITIONING and EXPANDING level ELLs will receive their ENL integrated instruction in a push-in setting during content area teaching. ELLs at these two levels depending on individual motivation and ability, may or may not be grouped together in the Gen. Ed. content area environment. The push-in structure will be by grade and the levels will be mixed (180 minutes per week). COMMANDING level ELLs will receive their ENL integrated instruction in ENL in a push-in setting in one of their content area classes: preference being E.L.A. At the COMMANDING level ELLs are highly functional in the Gen. Ed. environment and only need reassurance and occasional clarification with class work. b. TBE program. If applicable. The Transitional Bilingual Program at The Hunts Point Middle School will be pending enrollment numbers in grade 6. c. DL program. If applicable. n/a 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? All push-in and pull-out services are administered by the two ENL teachers. The ENL teachers are also responsible for scheduling ESL classes so that all ELL students receive the mandated instructional minutes. The students are pulled out during their non-core periods so that ESL does not encroach on the core content areas. The ENL teacher works very closely with the ELA teacher so that instruction parallels the ELA curriculum. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Content area instruction is delivered in English by general education staff in forty-five minute periods (90 minutes for Literacy and Math), with support from the ENL teachers. Additionally, the ENL teachers instruct students using lower-level text on content area subjects as a means of support. During pull-out sessions, the ENL teacher teaches a "bootcamp" for language acquisition. Other supports provided are the use of English and Native Language dictionaries and books, audio books, and Native Language speakers for instruction. All materials used in core content classes will be translated into the student's home language. All texts used in the student's native language will be in alignment with the CCLS. All ELL's have access to iPads or laptops and regularly use educational programs and translation apps. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? The ELL teacher makes sure that each core content teacher is equipped with the necessary assessments in every ELL’s native language. These assessments are a combination of teacher made tests and past state exams. This allows those students who intend to take their state assessment in their native language to have the opportunity to practice dealing with both the format and content of the test. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a) SIFE students are evaluated in their native language to assess deficiencies in reading, writing, listening and speaking to better determine areas in need of greater support. Once the ENL teachers have assessed areas of weakness they will then work closely with the student's content teachers to create strategies that specifically address help the student in the identified areas. Once an action plan has been created it will be implemented by the student's cluster teachers as well as the ENL teacher with regular reviewing occurring during ongoing enquiry meetings. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 316  b) Newcomers are provided with a risk free, welcoming environment to meet their transitional needs. These students are encouraged to become involved in learning their new language through role plays, simulations, projects, field trips and scaffolded lessons in the "bootcamp". It is important to provide informal assessments in order to know students' prior knowledge and build on the skills they already have in order for them to acquire new skills. Native language support may be provided, through home language print, technologies, translations in the native language and encouraging "buddy systems" of students who speak a same home language. When a new student is registered in our school, it is crucial to find out if they are literate in their native language in order to provide materials that will support them academically (i.e., books, glossaries, dictionaries). Students and teachers work together improving listening, speaking, reading and writing skills. Focus is given to phonemic awareness, phonics, fluency, vocabulary, decoding, encoding, as well as reading comprehension. Students who have to take state exams (i.e., ELA, Math, etc.) are taught explicit test taking skills and are encouraged to enroll in the school’s After School Program for further support. In order to provide ELLs native language support, state exams maybe administered in the student’s native language or when unavailable, translators are hired to support students. Newcomers receive explicit instruction that addresses their transitional needs and academic needs, as well as language development strategies. Listening comprehension is mainly targeted with newcomers, through the use of software and web based programs. Teachers work with newcomers in a rigorous language development program in order to prepare them to take the required ELA test after one year. c) & d) For ELLs receiving services 4 - 6 years and for long-term ELLs, assessment data is carefully analyzed to determine areas ofweakness and instruction is planned to address those weaknesses within the classroom. Teachers regularly read assessment data to monitor the student’s progress in all content areas and better differentiate instruction for specific academic needs. The skills that prove to be more difficult are targeted in small group settings. e) Former ELLs will be given assistance on an individualized basis. The ENL teachers will work closely with the content teachers to create an action plan that will help address any areas where the former ELL might still need assistance. Also all teachers are to be made aware of the testing accommodations to which former ELLs are still entitled. Former ELLs will also be encouraged to sign up for all extracurricular programs open to ELLs.. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? ELL-SWDs must have equal access to high-quality instruction designed to help them meet high expectations as well as follow all modifications of their I.E.P.s. Teachers should employ strategies known to be effective with ELLs, such as drawing on their prior knowledge; providing opportunities to review previously learned concepts and teaching them to employ those concepts; organizing themes or strands that connect the curriculum across subject areas; and providing individual guidance, assistance, and support to fill gaps in background knowledge. Early intervention strategies must be implemented as soon as learning problems/delays are observed. Examples of early intervention include clinical teaching, peer and expert consultation, teacher assistance teams, and alternative programs such as those that offer tutorial or remedial instruction in the context of general education. Teachers conduct curriculum-based assessment to monitor student progress and use the data from these assessments to plan and modify instruction in Clinical teaching. Peers or experts work collaboratively with Gen. Ed. teachers to address students' learning problems/delays and to implement recommendations for interventions. Teachers can share instructional resources, observe each other's classrooms, and offer suggestions for improving instruction or managing behavior. ENL teachers can help general education teachers by demonstrating strategies to integrate ELLs into the mainstream classrooms. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? The ELL-SWDs receive their ENL instruction either as push-in or pull-out. We strive to maintain the least disruptive environment for our ELL-SWDs to learn in. The least amount of pull-out is the optimum situation wherever possible. The I.E.P.s of each ELL is reviewed and the stipulations, and modifications are taken into consideration at all times. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 317  8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Counseling is offered in English and in Spanish. AIS Math is also provided in Spanish as well. The "bootcamp" program is also an intervention implemented for content area classes and acclimation to English. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? In the coming school year, we intend to make the following improvements to our programming: 1- Hiring of a dual license teacher Special Education/Bilingual Education 2- More Professional Development with a focus of ENL strategies for staff will be scheduled. 3- Parent ENL classes will be scheduled for two afternoons weekly. 4- Our T.B.E. Bridge class will be receiving Technology classes in English. 5- Our T.B.E. Bridge class will be traveling to other classrooms to receive content area instruction in English with push-in ENL assistance. 6- The DOE Translation and Interpretation unit will be utilized more to reach more parents in their HL. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? n/a 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. Our ELL population is included in all school programs including after school and supplemental services. When notices are posted or distributed for students to select what they would like to participate in, the notices are in English and Spanish. For students whose HL is French we have three French staff members who can translate it for them. For students whose HL is Arabic or Fulani, we have been able to have other students translate and utilize the NYC DOE translation department. We also offer a Saturday Academy for all of our students where a self-contained ENL class/group is held. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. The following instructional materials are used but are not limited to, to support the ELLs in our school. 1- ipad translation apps 2- Entering Level ELLs = starfall.com and educationcity.com software. 3- Emerging and up ELL levels = educationcity.com and achieve3000.com software 4- ATTANASIO & ATTANASIO testing expertise materials (all levels) 5- NEWSFORYOU ESL weekly newspaper reader (Emerging level and up) 6- American Reading Company's IRLA independent reading program (all levels) 7- Rosetta Stone software in English for our TBE program students. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Home language support is offered through the provision of bilingual dictionaries, glossaries, translation technology (IPads and laptops),, teacher support and authentic materials in the home language. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Before the start of the school year the administration sits down and ensures that all services and resources and services correspond to the ELL population's ages and grade levels. These meetings occur frequently throughout the year. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? We have shared space; we share the library. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 318  16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). There is a 6 th grade orientation prior to the start of the school year. Parents of ELLs, as well as ELLs, were welcomed and received a separate opportunity to hear about our ENL programs and ask questions. Throughout the school year as new arrivals and transfer-ins are enrolled, our ENL Coordinator and our Bilingual Social Worker have an open door policy to help students adjust as well as have a safe space to come to. The Parent Coordinator also conducts walk through's with new students when they enroll, so they are familiar with the school. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Spanish is offered as a language elective. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? n/a Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? All teachers at our school come in contact with ELLs. Therefore Professional Development for ELL personnel will include all staff. Our plan is to : 1- ENL strategies to use in the classroom 2- Fishbowl modeling of strategies/techniques and discussion afterwards 3- Outside ENL facilitators 4- ENL on line video instruction 5- Best practice Co-teaching strategies 6- Differentiating content area instruction for ELLs We also have outside providers come and deliver ELL PD's, such as District and Borough ELL representatives. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. The ENL teachers create and present workshops that keep the staff abreast of the latest ESL best practices. The times are calculated by the administrators in the building. Records of the workshops are kept in the PD binder in the main office. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 319  Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Every academic year the school organizes individual one on one meetings for the parents of ELLs. During these meetings the ENL teachers will discuss the details of the school's ENL program, the individual language progress of the ELL and the language development needs in the content areas. If the parents need an interpreter then one will be provided either through teachers in the building or through NYC DOE resources. We will continue to utilize the Parent Engagement time on Tuesday afternoons to schedule meetings and/or make phone calls to parents. We will continue to schedule meetings and/or phone calls during Professional Prep periods and after school, as well as evening hour phone calls home to parents who are unavailable due to work schedules during business hours. By the end of April all parents of ELLs will have had the opportunity for this one on one discussion. In addition, we will hold our Parents' of ELLs night within the first 6 weeks of school. At this gathering we re-show the mandated Parent Choice video (in the HL of the specific parent sub-grouping), we go over first observations and answer any questions the parent/guardian has. Due to the fact the majority of our Parents' HL is Spanish we use in-house staff for translation/interpretation. For the parents whose HL is French, we also have in-house staff for translation/interpretation. The parents who have Fulani as their HL, are usually fluent in French as well, and they bring other family members to assist in translation. Should we find ourselves with other language groups not covered in-house, we will fully utilize the DOE's T & I services department. All teachers use the existing procedure of maintain a log of meetings with parents in SKEDULA, as well as maintaining a parent sign in sheet for meetings. This sheet is created using EXCEL an shows 1- Parent name 2 - student name 3 - date seen 4 - topics discussed 5- signature. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. One of the specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs at our school is our after school adult ESL program. We used part of our Title III Supp Grant money to hold classes for the Parents of ELLs to learn ENL. They not only learn ENL but they are exposed to different ways that they can interact with their children that promote learning. ASPIRA, our community partner, will also offer Adult ENL classes that will mirror our structure. We conduct monthly Parent Association meetings. These meetings are held in English and Spanish with all documents and discussions held in both languages. For parents whose HL is not English or Spanish, our goal is to use the DOE Translation and Interpretation unit's services as well as our in-house translators based on the based on the school staff language survey. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. In addition to the regular school day curriculum, our school offers many after school programs. Each of these program facilitators are aware of the high number of ELLs in our school. They take this into account and make sure that each student no matter what their language level, home language, or linguistic ability, have equal access. Saturday Academy - a class just for ELLs to improve their English skills in all content areas is held. Graham Wyndham Group - organizes an after school program and includes bilingual facilitators to make sure the ELL population can participate fully. In addition to the above, we offer the following enrichment opportunities. To participate in any of these listed, students must come to a full hour of tutoring before any enrichment program. This tutoring includes ENL. All ELLs are encouraged to participate in these activities to improve their interpersonal relationship skills as well as their ENL skills. Also, due to the fact that our school is a Renewal/Community School, we have partnered with ASPIRA. We look forward to programming from ASPIRA that will offer assistance to lower level ELLs as well as enrichment to the higher level ELLs in our school. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 320  2018-19 RSCEP-PF 321 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Steeve Traversiere, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 322  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: The Hunts Point MS School DBN: 08X424 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Steeve Traversiere Title Principal Michelle Sukhedeo Assistant Principal Desire Vega Parent Coordinator Alan Reiff/ENL Coordinator ENL/Bilingual Teacher Jennifer Hernandez/P.A. Parent Willie Alexander/SETSS Teacher/Subject Area Yaser Jaber/ENL Teacher Teacher/Subject Area Alberto Cruz n/a Coach Coach Jeanette Rivera School Counselor Dr. Karen Ames n/a Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Wanda Cabrera Other Pupil Att. Secty. Kamilah Baker Other I.E.P. Coordinator n/a Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 9/15/17 9/15/17 9/15/17 9/15/17 9/15/17 9/15/17 9/15/17 9/15/17 9/15/17 9/15/17 9/15/17 9/15/17 9/15/15 9/15/15 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 323  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 08X424 School Name: Hunts Point Middle School Superintendent: Dr. Karen Ames The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. At first meeting (walk-in) or upon registration, all parents are greeted in the main office by our bilingual staff. This is the first opportunity to assess the home language of the parent. The next steps are when the parent/guardian completes the HLIS and designates their language preference for all school communication, and when the parent/guardian completes the Student Emergency Blue Contact card and makes their designates there as well. This information populates the "RHLA" report in ATS. The RHLA report can be used to follow-up and and reinforce parent language choice throughout the year for new registrants' parents, as well as for returning students' parents. In addition, our Parent Coordinator maintains constant communication with our parents and ensures at monthly meetings, and via phone calls, that parent language preferences are maintained and upheld. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 324  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Language The parent preferred languages for both written and oral communication at the Hunts Point Middle School are Arabic, English, French, Spanish, Fulani, Mandinkg, and Twi. 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Subsequently Subsequently Our practice is to always produce all communication to parents I.E. - Calendars, Newsletters, meeting announcements, Program changes, etc. in both English and Spanish. For Arabic and French we either use Google Translate or send out the documents to the T & I Unit. However, many of our written correspondence is not produced with enough lead time to send to the T & I Unit. Subsequently items would come back "after the fact of importance." We strive to utilize the T & I Unit as much as we can. We find that involving family members or family 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 325 Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents.  friends to help translate and interpret works best for our needs. Our parent population appears to be very satisfied with our line of communication to date. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? It is difficult to predict most of the informal interactions with parents. However, for Parent-teacher conferences and meet the staff night, we have staff on hand who are bilingual in English, Spanish and French to assist. Our 4 Arabic speaking families come with language assistance, as well as the Fulani, Mandinga and Twi speakers. The Fulani, Mandinga, and Twi speaking families are also able to communicate in French: we have in house speakers of French as well. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any: 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 326   Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) The T & I Unit welcome posters, Parents' Bill of Rights, and Parents Guide to Language Access are posted in the required places in our school. They are highly prominent and visable. The Language ID Guide and is posted at the Security Desk and in the Main Office as well. Our Parent Coordinator is aware of the T & I Unit and the protocols for Parent Language Choice and Access. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? The Parent Coordinator and the Language Access Coordinator distribute a parent survey at the beginning of the school year and in January to ensure parents feel their home language request for oral and written communication is satisfactory. In addition, whenever a parent comes into the office or has a meeting they are asked if they understand English and/or if they need home language assistance at that time. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 327 
