2018-19 RENEWAL SCHOOL COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (RSCEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 10X440 School Name: DEWITT CLINTON HIGH SCHOOL Principal: PIERRE ORBE 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 1  Renewal School Comprehensive Educational Plan (RSCEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: Executive Summary and Organizing Principles Section 3: Community Engagement Team and School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 4: Renewal School Narrative Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) Section 7: Community School Description Section 8: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 9: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 10: Title I Program Information Section 11: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 2  Section 1: School Information Page School Information DeWitt Clinton High School 10X440 321000011440 9, 10, 11, 12, and SE 100 West Mosholu Parkway South 718-543-2326 School Number (DBN): 718-548-0036 School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Phone Number: Pierre Orbe Fax: Email Address: porbe@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Community School CBO: Principal: Community School Director: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): Good Shepherd Services Pierre Orbe Erin Salazar Rafael Erazo Elizabeth Wong-Manning Steven Deep Elizabeth Wong-Manning LiasiaTurner Princess Danso District Information Geographical District: 10 Superintendent’s Office Address: Carron Staple Superintendent: 1 Fordham Plaza, Bronx, New York, 10458 cstaple@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-741-8534 Phone Number: 718-741-7098 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 3  Bronx FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Nancy Saffer Executive Director: 1230 Zerega Avenue, Bronx, New York, 10462 NSaffer@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-828-7776 Phone Number: 718-828-3113 Fax: 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 4  Section 2: Executive Summary and Organizing Principles The Objective The intent of this Renewal School Comprehensive Educational Plan (RSCEP) is to continue to frame a three-year process for each Renewal school and design a comprehensive plan that outlines a strategic path to a paradigm shift in each school at every level. The motivation driving this work is our commitment to providing every child with a school that meets their academic and social-emotional needs. Closely accompanying this imperative is our belief that every school can be renewed and foster a community based culture of learning. The job of the district is to use our position to provide the systemic vision, strategies, and resources to facilitate school renewal through a collaborative effort including all stakeholders. The core values held as essential for the success of the School Renewal Program:  A “learning stance” must be held by all community members (district leaders, school leaders, school staff, community-based partners, students and families). The work should be approached with humility and integrity. We must all be willing learners.  A “theory of action” must guide the work to ensure clarity and coherence.  Authentic teams that collaborate in the spirit of trust, within and across the various levels of the school community, are prerequisites for successful school renewal  Schools will be places of robust engagement, anchored in positive youth development, ensuring that the school environment is welcoming and empowering for students, families and community members.  Strong professional development/learning is a fundamental part of our work.  The school renewal implementation must be simultaneously dynamic and responsive as well as sustained over the three year period of renewal. The organizing Theory of Action that guides the School Renewal Program strategy: By using the Six Elements of the Framework for Great schools as our improvement structure, we seek to align instructional coaching and leadership development with structural supports in order to build staff capacity. Using schools instructional foci, school leaders and staff will implement changes in curriculum, instruction, school culture and structures so that there are sustainable improvements in student outcomes and school culture. The arc of the School Renewal Program strategy: In order to attain high levels of achievement for all students in Renewal schools we must build capacity to increase student achievement through the adoption of new attitudes and behaviors, research based strategies that improve teacher practice, coupled with the use of clear data driven supports for building students’ skills in the content areas and increasing student engagement. We are particularly prioritizing reading and writing across the curricula. The use of student learning data will drive instruction through strong teacher teams; onsite, job embedded professional learning and problem solving, and accountability at all levels of the system: central, district and school - for results. Renewal schools are provided with intensive training, leadership and pedagogical coaching, and structural supports, monitoring of implementation and ongoing feedback and revisions as needed. Further, each Renewal school will become a Community School and strategically partner with community based organizations (CBO) to integrate social services and expanded learning time into the fabric of the school to help them better serve the needs of students. These schools will stand as centers of opportunities where families can get the supports they need to make sure students come to school ready and able to learn. School Receivership In April 2015, state lawmakers and Governor Andrew Cuomo created section 211-f of the State Education Law, which established the School Receivership program as a new intervention strategy to turn around struggling schools. This new law, and Commissioner’s regulation 100.19, requires that “Persistently Struggling Schools,” defined as Priority Schools that have been in the most severe accountability status since the 2006-07 school year, be given an initial one or two-year period under a “Superintendent Receiver”. These schools were placed in receivership under the New York City Schools Chancellor. Each school must make demonstrable improvement on specific benchmarks or it will be placed under an independent receiver. Under the Chancellor’s Receivership Plan, the School Renewal Program is NYCDOE’s 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 5  core strategy for turning around struggling schools. Renewal Schools have already begun implementing significant interventions and are receiving additional resources and support to accelerate student performance and help close achievement gaps reflected in this RSCEP. Structure of the Renewal School Comprehensive Educational Plan (RSCEP) The Renewal School Comprehensive Educational Plan (RSCEP) will serve as the organizing and overarching document for each Renewal school and will be directly aligned and developed around the elements of the Framework for Great Schools, New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, and Strong Schools, Strong Communities, including the following:  Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks: Demonstrable improvement benchmarks located in the 2018-19 RSCEP, in the Data and Accountability Snapshot page. Receivership benchmarks have been closely aligned with the Renewal benchmarks so that schools will have one coherent set of improvement benchmarks to meet. All Receivership Benchmarks are a subset of Renewal Benchmarks. While the targets for these overlapping benchmarks are not always identical, the Receivership Benchmark targets are always equal to or lower that the Renewal Benchmarks targets. That means that any school that meets its Renewal Benchmarks targets have by definition also met its Receivership Benchmarks targets. For additional information on Receivership demonstrable improvement benchmarks go here.  Establishing an overarching summative vision aligned with elements of the Framework for Great Schools and documenting key areas of celebration and renewal through analysis of assessments and by envisioning what the desired outcome for each school will be at the end of the School Renewal process.  Setting interim assessment benchmarks that create the path for improvement by focusing on desired outcomes and goals. In this way, the plan will be mapped to the overarching summative vision. In addition to the five discrete goals formed around the elements of the Framework for Great Schools, each school will create an action plan.  Transformation into a community school in order to increase student and family access to physical and mental health services and other social-emotional supports made available in or near the school.  Expanded learning opportunities for all students, including additional instruction provided during afterschool  and/or summer programming provided in collaboration with community partners. Intensive professional development for all staff to ensure effective implementation of curriculum and instruction aligned to the Common Core State Standards (CCSS) and to support staff in effectively responding to the differentiated academic and social-emotional needs of all students.  Additional, focused strategies to increase parent and family engagement. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Information on the Framework for Great Schools and the DTSDE Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 6  The Department has established programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students supports to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and RSCEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint for continuous improvement that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to increase student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five (5) goals and action plans that align with the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. Accountability Tools and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is informed by the New York State Education Department’s (NYSED) Diagnostic Tool for 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 7  School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) Tenets, the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Rubric, School Quality Guide and other quantitative and qualitative data tools. NYSED’s Six DTSDE Tenets To strengthen the existing system, the NYSED has developed a tool that captures the best practices from each of the current tools called the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness. This new tool encompasses multiple instruments such as interviews, classroom observations and surveys. The protocol will begin with a clear and cogent statement of the optimal conditions of an effective school and the instruments comprising the protocol will measure how close or far away a particular school is to the optimal conditions identified. Once reviewed, the school and district will create a strategic plan to address the areas in need of improvement. All current Priority and Focus Schools and Focus Districts must use the tool; districts that are required to submit District Comprehensive Improvement Plans and Comprehensive Educational Plans also will use the tool. The DTSDE protocol includes a rubric, which identifies clear and coherent expectations of the optimal conditions of an effective school and school district across the following six tenets: 1. Tenet 1: District Leadership and Capacity 2. Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions 3. Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support 4. Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions 5. Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health, and 6. Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 2017-18 Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Structures for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the RSCEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the RSCEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 8  Next Steps for RSCEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists in every Renewal school and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the American Institute of Research (AIR) needs assessment, the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: In Part 1A of the Section 5: Needs Assessment indicate the Statement of Practice (SOP) from the DTSDE Tenets that will be addressed in the action plan. Schools that received an Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) School Review should use the recommendations from the review to select their SOPs. Schools that did not undergo an IIT review should select SOPs informed by the major findings/recommendations from your most recent Quality Review (QR) or Central-led Review (CLR), and other qualitative and quantitative data.  Step 4: Create a summative vision for the elements of the Framework for Great Schools.  Step 5: Revisit your school’s current goals, and strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you have identified, and will let your school community know when you have reached your goal.  Step 6: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 7: Update your school’s AIS section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 8: Complete the Expanded Learning Time (ELT) and the Community School sections.  Step 9: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether strategies and activities outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust practices along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 9  Section 3: Community Engagement Team and School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Directions: All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Renewal School Comprehensive Educational Plan (RSCEP). SLT members’ signatures indicates that they have been consulted with and given the opportunity to provide feedback on the plan and the plan’s alignment with the school-based budget to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Expanded Learning Time, Community School initiative, Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. On the chart below: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the second column. 2. 3. In the first column, indicate using an “X” if the person is an SLT member. In the third column, record the position and constituent group represented such as staff, parent, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), or other contributor. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 4. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the RSCEP, not approval. 5. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Signature (Blue Ink) Check if SLT X X X X X X X Name Position and Constituent Group Pierre Orbe Rafael Erazo Elizabeth Wong-Manning InesCarino Erin Salazar Liasia Turner Alex Vega Represented *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Community School Director (staff) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 10  Check if SLT Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Steven Deep Yolanda Adkins KhadijaKoyla Edward Fernandez ThaoH Le-Dang ShaneekaCenter Richard Puentes x X X X X X X Staff Parent Parent Parent Parent Staff Staff Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Community Engagement Team (CET) Signature Page Directions: Please fill out this form and indicate members of your Community Engagement Team. On the chart below: 1. List the names of each Community Engagement Team member in the first column. 2. Record the position and constituent group represented in the second column. 3. Community Engagement Team members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If a Community Engagement Team member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original signature page. Name Position and Constituent Group Pierre Orbe Erin Salazar Rafael Erazo Felicia Bray Steven Deep 2018-19 RSCEP-PF Represented Principal CBOGood Shepherds Director UFTChapter Chair Staff-AP Staff-AP Signature (Blue Ink) 11  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) LiasiaTurner Elizabeth Wong-Manning JayleneLorenzana Student PA President Good Shepherd Social Worker Alex Vega Yolanda Atkins KhadijaKoyla InesCarino PreyaSingh JenLovejoy CoreyBeder Student Parent Parent DC 37 Rep Staff- AP Staff- AP StaffAP 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 12  Section 4: Renewal School Narrative In a brief narrative, describe the current state of the Renewal school addressing the following: 1. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including your school’s mission statement and a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. 2. What are the school’s beliefs about student learning? 3. 4. Describe your school’s approach to family engagement and progress made with establishing families as Identify any special student populations that the school has and what their specific needs are. partners in furthering student achievement 5. Describe how your school is leveraging community school partnerships to support progress in elements of the Framework for Great Schools and indicate where this has been a challenge. 6. Summarize the Expanded Learning Time (ELT) opportunities that have been offered to your students this year. DeWitt Clinton High School has a rich tradition of producing notable alumni that impact all career fields. As documented in the book, “Castle on the Parkway: The Story of New York City’s DeWitt Clinton High School and It’s Extraordinary Influence on American Life,” graduates have paved the way in all imaginable careers, including, but not limited to, business, finance, law, government, journalism, education, religion, STEM, military, and sports. These alumni serve as a vital resource to the community, yearning to give back to DeWitt Clinton because they strongly value the roots that were forged here so long ago. Even recent graduates, like those from the class of 2000, are leading the way in our society, including Assemblyman for District 79, Michael Blake, whose work helped President Barack Obama get elected and re-elected to office. DeWitt Clinton High School’s Alumni Association looks to support students in realizing their career goals, offering opportunities for guest speakers, providing workplace visits and internships, and offering scholarships for college. DeWitt Clinton High School's Mission: DeWitt Clinton High School challenges our students to develop compassion and college/career readiness through continual reflection, research-based mindset work, goal-setting, and progress monitoring, but above all, we offer our students choice. By allowing students to engage in selecting their academic pathway, we support both their individual learning needs and their burgeoning autonomy. Upon graduating, students join our prestigious alumni association, continuing our storied legacy of social change. DeWitt Clinton graduates are expected to go into the world as humanitarians who recognize and respect the diversity of others and who will support those in need. In recent years, the school has struggled to meet student outcomes, as reflected by English Language Arts and Mathematics Regents scores, graduation rate, and college readiness indexes. There was a lack of coherence when it came to believing all students had the potential to succeed, lesson planning expectations, curricula across the same department, student record keeping and feedback, and teachers’ positions in relation to supporting chancellor’s regulations, including, but not limited to, providing students with opportunities to make up work. Actions taken to improve these areas included:  Administrators norming around Danielson Framework for classroom observations to ensure there was a common expectation for classroom instruction. Supports for teachers around grading policy and grade book record keeping.   Weekly PD to support using discussion protocols (Spring 2017) to make student thinking visible & stations learning (2017-18) to support create opportunities for differentiated instruction.  Common planning period 4 (Math & Science) and period 7 (History & ELA) to support exam design, unit planning, and lesson supports. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 13  The results from this included:  77% of teachers say that they design instructional programs (for example, lessons and units) together.  79% of students say that it's clear what they need to do to get a good grade.  77% of students say that they work in small groups.    College Readiness Index increased to 41.9%  College Preparatory Courses completion to 54.6%  Increase in ELA Regents ( 46.37% in June 2017 to 56% by August 2018 ) Increase in Math regents (53.18% in June 2017 to 65% by August 2018) Increase in Graduation Rate from 50% to 68.5% Despite these improvements, the school’s culture suffered, as many staff members often displayed implicit and explicit bias regarding student expectations, stating what students were unable to do, rather than focusing on what needed to be done to support the student learning. Expectations for students were very low, as reflected in the instructional expectations observed both by observation cycles (confirmed in advance for components 2a (2.64 out of 4) 1e (2.21 out of 4), 3b (1.94 out of 4), 3c (2.17 out of 4) 3d (2.04 out of 4) and in quality reviews indicators 1.1, 1.2, and 2.2 (which were rated developing). As a result of the PD cycle, many teachers utilized stations learning, but each station reflected level 1 and 2 DOK tasks, resulting in lower levels of active participation. The results of this impact on school culture can be observed in the DOE’s survey results:  With respect to supports and expectations:  41% of students say that teachers support them when they are upset (City: 49%)  65% of students say that teachers want students to become better thinkers, not just memorize things. (Q5e)  With respect to rigor/ challenging coursework:  44% of students say that they are challenged in their classes.  59% of students say that teachers ask difficult questions on tests.  57% of teachers say that students respond to challenging test questions.  49% of teachers say that students respond to challenging questions in class.  77% of teachers say that students feel challenged. The survey data shows that majority of teachers do not believe that students respond to challenging questions. There appears to be a disconnect between what students and what teachers believe is challenging. In addition, this says something strongly about teacher beliefs in what students can do.  With respect to being successful in the classroom:  52% of students say that they learn a lot from feedback on their work. (Q2a)  79% of students say that it's clear what they need to do to get a good grade. (Q2b)  67% of teachers say that students have to work hard to do well. (Q20c) 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 14  69% of students responded that the work they do is good preparation for their class tests. (Q2c)  61% of students say that the homework assignments help them learn the course material. (Q2d)  69% of students know what their teacher wants them to learn in class. (Q2e)  68% of students say that their teachers make the lessons relevant to their everyday life experiences. (Q1j) As DeWitt Clinton High School opens the 2018-19 school year with a new staff, we must consider the needs that our students are sharing in this survey. These results tell us that we need to design instruction that is relevant to everyday life, provide challenging tasks that ensure career and college readiness, ensure transparency about what they are learning and why, build deeper relationships with students, and give feedback that allows growth. DeWitt Clinton’s student population is very diverse (Asian:9%; Black:32%; Hispanic:53%; White:4%), consisting of 78% of students below the poverty line. Despite the biases imposed on them, 85% of students who graduated attended a 4 year university; % attended a 2 year university; % As a metric for improving the school culture, our goal remains to improve what students say in the DOE’s school surveys. We will provide surveys to students, parents, and teachers around the areas of growth indicated above. Some of the results display the progress we have made in the classroom, such as:  77% of students say that they work in small groups. (Q5d)  79% of students say that it's clear what they need to do to get a good grade. (Q2b) For SY 2018- 19, in order to ensure we ...  make our lesson relevant to everyday life,  provide challenging tasks that ensure career and college readiness,  ensure transparency about how to what they are learning and why,  build deeper relationships with students,  and give feedback that allows growth, we must engage our teachers, students, and parents around the school mission and how it will be supported on a daily basis. On July 27, the school organized a group of 10 teacher leaders who represented the core subjects (English, History, Math, Science) and support services we provide (ISS, ENL). In addition, 4 student government members and 10 youth leaders also participated in this process. This process will be replicated during the week of August 27 by these participants with the entire staff, new and returning. The process involved the following: 1. Review Agenda and Focus to Examine the Mission of DeWitt Clinton and propose ways we can support this on a regular basis 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 15  2. Review previous teacher practices that negatively impacted DeWitt Clinton. Read excerpts from Jon Sappier’s High Expectations regarding the history on eugenics and Christine Rubie Davis’ Becoming a High Expectations Teacher around the bell curve. 3. How does this make you feel... poll activity... 4. Share the quote from Einstein about school failed me... 5. Activity: Map out what will happen if:    if they don’t graduate... if they graduate but barely or it doesn’t mean what the paper (standards imply) ... if they graduate and meet the mission... 1. Read Literacy to Prison Pipeline ... use protocol to share out. 2. Review research based article to support motivation of all students... use protocol to share out. 3. Frame that our focus will be to consistently provide 3 need supports:  Autonomy (in transparent grading policy and desire to see students achieve high expectations of 80 or better.)  Competence (via differentiation practices in lessons (choice of content, process, products).)  Relatedness (observed in relationship with students, relevant performance tasks, use of career lens in lessons plans.) The results of this engagement with the Teacher and Student Leadership Team revealed the importance of our daily routines reflecting supports by creating relatedness, autonomy, and competence for students through real life career focused performance tasks that guide instruction, getting to know student interest in college and beyond, and providing students with increased opportunities for choice in lessons (differentiation). Some of the ways that we will support building relationships with our students will be to begin the school year in all classrooms with restorative circles that allow us to get to know our students and establish how we want to engage them around discipline and building rapport. In addition, we will build a profile of who our students are, simultaneously helping them know more about who we are in the process. It’s vital that our students know who our teachers are and the challenges they have faced in order to become the professionals they are today. This builds trust among students and teachers, opening the door for respect to be given and received. Some examples of these activities include:     Students receive a list of things about the teacher, then ask students to circle what you have in common Students and Teachers engage in activity called: “Don’t judge a book by its cover” where they write something others would not know about them if they simply looked at them. Students and Teachers write your biographical narrative about a challenge they have overcome or still hope to overcome Students and Teachers select a line from a poem that relate to who you are The Guidance Team, which consists of DWC Guidance Counselors/Social Workers and Good Shepherd Social Workers met over the summer to develop a coherent way to engage students in building their student profile. The school always had significant counseling outlets for students, but not a clear methodology for eliciting information 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 16  about who a student is and what supports they need. Students were mainly identified as a result of an incident (attendance, behavioral, or academic), which then resulted in an intervention plan. The Guidance Team came together to develop: Ice Breakers to support getting to know students   Questions to elicit student profile around home life, academic glows and grows, mindset, motivation, and  goal orientation Select research based literature they would utilize to engage students based on the area of support identified from questions asked  A Method for engaging students in self- reflection around their mindset, motivation, and goal orientation In addition to these initiatives grounded in the desire to build a deeper understanding about who our students are and what they need, teachers came in for training in departments on the following dates: Teacher Summer Planning Science Planning: August 6 - August 10  ELA Planning: July 30 - August 3 & August 6 - August 10   Math Planning: August 6 - August 10  History Planning: July 9 & 10 Mandatory PD Week  Day 1- Monday August 27 - All Day How we support Mission and Building Routines for Need Supports (morning); Developing Days 1-3 to Build Relationship with our students  Day 2- Tuesday August 28- Ramapo for Children "Establishing a Climate for Learning" (morning); Executive Functions (Elevate Education) (Afternoon)  Day 3- Wednesday August 29- Performance Tasks & Writing Across the Curricula (ELA Rubric Norming and TIED Paragraph structures)  Day 4- Thursday August 30 - Talk Aloud of Planning a Performance Task/ Unit/ and Lessons that show Relevance…  Day 5- Friday August 31- Growth Mindset & Routines for Creating High Expectations in classrooms (morning); Unit/ Lesson Planning → Share Outs  Day 6- Tuesday Sept. 4- Share Fair of Best Practices School Begins- Wednesday Sept. 5- Friday Sept. 7 In past year students were met with by guidance to determine their pathway courses (Health, Engineering, Arts). Despite this, the school year still had 3-4 weeks of program changes that impacted instruction for marking period 1. This summer, 2018, guidance and Good Shepherd engaged 9th graders in orientation sessions around the mission statement and how students can meet the high expectations. In addition, they selected their courses. Students in grades 9-11 of Spring 2018 took a google survey form that elicited courses they would like to take. This was used to 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 17  develop their program. Finally, guidance and GSS will call all students over July and August to review their final program. All of this was done to ensure quality instructional time begins from day 1. Action Plans taken to ensure these initiatives are supported include: Set Goals with Parents for CEP and develop parent monthly survey  Set Calendar to increase communication   Grades up on Skedula every two weeks   Common Planning normed to ensure focus around need supports for relatedness in performance tasks, unit Specialized Schedule to maximize PD around sustainable differentiation plans, and lesson plans  Develop Guidance/ Social Worker intake process that builds student profile (Diagnose theory of intelligence), examines current practices(elicits initial motivations & goal orientation), self- reflects on levels of motivation, and sets new goals (learner goals)  Develops Calendar of Lessons using growth mindset articles (Chapters from Mindset, Mathematical Mindsets, and Self- Theories) for use after each report card with discussion protocols  Develop Calendar of Assemblies for last Monday of each month by Pathway Major  Engages Health classes and 9th grade history around Restorative Circles 360 Curricula  Pushing into classrooms and planning with new teachers to support building related tasks, units, lessons  Utilize DDI for targeted students in each classroom around PD’s differentiation strategies  Calendar of data monitoring, such as Performance Tasks vs. Regular Tests, Scholarship data, Semester Makeup Data, Semester Regents, Saturday School  Mastery Rubrics for department performance tasks  Portfolio of student work  Pathway Major infused lessons in core subjects (Math, science, history, ela)- Shopping Mall Unit Design for Pathway major infusion lesson These course sequences include:  Clinton School of Health Professions- Project Lead The Way (PLTW) Principles of Biomedical Science (9Th gr), Human Body Systems (10th gr), Medical Interventions (11th gr) Biomedical Innovations (12th gr)  Clinton School of Engineering- Project Lead The Way (PLTW) Intro to Engineering (9th gr), Digital Electronics year 1 (10th gr) , Intro to Computer Science year 3 (11th gr), and Engineering Design/ Robotics Competition Course in year 4 (12th grade)  Clinton School of Art and Design – Fine Arts Major (Figure Studies --> Ceramics/ Sculpture --> Painting --> Studio Art); Instrumental Major (Intro to Band --> Intermediate Band --> Performance Group --> Marching Band); Vocal Major (Intro to Voice --> Intermediate Voice --> Concert Choir --> Performance Choir)  Macy Honors Early College – Students here can take elective courses from all the other programs in sequence or out. To make all these changes possible, the administration did the following: Identified Teachers who would serve as the pathway teachers for each major 1. Developed 4-year course sequences 2. 3. Met with parents and students to determine levels of interest. 4. Adjusted pathway courses to suit students interest 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 18  5. Identified training for teachers in Project Lead the Way Biomedical Sciences and PLTW Engineering/ Robotics Courses. 6. Trained Guidance Counselors in the 4- year course options. 7. Met with students to identify the courses of interest 8. Developed a program so that students could receive all the courses they desire in addition to fulfilling their graduation requirements. In Spring 2017, students from all the SLCs were met with to select courses of interest. Some students switched their area of major. What will be the school’s beliefs about student learning? The mission of DWCHS is: “To challenge our students to develop college and career readiness through continual reflection, research-based mindset work, goal-setting and progress monitoring, but above all, we offer our students choice. By allowing students to engage in selecting their academic pathway, we support both their individual learning needs and their burgeoning autonomy. Upon graduating, students join our prestigious alumni association, continuing our storied legacy of social change" It is our belief that all students will continue to learn in rigorous classroom environments where each student receives appropriate support and can demonstrate their learning at a high level. As teachers increase their use of Higher Order Thinking Skills (HOTS) questions and provide ongoing scaffolding in the form of discussion protocols and differentiated structures, students will be able to demonstrate their learning at higher levels. Students learn best when engaged in critical thinking projects and lessons connecting content to their prior experience. We will continue to use the Depth of Knowledge chart and Danielson 3c, Student Engagement, supporting teachers as they incorporate higher order thinking questions and engage students in content-rich, rigorous discussions. The process of asking students questions while connecting the content to real life experiences makes classroom lessons more dynamic and engaging for students. The notion of “What is the Thinking?” will continue to guide teachers as they create challenging classroom environments. The Danielson Framework will be used on an ongoing basis to continue to improve the quality and rigor of instruction. This process develops the capacity of each Assistant Principal to implement the use of the Danielson Framework for Teaching with fidelity, resulting in improved instruction. Identify any special student populations that the school has and what their specific needs are. The school has a large number of students who read below grade level. We also have a large population of students who are identified as ESL students (ELL) and students who are classified as students with disabilities (SWD). In addition, we have a number of students who live in transitional housing/shelters or are homeless (STH). In addition, there is a large number of students that have been incarcerated. These students pose unique challenges. Our ELLs and SWDs require extra support. Many of our SWDs also receive counseling mandated by their IEPs. Many of these students need support getting to school. Some of these students have been moved out of the borough and/or need to bring younger siblings to school. Students returning from incarceration often need time and support to transition into high school. Providing social and emotional support is essential in their success. Good Shepherd Services, the school’s community based organization, has built a support system where social workers remain in contact with students and their families, supporting them with transitional matters as well as crisis intervention. In order to address academic needs, our incoming ninth graders will attend a Summer Bridge program sponsored by Renewal Schools to increase reading and writing skills. There will also be a leadership component. During the 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 19  school year, every ninth grader will be programmed for a college writing English elective class. This course will utilize the GMRE and determine reading levels and infuse REWARDs reading strategies to improve reading levels. For ENL and SWDs, we have provided more integrated courses and ICT settings which will provide more supports while integrating students to mainstream settings. There is a focus on developing stations based lessons to begin supporting students individual needs. Describe the elements for the Framework for Great Schools that the school made the most progress over this past year and which elements remain the most significant challenges. Be sure to include the historical progress the school has made with establishing family and community partner engagement. Supportive Environment, Collaborative Teachers and Effective School Leadership are three elements of the Framework for Great Schools where the school has made progress. There is still room for improvement and growth. With our School Leadership Team we have selected “Collaborative Teachers” as one of the leading indicators on the Renewal Schools Benchmarks. Developing a more Supportive Environment is the an area we have been doing the following: - Weekly Attendance Meeting with Guidance, Good Shepherd, AP Guidance, APO, AP Security focused on identifying students who fall into at risk (90-94%), Chronically Absent (80-89%), and severely chronically absent (<79%). These meetings result in parent outreach and family meetings to discuss building a plan to increase success of the student. - Teacher's meet every Thursday 4th and 7th period to engage in Skedula Pupil Path messaging to parents about glows and grows for their child. - Guidance Counselors and Good Shepherd Social Workers push into classes monthly. GCs push in with a focus on social emotional supports focused on growth mindset, 7 habits of high effective teens, and setting goals to improve. These push ins occur via the ELA classes. - Good Shepherd Success Center pushes into classrooms around college process for each grade level via the ELA Classrooms. - Pathway Majors present their work via DWC Open Houses. These are opportunities for students from each major to share their current student work, challenges, and how they overcome this. These are performances that help students see how their classroom experiences in vocal, instrumental, fine arts, engineering, health sciences, or AP courses can be celebrated. The second element of the Framework for Great Schools where the school continues to improve is in the area of teacher collaboration. The school program was restructured to provide opportunities for teachers to meet together on a daily basis in order to build trust, participate in professional development, and share successful practices. Common planning time for departments is structures so that math (with their co- teaching ICT or ENL Partners) and science (with their co- teaching ICT or ENL Partners) meet every day during period 4, while ELA and History do the same during period 7 daily. These meetings are based on a rolling agenda that is focused on developing unit plans for upcoming units, so that teachers have the chance to develop pre/ post assessments, unpack standards based objectives and open ended aims, develop daily formative exit slips that inform next day content that needs to be spiraled forward. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 20  Effective School Leadership is one of the areas the school continues to improve. The new principal has made high expectations for all a focus for the school. These expectations begin first with the teachers receiving supports in professional development and common planning, so they will be prepared to develop lessons that provide stronger engagement, visible thinking, checks for understanding, and opportunities for students to self reflect on their individual needs. With this support also are clear expectations for instruction to be improved as captured in the high leverage feedback provided via the Advance ratings. Last year APs were trained by the Principal in accurately capturing and aligning low inference notes captured via observations and translating this into high leverage feedback for improvement. Teachers received consistent messaging around improvement which showed that teachers needed to implement more discussion routines and create more differentiated reasons for groupings. Rigorous instruction, strong Family-Community Ties, and Trust are the three elements of the Framework for Great Schools where there is the most room for improvement. The overall quality of instruction in the school remains inconsistent. For Rigorous Instruction: Our instructional focus remains "If we lesson plan and implement differentiation models to support multiple entry points for rigorous tasks, then students will make choices among content, process, and/or product in the ways that they experience curricula yielding increased engagement and learning outcomes. " To support teachers in doing this work, we have linked this to developing stations based lessons for differentiation. By providing stations, our teachers can provide an environment that allows students to self-reflect on their current levels and make decisions about stations they need for support. Stations will be explored so that teachers learn to conduct stations that differentiate process, product, or content. Stations will also be varied from those where students remain, to those where students shift, to those that students circulate. We believe strongly that this model will help us provide stations for make up work that will help reintegrate students who have missed coursework and are off track. Our long term goal is to form google classrooms that utilize chromebook technology so that students can enter the room and begin a do now that is digitally loaded by the teacher, aligned to the learning targets for the day and determining which students can already meet the targets set forth. Google Classroom allows then for the teacher to pre- load scaffolded resources, extension activities, individual resources that meet students needs whether ENL, SWD, or GE. Students can work for a period of time individually on their needs, but reflecting on their progress related to the learning objectives. Opportunities for discussion will still be utilized, but Google Classroom will support making thinking visible via various apps that can allow a student to post their response or questions during a discussion. At the conclusion, all students will be asked to retake another version of the learning target question asked during the Do Now, allowing the students and teacher to see how much improvement was made. This will support students understanding of growth mindset, shifting learning practices for students. Developing stronger family and community ties is something we continue to work on. Our plan is to create more open door policy and scheduled meetings for families to connect with guidance counselors on a regular basis. It's critical that parents form a plan with their guidance counselor around college and career readiness. The school needs to be a revolving door of parent meetings for GCs who should see 4-5 families a day focused on 1- Cutting Classes; 2- Failed classes; 3- Behavior Incident; 4- Mental Health Counseling walk ins or identified; 5- Positive Changes 6- College Process. It's our belief that if GCs and SWs from Good Shepherd create these year wide opportunities for families to come to the school, it will be more accommodating for families and create a sense of community we expect. In addition, our Parent Association will have meetings on a monthly basis that have a rolling agenda that celebrates successes, encourages families to mingle, and shares student work. Please see Calendar below: List strong partnerships that currently exist with 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 21  DeWitt Clinton High School has developed strong partnerships with: ● Good Shepherd Services ● Peer Health Exchange ● Montefiore Hospital ● Lehman College ● Scholastic ● Council for Unity ● College Now ● Monroe College ● New York Public Library ● Junior Achievement of New York ● Behind the Book ● TDF ● CUNY Research Fund ● VA Hospital Teens for Food Justice The James Baldwin Association Most of these partnerships have been in place for more than five years. This is an area of strength for our school. We understand the importance of working together with outside partners to better serve and prepare our students for success. The school has added to its existing partnerships by working with College Access, Research & Action (CARA), to create a space for and implement the Student Success Center (SSC). The SSC trains and employs youth leaders who are responsible for guiding and supporting upperclassmen through the college applications process. Each youth leader has a caseload of 25-35 students. In addition to guidance, SSC youth leaders help students adhere to timelines and due dates. The establishment of the SSC was one of the school’s most important priorities. It has already made a positive contribution towards establishing high expectations in the school. Its presence next to the student cafeteria makes it accessible to all students during their lunch period. Summarize the Expanded Learning Time (ELT) opportunities that have been offered to your students this year. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 22  ELT is part of the school day, where students are given 8 periods of credit bearing coursework that incorporates the 4 core subjects (math, science, ELA, history), foreign language (Spanish), Physical Education, lunch, and two elective courses that define a students major. There are six different programs: Macy Honors Early College Pathway Major Clinton Engineering Pathway Major Clinton Health Professions Pathway Major Clinton Performing Art & Design Major (Vocal, Instrumental, Fine Arts)) Each pathway major has sequential coursework that occupies 1 more period. The remaining ELT period is occupied by different electives: Support: 9th Grade = SAGA Math (Algebra & Geometry) & College Writing (Rewards Reading and Writing Supports); 10th Rebels and Reactionaries (Global History Elective); 11th Creative Writing (English Elective); Macy Honors students can take multiple electives from different pathway majors, for example they might take a fine arts painting course and Clinton Health Professions Principles of Biomedical Science Course. Or they might take a Vocal and Figure Studies course. By the Senior year, students who need to to retake courses will have sufficient space in their schedule to take these courses, or embark in a wide array of electives from the pathway majors across campus. Instructional Focus for the Year DeWitt Clinton has diverse student needs. We focused last year on developing open ended higher order questions that would be supported using discussion routines and protocols. This year we want to continue this work, but focus on developing structures for providing students more access. When a student is missing prior skills/ or content, it makes it difficult to plan a single road of instruction. But we should never believe that all students are alike, so we should view this challenge as a positive that we embrace and develop further ways to differentiate. So our plan is to begin by defining differentiation and instituting stations as a model for differentiating process, product, or content. Our Theory of Action: If we lesson plan and implement differentiation models to support multiple entry points for rigorous tasks, then students will make choices among content, process, and/or product in the ways that they experience curricula yielding increased engagement and learning outcomes. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 23  Our Action Plan: - Examine Data on Attendance and Scholarship for ENL, SWDs, ELA/ Math Proficiency levels - Recruit High Leverage Teachers from each department and APs to serve as a Pedagogical Designers Team whose role will be to unpack stations and differentiation strategies, develop exemplars, open their classrooms to inter- visitations, and facilitate Professional Development with teachers. - Identify data we would like to see impacted by these strategic shifts in instruction. In this case we would like to see the impact on students exit slip completion on stations vs. non station days. It is our expectation that there will be varied levels of completion for this. - Examine student work using tuning protocols - Refine planning based on student centered outcomes for students who are ENL, SWDs, GE 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 24  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 10X440 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 1203 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 287 280 15 21 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 51 39 19 2 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 89.0% % Attendance Rate 84.5% % Reduced Lunch 19.5% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.9% 50.8% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 3.8% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 1.65 0% 1% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 54% 52% 45.7% 7.3% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No No Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District Yes Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A NO N/A NO NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A YES YES Yes N/A 173 139 4 83.9% 4.4% 15.4% 32.8% 10.6% 2.0% 16 18% 8.8 N/A N/A 60% 55% 55.8% 13% N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A NO NO YSH N/A N/A NO NO YES YES N/A NO NO 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 25  2018-19 RSCEP-PF 26  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 3 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 3.2 The school leader ensures and supports the quality implementation of a systematic plan of rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of students. 3.3 3.4 3.5 Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction (DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and address student achievement needs. The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: SOP(s) Addressed X NA NA NA 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review?  We have developed a systemic blackboard configuration that includes: Open-ended AIM, Do Now, and an Instructional Objective framed in student-friendly language that serves as a benchmark to measure student progress for each lesson.  The PD Team, comprised of 8 different teachers, has led professional development (PD) on determining the problem of practice, developing a theory of action, examining low inference classroom notes and norming using the Danielson rubric, evaluating types of questions used in lessons: recall, single pathway and open ended; engaging students in discussion protocols.  Teachers are trying different types of discussion routines and protocols in their classes.  Professional Development on Danielson 3c will continue for SY2018_19 for teachers to develop a deeper understanding of student intellectual engagement, groupings, and differentiation. We have developed structures and protocols for our common planning meetings and we expect to continue to build on these structures to further develop our instructional practices.  The observation process (4.1) has become more closely aligned to the standards outlined in Danielson, as evidenced by the comments made by the evaluator from the Quality Review from May 2017. The school received it's highest Quality Review scores ever with 7 out of 10 indicators evidencing "Proficient" Ratings. Despite this success, we received a rating of “Developing” in the 3 areas of instructional core:  1.1: Curriculum - Ensure engaging, rigorous, and coherent curricula in all subjects, accessible for a variety of learners and aligned to Common Core Learning Standards and/or content standards 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 27   1.2: Pedagogy- Develop teacher pedagogy from a coherent set of beliefs about how students learn best that is  informed by the instructional shifts and Danielson Framework for Teaching4 , aligned to the curricula, engaging, and meets the needs of all learners so that all students produce meaningful work products and 2.2: Assessments - Align assessments to curricula, use on-going assessment and grading practices, and analyze information on student learning outcomes to adjust instructional decisions at the team and classroom levels Rigorous instruction was identified as our area of focus in our quality review. The QR stated that teachers plan units and collaborate sharing ideas and strategies and embed support for all learners. However, these supports were not uniformly visible within and across content areas. The QR also noted that curriculum, unit plans, lesson plans, and assessments were not coherently aligned with the Common Core learning standards. Although teachers reported planning with standards, there is disparity between standards across and within subject areas. This is also evidenced in our Advance data. In 1e: Designing Coherent instruction, 48% of teachers received a developing rating and 14% received an ineffective rating. Due to the structure of the SLCs, teachers were working of a same course were not teaching the same populations the same levels of intellectual engagement aligned to the Common Core learning Standards. There is a need to integrate students more so they have more heterogeneity and all students can be exposed to the same rigorous standards aligned course material. In order for this to happen, teachers need to plan as departments so they can develop curriculum maps, common unit plans and assessments and analyze data that is specific to their subject area, plan daily instruction together. Baseline assessments were administered in all departments, but there was inconsistency with how the data was analyzed after administering benchmark assessments. There is a strong need to provide teacher support in a) curriculum and unit mapping, b) standards based formative and summative assessments aligned to common core standards, and c) providing instruction that differentiates for all learners (GE, SWDs, and ELLs). Utilizing Google Suite, departments can directly work on unit maps or upload resources that can be shared among all teachers. In addition, using skedula's DDC bubble sheets allow teachers to directly scan student responses and receive digested information regarding student individual progress. Students can still complete their own individual self- grading, but the teacher is more aware of student's areas of need based on the use of this technology. In order to address these needs, our goal for the 2018-2019 school year is to reprogram the school so there are 2 assigned lunch periods instead of 5. This will give teachers time to meet daily with their co teachers. They will also meet as departments two times a week to design unit plans, formative, and summative assessments that are consistently aligned to the common core learning standards. Our ENL and ICT scholarship data is lower than the school-wide average. We are moving towards a least restrictive environment model and will provide teacher teams with daily common planning to support inclusive teaching models. We will be supporting rigorous instruction by continuing our development of open-ended aims. We will also start curriculum mapping creating standard aligned aims with standard based assessments. More time needs to be provided for teachers to backwards plan their unit assessments, then ensure they are providing standards based formative assessments on a daily basis. Our product of measurement will be linked to measure of teacher practice 1e: Designing Coherent Instruction and QR indicators 1.1, 1.2 and 2.2. We will continue our blackboard configuration (Aim, Do now, IO, SWBAT, Summary/Exit Slip). Last year, we introduced discussion protocols. We created a PD committee that focused PD sessions around teachers’ Problem of Practice. Teachers focused on engagement and through engaging in problem solving protocol, the PD committee realized that questions and discussion techniques were tools teachers can use to increase student engagement. We introduced, modeled, and teachers implemented discussion protocols. We worked on open-ended Aims and aligning exit slips and writing summaries to the aims. We also centered PD on question types: recall, single pathway and open ended. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 28  We will continue to use protocols and daily writing as well as focus on:  Understanding by Design -UBD for Curriculum mapping. UBD is a framework tool that begins with the end in mind. It focuses on identifying what the students are going to know, understand and be able to do (KUD).  Assessment for Learning for Building Standard based formative Assessments - We are going to assess what skills are needed to achieve mastery of the performance assessments . We will design pre assessments to inform our classroom groupings, lesson planning and multiple entry points. Students will self assess using “I can statements.”  Universal Design for Learning -UDL for meaningful Grouping. Students will be grouped based on their skill deficits. Teachers will support these skills in planning and activities.  Complex Instruction- a system of collaborative group roles to support differentiation, in addition to teacher moves where they assign competency to target students.  Google Classroom- a technological platform to support individual learning needs. Part 2 – Summative Vision for Rigorous Instruction What is your school’s instructional focus? What is your vision for promoting the instructional focus consistently across classrooms? What curricula will be implemented? How will it be scaffolded for all students? What academic programs (CTE, AP, etc.) will be implemented? How will the instructional shifts be evident? We will continue to implement the following: HMH Collections for ELA EngageNY Math Curriculum New Visions Curriculum for Living Environment, Global and US History. 3 PAthways will be offered: Clinton Health Professions (EMT) Clinton Performing Art and Design Clinton Engineering Scaffolds will include using anticipatory guides to help students determine ways to differentiate content, process or product. In addition, students will have more opportunities to make their groupings meaningful using collaborative group roles rather than only heterogeneous mixtures based on grades. What rigorous learning experiences will students engage in through Extended Learning Time  Student chosen Pathway Courses in Project Lead the Way’s Principles of Biomedical Science, Human Body Systems, Engineering, Robotics, Theatre, Vocal, Figure Studies, Painting, Sculpture, Sustainability, and more.  Credit bearing Regents review classes in Creative Writing (ELA) and Rebels & Reactionaries (New Visions for Global) for extra help in passing regents and in achieving College and Career Readiness  College now through Monroe and Lehman College  Fuel Education - online blended classroom 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 29   Freshmen will have a College Readiness Course that ensures stronger reading skills through the REWARDS Program. SAGA math tutoring for additional support in mastering the CC Algebra 1 curriculum. Freshmen will have a College Readiness Course and SAGA math tutoring for additional support in mastering the CC Algebra 1 curriculum. College Readiness is a course that engages students in reading higher levels of text. Through the shift from SLCs to students taking courses in their pathway majors, more students will interact. This will create courses in these majors with students from the Macy Honors Program and the other majors (Health Professions, Art & Design, and Engineering). What will the pedagogical practice look like? What will the mode of instruction be? What will classes look like?  Teachers will introduce an open ended Aim to the class and support students with grade appropriate text for them to extrapolate evidence, incorporate discussion in every class using one of the discussion protocols, and develop a written exit slip that answers the aim.  WITSI (Writing is Thinking through Strategic Inquiry) is a writing program, which provides high leverage writing strategies that close skill gaps surfaced through strategic inquiry.  Teachers will continue using the current structure of Open ended Aim, SWBAT, Do Now, Instructional Objective and Summary.  Teachers will use discussion and reading protocols to increase student discourse How do the teachers use multiple entry points to ensure the success of every child?  Teachers will work collaboratively with their ICT or Integrated teacher in during their common planning time to create CCLS aligned units and lesson plans that include scaffolds for all their students.  Teachers will allow students time to engage in responding to the open ended aim using discussion protocols that encourage students to listen to one another, make claims, and counter claims (accountable talk).  Teachers will include anticipatory guides in their do nows to help students determine their current levels of understanding so they might make a choice about what content they examine, questions they use to process the task, or manner in which they will express their understanding.  Teachers will utilize daily exit slips to help understand what areas students need more support, which can be provided the next day during the beginning of the lesson. How will consistency be supported across school faculty and community educators and across a longer learning day? As the capacity of the Assistant Principals continues to develop, the Principal will work with the APs to refine their understanding of using the Danielson Framework to support the design and implementation of rigorous instruction. The principal will norm observations to help the APs better evaluate their teachers and identify areas of teacher growth. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 30  September- Teachers will receive examples of what evidence must be present in order to merit “effective” in the areas of the Danielson Rubric. This will create a standard level of criteria for all teachers to strive for as they develop in the school year. October- Informal, non-evaluative observations at the beginning of the term will be conducted in order to build trust and collaboration. The following goals will ensure ongoing support of teacher development:  25% of all observations complete by November 30,  50% by December 18th,  75% by the beginning of March and  100% by early May, with all Formal Observations completed by December. PD will be done on Monday mornings during period 1 for teachers with a 2-9 schedule and on Monday afternoons for teachers with a 1-8 schedule. We also plan on programming teachers with a common planning time, so that teachers in the same subject area can meet during the week. What will the assessments be? How will the data be collected and used? Who will analyze it and see that next steps are taken pedagogically and with regard to curricular revisions?  Departments will create units using backwards planning and create standards based assessments. Assistant Principals will design the Mid- Term and Final Semester Assessments to help the teachers gauge the pace of their unit planning.  Departments will utilize pre assessments from each unit to create meaningful groupings and roles.  Daily Standards aligned exit slips will be used to determine students consistently struggling, approaching, exceeding the learning targets. When this data is examined on a daily basis, teachers will adjust their “do now” for the following day to support students’ area of need. Departments will work together to flesh out the skills and standards each unit’s performance task is aligned and l create a common pre assessment to test these skills and standards. Using the data from this baseline, teachers will adapt the unit to include different strategies to target deficiencies and or enrichment. Students will be grouped based on their results and receive more practice in their group in a particular skill and standard, or receive enrichment opportunities in their group. After the performance task, teachers will reevaluate the date and see the students progress. Teachers will administer a standards based pre assessment before beginning the next unit and modify the next unit plan accordingly. Regents data will be used to drive instruction, based on item analysis, teachers will use this data to create strategies and activities in their unit plans to target these skills.  Gates MacGinitie Reading Test will be used to get a baseline for all incoming students and to provide intervention support for students reading below grade level 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 31  What is your vision for the implementation of CCLS-aligned curricula that meets the needs of your diverse learners, personally, academically, and culturally? Teachers will work collaboratively daily to develop curriculum maps, CCLS aligned daily assessments, and create lesson plans that include multiple entry points. These entry points will include sentence starters, reinforcement of targeted vocabulary, daily opportunities for discussion and writing using discussion protocols, and WITSi routines. What is your vision for diverse program offerings that allow students to develop skills, habits, and behaviors to be career and college ready? How are instructional shifts embedded in this vision? This next year we will be more course offerings that reflect the interest of students in their intended pathway majors. For examples students in Clinton Health Professions will take hands on course in Principles of Biomedical Science where they will conduct labs to determine the cause of death of a fictional character named Anna. This work aligns with the Common Core Instructional Shifts of students engaging in rich and rigorous evidence based conversations about text. In addition the other majors will have courses in beginner to advanced instrumental, figure studies, painting, sculpture, engineering, and robotics. Each of these courses emphasizes the instructional shifts focused on deepening understanding rather than narrowly looking at broad content. What do you envision the delivery of instruction to look like so that all students are set up for success? We envision that teachers will engage students in “do now’s” that incorporate previous day’s learning targets   open ended Aims that reflect the instructional shift “Students engage in rich and rigorous evidence based  conversations about text.” Students work in groups based on Stations based that provide collaborative roles or differentiated content, process, or products.  Teachers in ICT and Integrated ENL Classes plan together to execute the 5 models for collaborative teaching.  Teachers will plan lessons with their ICT and integrated teachers that promote students discourse and standards based writing allow sufficient time for students to engage in differentiated learning tasks aligned to CCLS for reading and writing in ELA, Social Studies, and Technical Subjects.  We will also continue to focus on Danielson's Framework, specifically indicators 3b, 3c, and 3d. 3c in Domain 3. How do you envision teachers using multiple entry points to ensure the success of every child? Teachers will utilize multiple entry points through  Open Ended Aims and group discussion protocols will ensure more students have a chance to make their thinking visible.  Do Now Anticipatory Questions to help students identify their own personalized area of differentiation: content,  process, or products they need to focus on for the day. ICT and Integrated Models of “One teach, one assist”, parallel teaching, alternative teaching, stations teaching will take place more due to the daily common planning period provided to all teachers. We will encourage teachers to use the data from the GMRT and other formative assessments to determine the needs of each student. Teachers will also be supported to use students' modifications as listed in their IEPs. In addition, we will share best practices during department common planning time, to learn strategies that help students learn best. To ensure these structures are happening, we will support adult learners in Common Planning led by Assistant Principals for each Department. In addition, they will utilize a rolling agenda that is product driven to make sure there are true products such as pre/ post assessments, open ended aims, standards based objectives, daily formative assessments. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 32  Also, high leverage teachers will work with APs on Tuesday from 3:45- 5:15 to develop model units ahead of implementation and teacher engagement. In addition, Office of School Renewal will provide in house coaching around co- planning to ensure staff have clear supports for how co- planning should look. They will provide co-planning lesson plan templates, model the different ways to co- teach (Stations, 1 teach 1 assist, parallel, alternative, co- teach). Leadership has also hired an AP of Special Education who will work with ORS to conduct coaching cycles. There are more co-teaching partnerships than every before, so administration has provided co- planning expectations to support teachers in understanding their roles in the process. Lastly, Pedagogical Designers (high leverage teachers and APs) will collaborate on developing instructional structures and strategies from research based differentiation systems including Complex Instruction (Elizabeth Cohen), Rhonda Bondie's AllEd.org, Universal Design for Learning. They will meet every Wednesday and Thursday to unpack theory and develop subject specific examples for how to utilize these strategies. These high leverage individuals will also facilitate the professional development that occurs on Mondays during 8:00 am - 9:00 am & 3:00 pm- 4:00 pm. Beyond all these supports, nine Assistant Principals will conduct routine informal and formal observation cycles that stress high leverage feedback. APs will also meet in cabinet with the Principal to align high leverage needs and reflect on the supports that need to be in place via common planning or professional development. Leadership will capture low inference notes and accurately capture practice that is currently taking place, providing logs of assistance for teachers who are "developing" or "ineffective" in their measures of teacher practice (MOTP) . What is your vision for the use of a comprehensive assessment strategy (diagnostic, formative, benchmark, and summative) to drive curricular, instructional, and organizational decisions that impact student outcomes? As mentioned earlier, the results of the GMRT will be used to help teachers identify students needs and to plan accordingly. In addition to this reading assessment, all students sitting for the Algebra I assessment in June will also sit for a quartile baseline through the use of Think Through Math and provided support appropriately. Furthermore, teachers in other Regents content areas are working collaboratively to create and administer mock Regents periodically through out the year. We will also use the New Visions Mock Regents Tool in April to assess students . Teachers will be encouraged to constantly monitor students understanding by using some of the techniques and strategies we shared last school year, including using discussion protocols. In addition, a major feature for all Departments will be to develop diagnostic pre- assessments prior to be utilized at the beginning of every unit. The purpose of this is to 1) Ensure teachers are clear about their unit learning targets and have developed the post assessments ahead of time. 2) Allow teachers the chance to see areas of strength and focus for their students and adjust curriculum prior, so they do not blindly engage all unit topics. Then teachers can create lessons to support more of some topics and less of others. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 33  3) Provide students with a chance to preview the learning targets and set goals for areas of strength, focus, and challenge. Beyond this pre- assessment structure, daily exit slip development will be supported in common planning to ensure that teachers are reflecting on student's approach to the target. Please indicate below the specific assessments that you are implementing and their purpose for each grade. Assessment Name Assessment Type Grades Implemented Purpose (diagnostic, formative, benchmark, summative) Gates MacGinitie Diagnostic/ Summative 9, 10 Rewards Reading Intervention Program Formative 9. 10 Think Through Math Diagnostic/ Formative/ 9, 10 Summative Mock Regents exams Summative 9, 10, 11, 12 Part 3 – Annual Goal Assess the reading levels of students to determine lexile level Assess students' reading progress throughout the year in order to support growth Assess students' numeracy progress throughout the year in order to support growth Assess student mastery of subject matter according to NYS standards. Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Renewal Benchmarks and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks. By June 2019, all core department teachers will demonstrate a coherent set of beliefs captured in their lesson plans that are standards aligned, reflect co-teaching models, and support differentiation by content, process, or product which translates to student learning in classrooms, resulting in an increase from 56% and 67% (2017-18) to 65% and 70% (2018-19) pass rate on the ELA (by year 3) and Algebra Regents (by year 2). Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Rigorous Instruction Annual Goal: Which Renewal benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Rigorous Instruction Annual Goal? List of Renewal Benchmarks expected to improve College and Career Preparatory Course Index 24.2% English Regents Percent Pass by Year 3- 46% Math Regents Percent Pass by Year 2- 44% 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 34  Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) Administer the GMRT for all incoming students. 9th grade incoming students English Regents Percent Pass September to October 2017 ELA Assistant Principal Results of GMRT Common Planning- department teacher teams will collaborate on developing coherent standards based curriculum maps (1.1) and standards aligned formative assessments (2.2) across content areas Ensure Parent Engagement during common planning so that grades are up on Skedula every at least every two weeks Provide time during ELA class to review skedula every two weeks Professional Development Every Wednesday by Content Area for increased time of 80 minutes Teachers Collaborative September 2017 to June 2018 Teachers and Assistant Principals Teaching Completion of Curriculum Maps and Unit Assessments posted on Google Docs 9th graders below reading level ELA and Algebra Course Scholarship September 2017 to June 2018 ELA Teachers trained in REWARDS, SETTS Teacher Improved results on student surveys around clarity of expectations in class All Teachers Regents Pass Rate September to All APs and Principal May Danielson observations of Teacher practice Performance Task # 1 Results Monitoring by grade level and subjects (ELA, 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 35  History, Science, Math) 1st MP Scholarship 80% passing minimum Performance Task # 2 Results Monitoring by grade level and subjects (ELA, History, Science, Math) 2nd MP Scholarship 80% passing minimum Performance Task # 3 Results Monitoring by grade level and subjects (ELA, History, Science, Math) Semester 1 Overall Scholarship 80% passing minimum ELA Regents Results in January 2019 and Algebra (year 2) 4b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Students will all be provided with a DeWitt Clinton High School Binder for the first semester that contains their course contracts and outlines, in addition to the organization needed to be successful. This organizational structure will be reviewed with parents on September 26, for curriculum night. Once the google chromebooks arrive, all binder content and student portfolios will become digital. Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, lead CBO’s community school budget, etc. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 36  OTPS funds ELT funds TTM, Gates MacGinitie and REWARDS All students have a 9 period day Model teacher who model Datawise trainings Project Lead the Way Chromebooks for google classroom New Furniture (Chairs and Desks) Air Conditioners Branding Computer Lab Teacher's Center for PD (Furniture and Technology) Smartboards Title I for teacher salary Title III LEP funds to support AP Salary Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) X Title III Title I TA PTA Funded X P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By February 2019, 60% of the students who sit for the CC ELA and Algebra Regents (year 2)in January will pass the exam with at least a 65 or above as a result of the standards aligned curriculum mapping and common assessments. Monitor: 1. Performance Task # 1 Results Monitoring by grade level and subjects (ELA, History, Science, Math) 2. 1st MP Scholarship 80% passing minimum 3. Performance Task # 2 Results Monitoring by grade level and subjects (ELA, History, Science, Math) 4. 2nd MP Scholarship 80% passing minimum 5. Performance Task # 3 Results Monitoring by grade level and subjects (ELA, History, Science, Math) 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 37  6. Semester 1 Overall Scholarship 80% passing minimum 7. ELA Regents Results in January 2019 and Algebra (year 2) Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. ELA CC Regents Exam results Algebra CC Regents Exam results Curriculum Maps Common Standards based Exit Slip formative Assessments Common Unit Exams Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 38  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 5 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 5.2 The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. 5.3 The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students. 5.4 All school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health supports tied to the school’s vision. 5.5 The school leader and student support staff work together with teachers to establish structures to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental health needs. NA NA X NA Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: SOP(s) Addressed 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? 5. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? Strengths: DeWitt Clinton High School:  Has a very strong Alumni Association  Has over 30 available teams and clubs for students to participate in  Benefits from a strong connection with Good Shepherd Services (GSS), a CBO. Each SLC is assigned a social worker and, together with our DWCHS Attendance Staff, we assist all students' individual needs. CBOs such as GSS provide services to students and families throughout the school day, as well as before and after regular school hours.  Has developed an inner core of parental connections. DWCHS has an involved Parent Coordinator and Parents Association working together to develop more critical outreach for the community setting.  Houses a full Montefiore clinic. Students can receive medical, dental, and mental health services on site and do not need to miss school. In addition, through the clinic, the students and families can receive family social work intervention services.  Has a LYFE center. Students with children ages 3 months to 3 years can receive free childcare services.  Has a YABC program. Students in need of a 5th year for success in their studies can be accommodated with an on-site transfer. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 39   Has a TASC (previously GED) program, also known as Pathways to Graduation. The program is an additional way for the school to meet the needs of the community, build trust, and assist all students in completing high school. Needs: Students want to take courses in the areas their are interested. Students have been asked to review course offerings for each major and make selections based on interest to foster a sense of ownership among the students stakeholders. The hope is that students will value the selections they have made and attend their classes on a daily basis. There are approximately 150- 200 students who are overage and under credited. There is a need to provide more support to accelerate their credit accumulation, so that these students can either attend a transfer school setting or be back on track and graduate at DWC. Currently many of these students do not attend class regularly, which is contributing to their issues. We have applied to develop "achieve now" classes which will provide students with instruction to help gain back more credits, which also attending on a different schedule that the rest of the school. By starting later and finishing later, these students avoid the issues they typically face that holds them back such as avoiding classes with students who are younger and arriving late. There is a need to develop stations based lessons to accommodate the students who have been chronically absent. These students return to class and may be missing prior skills or content, which makes it hard to reintegrate successfully into class. Teachers currently have limited ways to help these students outside of groupings where a student who has been there can aid the one who has not. This is not sustainable or consistently impactful as it relies on the good will of another student. This is another reason for the following solutions to be implemented: 1- Stations based lessons- these will provide students who have been missing a chance to make up work, while other students who have been present can also still work on individual needs. There can be stations that vary based on content needs, or processing needs, or different products that demonstrate student understanding. This in conjunction with teachers utilizing a folder system with previous days/ weeks work will help students who arrive after absences. 2- SAGA Room for Other Subjects- SAGA is currently a partnership we have that provides academic intervention tutoring throughout the school day focused on math. There is a need for this sort of room for other core subjects like science, ELA, and history. These rooms would contain a tutor who would provide students who need help during a given period that cannot be done by stations or the teacher. The student would receive a pass from the classroom teacher with their folder to gain entry into these alternative SAGA rooms. The tutor there would be there to support their completion of make up work. This would increase the level of support for students who have missed class. 3- Develop Classroom spaces that are inviting to students and support learning. There is a need for new chairs and desks that support stations and multiple configurations for learning. In addition, these chairs need to show the school colors and provide a sense of pride for the community they are joining as part of the DWC Alumni family. We are firm believers in showing respect to students through the way their environment is maintained and improved. 4- Branding- There is a need for improved signage around the school that displays the famous alumni that graduated from DWC, and a section that highlights students who are doing great work today. 5- Chromebooks- In order to increase differentiation for all students' individual needs, all classrooms will be equipped with chromebooks. evelop a common understanding of the importance of the on at are currently in your classes. These students will be our focus gr Part 2 – Summative Vision for Supportive Environment 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 40  What is your vision for a supportive school environment? How will you in partnership with each CBO and families enact your vision? 1. How would you want school stakeholders to describe the school? “Dewitt Clinton is the High School is he school that allows students to choose their courses of interest and grow in this area.” To allow for this sort of student ownership, we must develop 4-year curriculum sequences in the areas of health professions, engineering, and arts. 2. What do the CBO partnerships look like? How do they sustain and support the social and emotional growth and health of your students? Our partnerships with Good Shepherd services, CARA, Montefiore Clinic, Sports and Arts Foundation, Sports and Arts, Brothers and Sisters United, Council for Unity, LYFE program, Pathway to Graduation, YABC, JrROTC, JANY, TDF, Behind the Book, College Now, Monroe College, VA Hospital, SAGA and DWC Alumni Association address social and emotional growth for all students, especially those ‘at risk’ students with support and mentorships. ● Good Shepherd Services- GSS is a leading youth and family development agency with more than 80 programs serving over 26,000 participants a year. The mission of GSS is to surround at-risk New York City youth and their families with a web of supports that promote a safe passage to self-sufficiency. Building on its relationship with DWCHS, and extensive experience providing services to the student population, under the Community School model, GSS will provide student-centered, personalized services to students and families, grounded in a Youth and Family Development (YFD) framework. This strength-based YFD approach builds on students’ and families’ existing competencies, while recognizing the importance of meeting their developmental needs. We will partner with GSS to provide individual and group counseling to high-risk students; student and family outreach to engage them to use the services available in the school and community; peer leadership to target youth through soft skills and social emotional training, group work, and service learning; and Extended Learning Time activities based on the needs of the student population ● CARA is an organization which helps build student awareness and access to the college application process. Next year the school will open a CARA Student Success Center. The CARA program teaches 11 th and 12 th grade students all about the college process and then hires these students as Youth Leaders to work with the current 12 th grade class. Each Youth Leader will have a caseload of 25-35 students, who they assist in completing the college application process. ● Montefiore Clinic- DWC has a full service Montefiore Clinic that provides medical, dental, optical, therapeutic and family planning services. The Clinic also provides internships for the students. ● Sports and Arts Foundation provides a series of services to DWC students including, tutoring, SAT preparation, enrichment activities, college awareness activities and experiential learning opportunities. ● Sports and Arts, which is different from the Sports and Arts Foundation, is an organization where students take part in drug abuse counseling and seminars. ● Brother and Sisters Unity provides DWC students with small group counseling, conflict resolution, peer mediation and sensitivity training. ● Council for Unity provides DWC students with classes which develop their negotiation skills in dealing with conflict. The purpose is to develop a safe learning environment in the Campus. ● Living for the Young Family through Education (LYFE) program “fosters a generational impact which positively influences the life outcomes of student parents and their children”. ● Pathways to Graduation provides classes for students to earn a TASC (Test Assessment Secondary Completion) diploma. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 41  ● YABC- Young Adult Borough Center is designed for high school students who are behind in credits and are considering dropping out. ● JrROTC- Junior Reserve Officer Training Corps is a program that fosters student achievement and leadership and public service. ● JANY- a volunteer driven program providing students opportunities to participate in community service activities, college and career readiness activities. ● TDF- Theater Development Foundation provides students with access and education of the performing arts. ● Behind The Book- to inspire NYC Public School students to love reading by bringing authors and their books into classrooms. ● College Now- Committed to providing students with the opportunity to engage in advanced and challenging coursework outside of the high school curriculum. ● Monroe College- Jumpstart program offers HS students the opportunity to earn college credits before entering college. ● Our partnership with the VA hospital continues to provide internship opportunities for our students. ● SAGA- A very small engaging individualized 2 to 1 math tutoring program specializing with 9 th grade incoming students, with the University of Chicago. ● DWC Alumni Association provides DWC seniors with scholarship opportunities and leadership development.  New Visions data tool, which is utilized in direct identification of student tracking.  Project Bully Free Zone, which includes counseling sessions during the school day  NY Grows/Sustainability  New York Public Library, where students develop skills in helping younger students and are able to complete the program to earn high school credit and obtain jobs.  EMT- This year, the program will be expanded and we will be the first school to have an ambulance  Bronx Zoo internships and employment- An extended classroom provides high school students with internships and seasonal employment; WildLife Conservation Conservation Society Scholastic Junior Achievement    Middle School Leadership Academy in cooperation with the Office of Youth Development services middle school students currently living in temporary housing; The school provides peer monitoring, academic services, and enrichment activities. Lehman College Masters Program for honors students   Bronx Community College- college visits and college counseling  Peer Health  Apex Learning- Online learning classroom operates from 10AM - 4PM when school is open. It is an alternative learning environment for under-credited students Skedula SAPIS substance abuse prevention services, small groups, and individual counseling  Carnegie Mellon  Monroe College    Conn State College   Restorative Circles Smart Board use in classrooms 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 42   Pencil  Peer Group Connection These partnerships provide ongoing services and supports and internships as mentioned above. 3. How is student voice and leadership supported? Students’ voices are heard and given due consideration before making any decisions that impact student learning life at Clinton. Our student government has a major role in making student voices heard. The student council meets with the Principal on a regular basis, and asks for additional meetings when necessary. Students are also part of the School’s Leadership Team. The Student Success Center program provides students with the opportunity to mentor each other. DWC also provides students with a voice in the following areas: Student Government, Magpie (Magazine), Clinton News (Student Newspaper), Peer Group Connection, JROTC, Film Club, DWCHS TV, DWCHS.net, Instagram, Facebook, Twitter, Council for Unity and Brothers & Sisters United. In addition we have numerous clubs, after school activities and 30 PSAL teams. Students from all SLCs (20-30) are invited to participate in an Alumni weekend as well. 4. What social-emotional learning framework will your school adopt (RULER, In addition to the items mentioned above, Guidance Counselors, Restorative Circles, Peer Group Connection, College Access Research and Action, Peer Group Counseling and other frameworks, such as family individual counseling through Montefiore Clinic. Mandated counseling services are provided according to the students’ IEP. DOE Guidance Counselors are connected with additional outside agencies such as Probation, PINS, Temporary Housing staff, Hospital, Home instruction, and ACS services. Good Shepherd Services provides an additional Social worker to each SLC, providing support to students and their family. 5. How should the school be more proactive in promoting improved students social-emotional skills ? How should counseling happen? The Guidance Counselors meet students individually, in groups, in classrooms to provide information around the graduation requirements and to address their social and emotional needs. The Guidance Counselors meet with teachers, attendance teachers, CBO’s, parents, social workers, case workers, students and administrators. Through these meetings the students’ social emotional needs are identified. Mandated counseling services are provided as per IEP. Further social emotional needs are met through Guidance Counselor services, assessment and referral to appropriate partnerships. This is supplemented by the partnerships mentioned above. In addition, the DOE guidance counselors have outside opportunities to refer to students. Good Shepherd Services also offers a number of small support groups for the students. 6. How will your school team measure social-emotional development? This is measured during weekly attendance meetings, assemblies after every marking period, and measured by scholarship, report cards, incident reports (OORS), Pupil Personnel Team meetings, parental outreach and Kid-talk meetings during the SLC leadership team regular “check in”, as well as ongoing dialog between teachers and Guidance Counselors and anecdotes in Skedula and iLog. We also measure the connectivity rate with families. The principal uses School Messenger to inform parents of what is happening in the building. The phone messages are included in the parents section fo the school's website. 7. How would teachers, community partners, and school leaders use data to respond to student social and emotional needs? DOE teachers, guidance counselors, community partners, and school leaders will use data to respond to student social and emotional needs. Data from attendance reports generated from ATS will be used to identify patterns of 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 43  absenteeism. During the student success summit meetings, we will analyze the intake process for students returning back to school from suspension or hospitalization. The SLC teams during Professional Development time will also analyze scholarship report data, Regents data, etc. The information provided by the New Visions data sorter will be utilized as a means to address any negative flux in student progress as a means to intervene and redefine student needs. Data from student report cards and scholarship reports will be used as a means to reach out to students and families for praise in improvements and as a means for referrals for academic or tutoring opportunities. We also use iLog to track student's behaviors and communication with families. 8. Indicate how your attendance and chronic absenteeism rates will improve? The school will be utilizing the New Visions Attendance Heat Map tool in order to identify student attendance pattern. Weekly Attendance meetings led by CBO Good Shepherd, AP Guidance, APO, and AP Security provide a script for examining patterns and developing weekly goals to improve attendance. This year we saw an increase in attendance due to these meetings and parent outreach of 1.5% from previous year this time. In addition, we have instituted an initiative to improve hallway transition time. Class transition should take 3 minutes from bell to bell. Teachers are standing by their doors to encourage their students to class. In addition we have our GCs and GS Social Workers out in the hallways engaging in "Mix & Mingle" where they engage students who are late and still present in the hallways. They obtain student's ID and will utilize this to contact families and schedule meetings to build relationships to support students who are off track. If we support students so that they feel safe and academically challenged by DOE staff and the students see the school as a supportive setting, and communication is more effective between students, teachers, parents, guidance counselors and administrators, then attendance will increase to meet the Renewal School Benchmark. Who are your CBO partners? How will each CBO sustain and support the social-emotional and academic growth of your students? Student centered and personalized services to students and families on site; Conflict resolution and sensitivity training; Small group counseling; Peer mediation CBO Focus Medical, social, emotional, drug abuse counseling and services to students and families CBO Partner Good Shepherd Services; Brothers and Sisters United; Sports and Arts; Council for Unity Montefiore Hospital School Based Clinic; SAPIS; Restorative Circles; LYFE How will you in partnership with your CBO will create a supportive environment and engagement for your students’ families? DWCHS together with each CBO meet weekly within each SLC. These meetings will be used to identify and discuss student needs. Parents are also invited to participate. Phone conferences take place to meet working parents' needs. DWCHS and its CBO partnerships collaborate with the Parents' Association and the Parent Coordinator to develop strong bonds with parents and families and offer workshops throughout the year, based on needs. DWC also open doors on weekends to students in temporary housing for use of the gym facilities and weekend tutoring. DWCHS has established a SAVE room mandated by NYS law. In doing so, the needs of students will be met and the connection with families will be further increased as the staff communicates the progress of the students as they stratagize and meet social and academic successes. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 44  Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Supportive Environment. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Renewal Benchmarks and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks. By June 2019, staff will provide students with transparent understanding of the new school-wide academic expectations and school-wide grading policy through the usage of Skedula/Pupil Path, ensuring that students and parents feel supported and are aware of student/self-progress, empowering them to utilize AIS supports when necessary, resulting in an 80% scholarship rate across core subject disciplines. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Supportive Environment Annual Goal: Which Renewal and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Supportive Environment Annual Goal? List of Renewal Benchmarks expected to improve Attendance Progress Towards Graduation 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 45  Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Attendance Team Attendance Chronically Absent (80-89%) September 2018- June 2019 Good Shepherd Director , AP Bray, APO Deep, Attendance Parents of students who are C.A. Credit Accumulation September 2018- June 2019 Good Shepherd Director , AP Bray, APO Deep, Regents How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) Weekly Meetings setting goals around planned family meetings. Observations of GC's parent meetings for the # of families schedule to come in based on case load; quality of these meeting; improvements in attendance or credit accumulation; increase in skedula/ pupil path Guidance- Parent Meetings - Develop Guidance/ Social Worker intake process that builds student profile (Diagnose theory of intelligence), examines current practices(elicits initial motivations & goal orientation), self- reflects on levels of motivation, and sets new goals (learner goals) Develops Calendar of Lessons using growth mindset articles (Chapters from Mindset, Mathematical Mindsets, and Self- Theories) for use after each report card with discussion protocols Social Worker- Parent Meetings Attendance Parents of students who are C.A. September 2018- June 2019 Good Shepherd Director , AP Bray, APO Deep, Observations of SW's parent meetings for 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 46  Credit Accumulation Regents Student on Track, almost Progress to Graduate 2nd and 3rd year September 2018- June 2019 Good Shepherd Director , AP Bray, APO Deep, Develop Calendar of Assemblies for last Wednesday of each month by Pathway Major to celebrate attendance, academic honor roll, and academic growth, and performance tasks the # of families schedule to come in based on case load; quality of these meeting; improvements in attendance or credit accumulation; increase in skedula/ pupil path . Increase attendance, scholarship, regents results 4b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will receive phone calls and personalized meetings to support them in logging into Pupil Path so they can monitor their child's progress (attendance and grades). Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Metrocards for home visits Project Lead the Way Chromebooks New Furniture (Chairs and Desks) Branding Computer Lab Teacher's Center for PD (Furniture and Technology) 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 47  New Promethean Boards Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By February 2019, 80% of DeWitt Clinton students will have passed 80% of their courses. Will will monitor this by: 1. Performance Task # 1 Results Monitoring by grade level and subjects (ELA, History, Science, Math)\ 2. 1st MP (Fall) Scholarship 80% passing minimum benchmark 3. Performance Task # 2 Results Monitoring by grade level and subjects (ELA, History, Science, Math) 4. 2nd MP (Fall) Scholarship 80% passing minimum benchmark 5. Performance Task # 3 Results Monitoring by grade level and subjects (ELA, History, Science, Math) 6. Semester 1 (Fall) Overall Scholarship 80% passing minimum benchmark 7. Performance Task # 4 Results Monitoring by grade level and subjects (ELA, History, Science, Math) 8. 1st MP (Spring) Scholarship 80% passing minimum benchmark 9. Performance Task # 2 Results Monitoring by grade level and subjects (ELA, History, Science, Math) 10. 2nd MP (Spring) Scholarship 80% passing minimum benchmark 11. Performance Task # 3 Results Monitoring by grade level and subjects (ELA, History, Science, Math) 12. Semester 2 Overall Scholarship 80% passing minimum benchmark Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Parent Meeting Book Signing Logs from Guidance and Good Shepherd ilog summaries, attendance meeting progress minutes Skedula/ Pupil Path registration Scholarship Report Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 48  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 4 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 4.2 School and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. 4.3 Teachers provide coherent, and appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. 4.4 Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences and tailored to the strengths and needs of all students. 4.5 Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, and progress monitoring). Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: SOP(s) Addressed NA X NA NA 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? In Tenet 4.3 Based on the Quality Review our focus will be to have consistent emphasis on rigorous CCLS based tasks and employ teaching strategies to provide entry points for all learners across content areas. The action plan will be reorganizing common planning time meetings from Small Learning Communities to Department. Feedback from the 2017_18 Quality Review was considered, especially Quality Indicators 1.1 and 1.2. The feedback suggested that the level of rigor for tasks resembled DOK levels 1-2, and needed to grow towards 3 and 4. This next year we have supported this effort in several ways: - A staff wide training on the ELA Regents and it's relationship to the school's chosen power standards faculty professional development is facilitated by the Professional Development Committee made up by teachers from specific academic departments. Professional development focused on improving pedagogy as it aligns to the Danielson Framework domains 1 and 3 to support differentiation through stations based instruction. Some of the practices included instructional coherence, creating open ended aims and implementing discussion protocols, and stations. During the meetings teachers viewed lesson plans, collaborated by engaging in protocols and worked with subject specific teachers to align planning to the school wide expectations based on the school’s belief of 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 49  how students learn best. This year's focus is to extend from developing questions for discussion and to support individual student needs through stations based instruction. In addition departments will meet daily to focus on common planning around aligning curriculum unit maps. Part 2 – Summative Vision for Collaborative Teachers What is your vision for collaborative teaching? How is the school organized to promote teacher collaboration? The school will continue to remain a multi-session school. The school is moving from a Small Learning Communities structure to a Pathways structure. Instead of five lunch periods per day we will have two lunch periods and during that time content teachers will be available to collaborate on a daily basis. The new structure will provide time for teachers and other staff members to deepen their work around instruction and student support. While teachers will be meeting by department, the departments will have the opportunity to meet together since their common planning time will occur during the same period. For example, English and Social Studies teachers will have the same meeting period, while Mathematics and Science will have a different meeting period. ICT and ENL teachers will be assigned to either English/Social Studies or Mathematics/Science groups. What does teaching and learning look like? What underlying principles would influence the creation units and lesson plans? Do teachers work on units and lessons in teams? In Departmental meetings teachers will utilize curriculum to collaborate on refining unit plans to include an essential question and creating lesson plans aligned to the the Common Core Learning Standards. Teachers’ lessons will include open ended aims, instructional objectives, protocols, and multiple entry points to engage all students in learning with activities that make learning visible. This will result in rigorous instruction and active engagement by students. Unit Planning will produce alignment of the following:  Planning Unit Assessments (Pre and Post)  Growth Mindset Lesson Design     Analysis of Pre- Assessment & Shifting Pacing of topics or identify areas of Differentiation  Standards alignment with Common Core and developing power standards Standards based objectives and Open Ended Aims Formative Assessments aligned with the objectives and utilized in the exit slips Shifting Lesson Planning & Differentiation of Materials & Resources based on Pre- Assessment Results Learning looks like - Students involved in tasks where they reference the objectives and are acquiring knowledge to answer the aim - student's thinking is visible as a result of discussion routines and protocols 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 50  - students engage in stations based learning that meets their individual needs - students are able to complete the exit slip demonstrating their acquiring learning targets or needing more support Teacher discuss student progress during common planning time and departmental meetings and make adjustments to curriculum to improve teaching and learning. How are teachers providing opportunities to deepen learning for higher achieving students? Utilizing lessons that focus on Open Ended Aims, Discussion routines/ protocols, and stations will allow all students access to the lesson plan based on their individual learning needs. The instructional focus will be to incorporate stations more so that...      students can engage in stations based on need stations can represent different ways to process a task, content, or products stations can be for whole period, transitional, or rotating stations allow students to work in small groupings students have a safe space to make up work missed when absent What system do teachers use to ensure that every child is safe in their class? Teachers develop norms/rules in the beginning of the year in order to establish a safe and nurturing space conducive to learning. Assistant Principals support teachers who may be struggling with classroom management in order to improve the learning environment in the classroom.  Positive reinforcement  Creation/Consistency with class rules  Parental contact  stations provide students with an active way to attend to individual needs What data should teachers review regularly to ensure they plan for individual student needs? Should the teachers review student work collaboratively in teams? As teachers collaborate to develop CCLS unit of studies each unit will have a performance task with a rubric to evaluate student performance. Teachers will engage in an inquiry process as they look at student work together to refine the assessment process and give all categories of students the support they need to be successful. Formative assessment, class and homework tasks, and in-class tests and quizzes will be used to ensure appropriate adjustments to instruction are made. Formative assessments exit slips in class  eview IEP’s 2x’s per year minimum  pre and post unit assessments school wide  NYSESLAT data for ELLS   Attendance record not just daily but periods 1-9  Cut reports and anecdotals on Skedula  Common planning time needs to be supported with adequate space/time  self- reflection based on growth mindset and 7 habits of highly effective teens How do you intend to use community educators / partners to support a collaborative teaching approach? We will continue to utilize resources from Renewal Schools to support pedagogy in areas WITSI, ICT and ENL push in models. Our community school partner, Good Shepherd Services, will provide each grade level with a liaison that comes into classes and assists students’ regarding social and emotional support. Sports and Arts provides students with 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 51 academic support and seminars. SAPIS provides students with drug abuse counseling. Professional Development committee will continue to support teachers in modeling best practices. We will continue to use our Model Teacher to work with individual teachers in supporting them develop effective lessons. How do you envision collaboration amongst your School Instructional Cabinet to improve teacher practices and student learning? Weekly cabinet meetings will provide cohesiveness among subject Assistant Principals focusing on curriculum alignment to standards, creating rigorous lesson plans, incorporating discussion protocols resulting in performance tasks that could be utilized as data to adjust curriculum for all levels of learners. This information will be shared with the professional development committee According to the 2017-2018 Quality Review the school received developing in the areas of 1.1 Curriculum, 1.2 Pedagogy, and 2.2 Assessment. 1.1 Curriculum: "School leaders and teachers are creating yearlong curriculum maps, which include time frame, essential questions, enduring understanding, performance indicators, New York State and Common Core standards, and formative and summative assessments. Most lesson plans also include these same sections as well as specific assessments like do now activities and exit tickets. A few curricula items also include objectives introduced by the statement, “Students will be able to” and seating assignments that are aligned to student learning needs; however, this is not yet evident across grades and subjects." Examples: a) One science lesson plan delineates the open-ended, higher-order thinking questions, though another notes, “Students will work in groups and some students will work independently.” Finally, while many lesson plans include a short list of general scaffolds such as a graphic organizer, use of pictures for visual learners, and an opportunity for students to work in groups if necessary, many lesson plans exclude detailed differentiation support that are specific to student needs. b) some lesson plans evidenced that students were assigned recall tasks that did not reflect opportunities for high levels of student thinking and engagement. During the student interview, some students stated the work is not challenging. To that end, staff collaborates and is in the process of aligning tasks and lessons to Hess’ Cognitive Rigor Matrix levels. Although staff is currently making these alignment adjustments, it is unclear as to whether a variety of students have gained access to higher-order tasks 1.2 Pedagogy: "With an overall student population that includes a large percentage of students with disabilities and English Language Learners, staff believes that students learn best when they are engaged in a series of station-learning activities and multiple points of entry that are provided to meet the individual needs of students. Consequently, staff is expected to serve as a facilitator of learning as students work in flexible, data-determined groups. However, this practice of the teacher as facilitator is inconsistently implemented across classrooms. Examples: a) The teacher asked the students, “What does it mean to condemn something?” Students struggled to make meaning to the word. b) In an English Language Arts class, students attempted to complete station work about Elizabeth Stanton. Students answered Depth of Knowledge level one and two questions, such as, “Who is Stanton?” and “What is she known for?” 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 52  When asked, students said the tasks are easy. Without looking at notes, students were unable to answer the aim question, “How did Stanton influence women today?” 2.2 Assessment: "However, the type of grades assigned to each of the assessments vary across subjects and grades, ranging from check marks, to ratios, percentages, or fractions. Some work showed the amount of points earned out of the total possible, such as five over six or twelve over fifteen. Other pieces of student work had a check or check plus while still others had scores such as an 80 percent or a letter grade. Many written assessments had a rubric attached with portions highlighted or outlined to designate a score, or feedback ranged from a congratulatory “good conclusion,” to no feedback at all. The school restructured during the 2017/18 school year to provide teachers supports through department team meetings guided by content based APs. This work did allow the school to have increased coherence which demonstrated in the following areas of improvement: 1) ELA & History (80%) & Math/ Sci (76% and 72%). 2) ELA (56%) & Math (63%). For 2018/19, our efforts remain to continue supports in Department Teams for common planning. In addition, we are supporting the development of: - Performance Tasks in all core subjects to create relevance for students with the content and skills they are learning - Writing Across the Curriculum will support use of common TIED Paragraph structure in all core subjects - Writing will be supported with usage of common scaffolds (3 types from highly to least scaffolded) and common rubric so that students receive more actionable feedback that perpetuates growth - We will continue to support increasing rigor across classrooms by training teachers in developing higher order questions for daily lessons and to guide multiple entry points, such as stations based learning How do you envision collaboration within teacher teams to improve teacher practices and student learning? Currently, Special Education teachers are engaging in professional development to become facile with various ICT models. For the new school year, Special Education teachers will be assigned to either English/Social Studies or Math/Science. This is resulting in teachers becoming more active in developing stations based learning lessons. The impact will be measured by seeing the student's abilities to complete formative daily exit slips. By teachers engaging in the following:  Common planning time daily 4th or 7th period in departments  Wednesday PD for all departments 2:30- 3:50  Engaging in PD around Growth Mindset, Common Planning Structures, Differentiation through stations  Understanding the diverse needs of students  Providing differentiated instruction  Multiple Entry points (but needs to be clarified what it looks like)  Common ground in terms of discipline styles and delivery of instruction 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 53  Provide effective PD on co teaching styles How do you envision collaboration across teacher teams to improve teacher practices and student learning? Moving the school schedule to two lunch periods will free up larger blocks of teachers for a common planning period five days a week. Teachers, will have common planning time based on their subject area; English and Social Studies, or Mathematics and Science. This will give both groups the opportunity for cross-curricular planning. This planning will include ICT and ENL Co- Teaching Partners which will support all students. By having so much consistent access to one another, they will proactively create lessons that support all levels of learners, rather than reacting to a lesson they may not have planned together. This in turn will improve student outcomes. Assistant Principals will oversee department meetings during these 4th and 7th period common planning to ensure that accountability and completion of the work products. In addition, a high leverage teacher will be selected to be a lead unit designer, working on Tuesdays after school to develop model units to support teachers in their department. What data will teachers and the School Instructional Cabinet regularly review to ensure that they are reflecting upon their teaching practices and meeting individual student learning needs? What is the intent for reviewing each piece of data? (ex. Teachers will regularly review student IEPs when developing lessons in order to ensure that tasks are appropriately scaffolded.) Data Reviewed Student Work Regents based data according to CCLS addressed. Intent Teachers will look at students’ work from daily standards aligned exit slips, and performance tasks to make adjustments to the curriculum. Inquiry teams will be formed by department to determine best practices for subject specific instruction. Assistant Principals will review data from previous regents exams to support student achievement and measure student progress. Mock Regents Data To assess student progress and make curricular revisions Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Renewal Benchmarks and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks. By June 2019, all core department teachers will collaboratively create unit plans in the UBD format, that supports relevant and standards-aligned performance tasks, resulting in 80% of core subject teachers receiving an average score of 2.8 for components 1a (Demonstrating Knowledge of Content and Pedagogy). Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Collaborative Teachers Annual Goal: Which Renewal and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Collaborative Teaching Annual Goal? 5 year graduation rate (including for ENL) Regents Completion Rate- 43.3% Rigorous Instruction Collaborative Instruction 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 54  2018-19 RSCEP-PF 55  Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) Daily Department Meetings focused on Curriculum, Pedagogy, Parent Engagement All IEP and ENL Students Credit Accumulation and Regents Pass Rates On going throughout the year Department Assistant Principals and Subject Area Teachers Daily Exit Slips, Performance Tasks, Uniform Credit Accumulation and Regents Pass Rates On going throughout the year Department Assistant Principals and Subject Area Teachers Daily Exit Slips, Performance Tasks, Uniform Assessments and Regents Exam results. Assessments and Regents Exam results. ICT and ENL Teachers integrated into common planning with departments All IEP and ENL Students 4b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Through the Parent Engagement meetings held on Friday, Teachers will update their Skedula gradebooks so that parents can see their child's progress. This will include a reflection of the performance tasks designed in collaboration by teachers. In addition, teachers will be providing binder organization that is supported in all classrooms. There will be a section with all student work returned with feedback. Parents will be advised to check these sections to see progress made over time. Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Use teachers to implement the mid-year assessment and use after school and Saturday school tutoring to prepare students. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 56  Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded X P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By Febuary 2019, department teachers and their ICT / ENL co- teaching partners will demonstrate in 3 rounds of observations an average score of 2.5 for components 1a, 2a, 3c. Will monitor: 1. 1st round of observations by department for 1a, 2a, 3c (Sept. - Oct.) 2. 2nd round of observations by department for 1a, 2a, 3c (Oct. - Nov.) 3. 3rd round of observations by department for 1a, 2a, 3c (Dec.- Jan) 4. 4th round of observations by department for 1a, 2a, 3c (Feb- Mar) 5. 5th round of observations by department for 1a, 2a, 3c (Apr- May) 6. Completed Curriculum/Unit Maps in UbD format 7. Professional Development Artifacts Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. SWD and ENL Scholarship Reports Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 57  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 2 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 2.2 The school leader ensures that the school community shares the Specific, Measurable, SOP(s) Addressed Ambitious, Results-oriented, and Timely (SMART) goals/mission and long-term vision inclusive of core values that address the priorities outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (RSCEP). Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital resources. 2.3 2.4 The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district's Annual Professional Performance Review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. 2.5 Leaders effectively use evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve critical individual and school-wide practices as defined in the RSCEP (student achievement, curriculum and teacher practices; leadership development; community/family engagement; and student social and emotional developmental health). NA X NA NA Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? Decisions: To support more effective communication, memos highlighting teaching and learning strengths from the week before and hopes for the current week, and highlighting key social -emotional development work from the week before and hopes for the current week should be continued to be emailed to all teachers, distributed in all staff mailboxes, and be referenced during the Tuesday common planning meeting facilitated by the assistant principals. All the resource, programmatic, human, and fiscal capital are organized strategically: Programmatically: All students will have a program of their choice in one of the four pathways. The new programming will have more ICT classes that increases the exposure of more SWD students to a least restrictive environment. The current SLC structure is going to be changed into the Pathway structure that provide students and teachers the ownership and choice of what they like to do every day. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 58  Students will be programmed in sections of the building based on grade level. The 1st floor will house the 11th and 12th grade, while the 2nd floor will house the 9th, 10th, and Macy Honors Program. Students will still travel to other areas for gym, lunch, or elective courses. A new bell schedule allows students to still experience 9 periods, but from 8:15 am to 3:17 pm on Monday, Tuesday, Thursday, Friday. On Wednesday students will only have periods 1-8 and end their school day at 2:25 pm. This allows the teachers to have extended professional development. In addition, 9th period will be longer during Monday, Tuesday, Thursday, Friday. Human: There are now more courses for Project Lead the Way, which offers all students who take these courses the chance to receive college credit from over 30 universities nationwide. These courses also count as college college readiness courses. This year the school will have the full 4 year sequence for Biomedical Sciences and Engineering. Computer Science Essentials will also be in place and begin building a 4 year course sequence. All these courses sequences will be applying for CTE (Career and Technical Education) certification which will provide our students with increased recognition for their courses. Fiscal Capital: Capital is planning to be invested in structural upgrading such as revamping the classrooms to lab com classrooms and the existing laboratories to pathway classrooms. Part 2 – Summative Vision for Effective School Leadership What is your vision for effective school leadership at your school? ● How will school leader articulate a shared vision and mission to the entire school community? Weekly recap Cabinet Meetings with APs on Monday, Wednesday, and Friday period 5 & 6 Meeting with students to choose Pathways Meeting with parents on last Thursday of each month during PA meetings SLT team ● What kind of evidence based systems would a school leader put in place to ensure that the school and individuals continues to improve? What kind of supports? Who would he/she collaborate with? What would those collaborations look like?  Norming with tDEC  Norming with AP’s  PD Committee 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 59   Accreditation Committee  Targeted PD on student engagement and questioning techniques based on Danielson 3b and 3c evaluations  Targeted PD based on Problem of Practice  Department Daily Common Planning  Weekly Deparment PD  Weekly Attendance Meeting ● How would the leader organize student and teacher programs to ensure students’ needs are met? Fiscal capital? School Principal developed a 4 year course seqence for each pathway major, in addition to a 4 year sequence for all subjects leading to graduation. This 4 year sequence outlines the needs of students for each major in all required subject areas: Macy Honors Early College Pathway Major Student Program 9th- 12th Grade 1. Math 1. Science Macy 9th Macy 10th Macy 11th Macy 12th Algebra Honors or Geometry Honors or Algebra 2/ Trig & AP Calculus Algebra 1 Biology Honors or Living Env. Geo 1/2 Earth Science or Precalculus Chemistry Honors or AP Biology AP Chemistry Chemistry 1. History AP World History or AP World History or AP U.S. History or US Government/ Econ or Global 1 Global 3/4 History AP Econ 1. English English 1 Honors or English 3 Honors or AP Eng Language or AP Literature or English 1. Gym 1. Lunch English 1 PE/ Arts English 3 PE/ Arts English 5 PE/ Health Lunch Lunch Lunch 7 PE/ Arts Lunch 7- Foreign Language 8- Arts Pathway Course 9- PLTW Pathway Course Spanish year 1 Figure Studies or Instrumental Principles of Biomed or Engineering Spanish year 2 Sculpture or Instrumental Spanish year 3 AP Spanish Painting or Marching Studio Art or Marching Band Band Human Body Systems Medical Interventions or or Robotics year 1 Robotics year 2 Biomedical Innovations or Robotics Competition Health/ Piano Monroe College Lehman College Sociology Fall/ Philosophy Spring GE College Now Career Readiness Global History Creative Writing Algebra Teacher’s Writing Teacher’s Assistant Teacher’s Assistant Assistant 9- College Now Alternative Pathway Course 9- Academic Support Alternative Pathway Course 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 60  Clinton Health Professions Pathway Major Student Program 9th- 12th Grade 1. Math 1. Science 1. History 1. English 1. GYM 1. Lunch Health 9th Health 10th Health 11th Health 12th Algebra Geometry Algebra 2/ Trig or Precalculus Precalculus or AP Calculus or Arts Earth Science Living Environment Chemistry AP Biology or Arts Global year 1 Global Year 2 English year 1 English year 2 US History or AP U.S. History English year 3 or AP Eng. Language Government & Economics English year 4 or AP Eng. Literature PE Lunch PE PE/ Health PE Lunch Lunch Lunch 7- Pathway Course PLTW Principles of Biomedical Science PLTW Human Body Systems PLTW Medical Interventions PLTW Biomedical Innovations 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 61  8- Elective Period Saga Algebra Creative Writing or Spanish year 1 Rebels & Reactionaries College Readiness Or EMT Year 1 or Spanish year 2 EMT Year 1 Or EMT Certification Year 2 Or Spanish year 3 EMT Certification Year 2 9- Elective Period Or ENL Stand Alone Monroe College Elective Or Lehman College Now Elective Or Or ENL Stand Alone ENL Stand Alone ENL Stand Alone 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 62  The Clinton School of Engineering Pathway Major Student Program 9th- 12th Grade 1. Math Engineering 9th Engineering 10th Engineering 11th Engineering 12th Algebra Geometry Algebra 2/ Trig Precalculus or Arts 1. Science Living Environment Conceptual Physics Regents Physics Or Earth Science US History AP Computer Science 1. History 1. English 1. Gym 1. Lunch Global year 1 Global Year 2 Or Government & Economics AP US History English year 3 English year 4 English year 1 English year 2 or or AP Eng. Language AP Eng. Literature PE PE PE/ Health Lunch Lunch Lunch PE Lunch 7- Pathway Course PLTW Intro to Engineering PLTW Digital Electronics/ Robotics 1 PLTW Principles of Computer Science/ Robotics 2 PLTW Engineering Design/ Robotics Competition Aerospace 1 or Aerospace 2 8- Elective Course SAGA Algebra Creative Writing Elective or Spanish year 3 Or Spanish year 2 College Readiness Spanish year 1 Rebels & Reactionaries Lehman College Now Elective Required Arts 9- Elective Course Or Or Or ENL Stand Alone 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 63  Monroe College Elective ENL Stand Alone Or ENL Stand Alone 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 64  Vocal Pathway Major Student Program 9th- 12th Grade Art & Design 9th Art & Design 10th Art & Design 11th Art & Design 12th 1. Math 1. Science 1. History 1. English 1. Gym 1. Lunch Algebra Geometry Algebra 2/ Trig Precalculus or Elective Living Environment Earth Science Chemistry AP Biology or Elective Global year 1 Global Year 2 English year 1 English year 2 US History or AP U.S. History English year 3 Government & Economics English year 4 or AP Eng. Language or AP Eng. Literature PE/ Keyboard PE/ Keyboard PE/ Recital PE/ Recital Lunch Lunch Lunch Lunch 7- Pathway Course 8- Elective Course Intro Vocal Saga Algebra Intermediate Vocal Performance Choir Spanish year 1 Rebels & Reactionaries Creative Writing Spanish year 2 Performance Choir Spanish year 3 College Readiness Or or 9- Elective Course Or Monroe College Elective Lehman College Now Elective Health ENL Stand Alone Or Or ENL Stand Alone ENL Stand Alone Fine Arts Pathway Major Student Program 9th- 12th Grade 1. Math 1. Science 1. History Art & Design 9th Art & Design 10th Art & Design 11th Art & Design 12th Algebra Geometry Algebra 2/ Trig Precalculus or Elective Living Environment Earth Science Chemistry AP Biology or Elective Global year 1 Global Year 2 US History or AP U.S. History Government & Economics 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 65  1. English 1. Gym 1. Lunch English year 1 English year 2 English year 3 English year 4 or AP Eng. Language or AP Eng. Literature PE/ Figure Studies PE/ Sculpture PE/ Painting PE/ Studio Art Lunch Lunch Lunch Lunch 7- Pathway Course 8- Elective Course Figure Studies Saga Algebra Sculpture Spanish year 1 Rebels & Reactionaries College Readiness Or Studio Art Spanish year 3 Painting Spanish year 2 Creative Writing or 9- Elective Course Or Monroe College Elective Lehman College Now Elective Health ENL Stand Alone Or Or ENL Stand Alone ENL Stand Alone Instrumental Pathway Major Student Program 9th- 12th Grade 1. Math 1. Science 1. History 1. English 1. Gym 1. Lunch Art & Design 9th Art & Design 10th Art & Design 11th Art & Design 12th Algebra Geometry Algebra 2/ Trig Precalculus or Elective Living Environment Earth Science Chemistry AP Biology or Elective Global year 1 Global Year 2 English year 1 English year 2 US History or AP U.S. History English year 3 Government & Economics English year 4 or AP Eng. Language or AP Eng. Literature PE/ Keyboard PE/ Keyboard PE/ Recital PE/ Recital Lunch Lunch Lunch Lunch 7- Pathway Course 8- Elective Course Intro Instrumental Saga Algebra College Readiness Intermediate Instrumental Spanish year 1 Instrumental Performance Spanish year 2 Marching Band Spanish year 3 Rebels & Reactionaries Creative Writing 9- Elective Course Or Or or ENL Stand Alone Health 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 66  Monroe College Elective Lehman College Now Elective Or Or ENL Stand Alone ENL Stand Alone Guidance Counselors and Programmer will utilize this to help support students in accumulating required credits for college. Student programs are organized and reviewed to ensure students are on track for graduation and to ensure that their IEP mandates are implemented. Teacher programs are organized to meet the needs of the student population. Teacher programs reflect common planning time for ICT and ENL push in teachers. ● What approach would the school leader have to conducting observations? How would he/she ensure that teachers are provided accurate, timely, and actionable feedback coupled with the support to implement the feedback? Assistant principals are required to have regular norming visits to classrooms with the principal and TDEC for calibration purposes. Low inference notes are compared for accuracy and omissions. Each of the subcomponents are rated individually for each of the components and take the preponderance of evidence for a final rating of that component. Teachers will be allowed to go through the low inference notes before the Post Observation conferences and allowed to input their suggestions and concerns. Feedback is given as next steps for each of the developing and ineffective components and an overall suggestion is given as the high leverage feedback. The Principal and Assistant Principals will develop an observation calendar that takes into account teacher ratings and uses the observation/feedback cycle as a tool for teacher improvement. The principal will continue to norm observations to help the APs better evaluate their teachers and identify areas of teacher growth. ● How will the school support a shared accountability? What systems will be developed to share academic, behavior, Social Emotional Learning (SEL), and attendance data with partners so that strategies can be created and assessed to support growth? Each Academic department will infuse growth mindset and 7 habits of highly effective teens for all students. Teachers will develop stations and folder systems to help aid students who have been absent and need support getting back on track in class. There will be a make up work station that will identify this student's needs, in addition to others that help other student needs who have been present. In addition, they will utilize unit pre- and post assessments that will help students see how they grow in areas over the course of a unit. In addition, weekly attendance meetings will focus on developing scripts for speaking to families to develop positive outlook plans. Often parents are only called for negative things related to this child such as low attendance or performance. These scripts will be developed by GCs and SWs to partner with parents around using growth mindset language to support students back on track. They will place students on daily progress sheets to support students seeing their growth in performance and reinforce it verbally. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 67  ● What and how will the leader delegate to assistant principals and the community school director? The Principal and Assistant Principals will develop parent engagement meeting norms so that families will receive emails and updates via pupil path around attendance and performance. On which aspects of your own leadership do you plan to focus for the upcoming school year? Communication- It seems that not every teacher/staff member reads the weekly recap on a regular basis. Developing ways to reinforce the messages I deliver throughout the year is an area of focus for the upcoming year. We are providing a pared down weekly memo that will communicate the weekly instructional focus or push. What is your vision for ensuring that everyone in your schools has a normed and shared understanding of the school’s vision, mission, and instructional focus? Using the State of the School Address in September to set the tone and identify clear expectations for the APs and teachers. Use the Weekly Recap to provide information and feedback on what I see in the school and in the classrooms. What is your vision for developing differentiated leadership throughout your school? How will you utilize teacher leaders to build broad capacity within your school? Develop Teacher teams that collaborate with Assistant Principals in departments. These teams will consist of content teachers, ENL, and IEP Teachers. They will work together to develop structures for curriculum mapping, common assessment, and differentiation. Their voice will determine the adaptations made for adult learning in the building. How will the leader foster collaborative school governance processes, and ensure full family participation together with other stakeholders? In addition to the school leadership team, Good Shepherd Services provides support groups with parents as well as focus groups that provide valuable feedback. We have a Community Team which meets on a monthly basis and helps develop plans for engaging parents and students. This committee includes parents, students, staff and GSS personnel. How often will the school leader conduct observations? How quickly will school leader share actionable feedback with teachers? How will school leader ensure accuracy and provide support to teachers based on observation feedback? Frequency Feedback Turnaround Accuracy Weekly within a week Will be based on DanielsonAlignment and normed with leadership cabinet. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 68  What kind of evidence based systems would a school leader put in place to ensure that the school and individuals continues to improve? What kind of supports? Who would he/she collaborate with? Evidence-Based System Support(s) Collaborator(s) Advance Reports Feedback and next steps from observations APs and Teachers How will you organize student and teacher programs to ensure students’ needs are met? Fiscal capital? Using the New Visions Student Sorter, the GCs and I will identify students with credit gaps or not properly programmed. Individual student interviews. Using fair student funding, we bring in guidance counselors and programmers over the summer to ensure programming examines transcripts for student needs. Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Renewal Benchmarks and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks. By June 2019, all core department teachers and their ENL or ICT co- teacher will be supported by administration in a focused inquiry process for writing across the curriculum, resulting in student portfolios with performance based assessments that demonstrate student growth through self-monitoring and teacher feedback of actionable next steps for growth resulting in a 3% growth on ELA and Math Regents exams. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Effective School Leadership Annual Goal: Which Renewal and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Effective School Leadership Annual Goal? List of Renewal Benchmarks expected to improve English Regents Percent Passed by Year 3- 46% Framework: Collaborative teacher- 2.40 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 69  Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) State of the School Address All Staff Framework: Collaborative Teacher Weekly Recap All Staff Framework: Collaborative Teacher Principal Principal September, January and June Weekly throughout the year Communicate Clear Expectations All Staff English Regents Percent Passed by 46% Throughout the year Principal/APs How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) Scholarship Reports every marking period Scholarship Reports every marking period Regents Pass rate January and June 4b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will be invited to the classrooms during curriculum night on September 26, 2018 from 5:30 pm- 7:30 pm. During this visit they will go to their child's classes and hear from their teachers about what they will be learning in curriculum. They will share their contacts via pupil path and show how they can see student work in their binders. The school hopes to have google classroom in place for the Spring Semester. At this point they will share with families how they can access student portfolios and digital notebooks via google classroom. Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. We will monitor the Regents results in January to ensure that we are making or exceeding the goal. We should meet the goal in January as well. Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 21st Century X C4E School Achievement Funding Other 70  Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By February 2019, the average teacher rating after 3 rounds of observations for 1e will be 2.5. Monitor: 1. Examine student work (TIED Paragraphs & Performance Tasks) by department (Sept. - Oct.) 2. Scholarship Reports for ENL and ICT Students in 10th grade algebra and 11th grade ELA (Oct. - Nov.) 3. Examine student work (TIED Paragraphs & Performance Tasks) by department (Dec.- Jan) 4. Scholarship Reports for ENL and ICT Students in 10th grade algebra and 11th grade ELA (Feb- Mar) 5. Examine student work (TIED Paragraphs & Performance Tasks) by department (Apr- May) Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Regents Exam Report Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 71  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 6 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 6.2 The school leader ensures that regular communication with students and families fosters their high expectations for student academic achievement. 6.3 The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders so that student strength and needs are identified and used to augment learning. 6.4 The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to support student success. 6.5 The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school community members centered on student learning and success and encourages and empowers families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their children. X NA NA NA Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: SOP(s) Addressed 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? 6.2- School leaders and staff consistently communicate expectations for college and career readiness and provide support to students and families through strong attendance outreach, a personalized environment where all students are known and the Good Shepherd Services Student Success Center as evidenced in the Quality Review Report 2016-17. Sports and Arts, CBO, provides extended day tutoring during the school year as well as a summer bridge program for incoming 9th graders. With regards to College and Career Readiness Sports and Arts supports a cohort of students and their families in understanding the college and university access and choices, the researching and application process and through the decision making and funding process. Sports and Arts continues to work with the students during their years in college and works with the families to ensure that support and guidance is available while the student is away. Good Shepherd Services social workers push into 9th grade advisory classes to provide social emotional workshops. The school provides a personalized environment for all students and their families through the SLCs. All students are known by at least one adult in the school. The school has a strong attendance outreach; phone calls are made daily to families of absent students by school personnel. Parents who sign up to CASS receive daily text messages informing them if and at what time their child arrives to school. Next year grade level advisors, and guidance counselors together with Good Shepherd Services personnel will monitor students’ academic and social-emotional needs and progress. The guidance counselors will follow up with students who receive an unsatisfactory report. They will help students define and develop realistic educational plans and monitor their progress toward their educational goals. Good Shepherd Services will continue to run support groups and facilitates interventions on an as needed basis. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 72  Needs: IIT Review states: In order to support parent and student engagement on student learning, all teachers will enter grades into the pupil path portal every two weeks. Teachers and the guidance team are encouraged to collaborate and support each other to ensure timely updates of grades and include anecdotal updates detailing positive aspects of students’ academic and social- emotional development. The biggest need is to help families and students feel more connected to the school. We will increase the number of teachers using Skedula and the number of families using PupilPath (an extension of Skedula) as a means for communication. Currently 37 of 97 teachers use Skedula and 318 or 25% of families have signed up for PupilPath. Our need remains to have families universally connected to this network. Good Shepherd Services will do home visits and help families connect to PupilPath. We feel that when students feel connected their attendance improves and leads to credit accumulation and ultimately graduation. Every three weeks parents will receive communications via PupilPath, mail and email and adobe connect regarding their child’s academic progress. (At the end of the third week of the marking period they’ll receive a progress report and a report card at the end of the six week marking period.) Part 2 – Summative Vision for Strong Family and Community Ties What is your vision for having strong family and community ties at your school? How does the school provide support to families so that they understand and can take an active role in what their child is learning? As evidenced in the Quality Review Report 2016-17 Good Shepherd Services Student Success Center (SSC), organizes in conjunction with Sports and Arts a community-based organization, and the parent association conduct workshops for parents on the college search, application, and financial aid process, including how to interpret the financial aid award letters. The Good Shepherd Services Student Success Center conducts college fairs which provides students and their families with the opportunity to speak to representatives of numerous colleges. Sports and Arts in conjunction with the alumni association sponsored a career day where students had the opportunity to hear from recent DWCHS graduates about college and career. The school will continue to send out mailings in multiple languages. Translation services will be made available to parents for all school events. We offer ESL classes and Rosetta Stone computer classes in English and Spanish to parents during the week. Since we have made Rosetta Stone available attendance has improved in the parent ESL classes. In addition, Good Shepherd Services offers monthly support groups for parents on various topics such as social emotional support, transcript literacy and how to navigate the DOE to better help their children. These support groups provide GSS with insight on how to best support the student and the family as a whole. How would the school engage the community and families? How would they ensure that teachers are able to learn from families about the children being taught? 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 73  Families will be engaged through teacher weekly outreach, Freshman Orientation, Parent Association meetings, Curriculum nights and Parent Teacher conferences. Additionally, guidance counselors, grade advisors, and teachers will inform parents about what their child needs to pass classes and ultimately graduate through phone calls, one-on-one conferences, PupilPath, and or emails. The school will be purchasing Adobe Connect, a software which will allow parents to participate remotely to Parent Association meetings and other school events. The school is a resource center for parents as well as the community and provides services according to their needs. Good Shepherd Services social workers engage parents at community service events i.e. immigration clinics, vision testing and at our campus food pantry. Outreach will continue to be done on an ongoing basis through school personnel, School Phone Messenger, Parent Association meetings and events like the Unity in the Community Day. In addition, parents will be provided with on going information about their child’s academic success through PupilPath. How do families partner with the school and CBO to support student success? Will there be dedicated space for families? As mentioned above, the school has a designated Welcome Center (room 103), where parents are welcomed at all times. In addition, the Guidance Counselors and grade advisors provide support to the family by meeting with the child and the family a few times a year. Good Shepherd Services licensed social workers provide social and emotional support to the student and the parent as necessary. The social workers connect families to resources outside the school, which may be more convenient for the family. In addition the Student Success Center, Sports and Arts and SAGA provide academic support in math and college success transition. What adult education offerings can your school community provide to families? The school will continue to offer ESL and Computer classes for the parents in the evenings. We will also continue to provide parents with access to Rosetta Stone. Sports and arts provides Financial Literacy Seminars for parents and students which allows parents to better understand the process of financing higher education opportunities for their students CUNY and FAFSA Saturday information sessions to assist parents and students support in completing these applications. How would families be able to access and understand student data and progress? The school has an active website where parents can view which explain graduation requirements, the college and financial aid application process and much more. The school will continue to provide workshops and training throughout the year on these and other topics of interest to parents. In addition, parents are encouraged to participate in PupilPath to monitor student progress. In order to support the transition of our incoming 9th grade families from middle school, we will provide training for families around PupilPath, course selection, graduation requirements and college readiness. Within the Community School model, how will families be welcomed into the school and made a part of the school community? What support will administrators, teachers, school staff and school safety officers be given to help create a welcoming environment? Will there be a dedicated space for families in the school? 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 74  Parents are greeted warmly by school safety and personally escorted to their destination. If they are required to wait, they are taken to the Welcome Center (room 103). The Welcome Center is equipped with laptops and Ipads, and information about the school. The Parent Coordinator and the Parent Association President are available to answer questions and to be of assistance to the parents. Thirty percent of the school staff is bilingual Spanish-English. School staff is made aware that language access services are available as needed for non-English speaking families. Sensitivity training and support will continue to be provided by GSS staff. The LYFE program has a nursery on the first floor (room 114) for our students who need child care during the school day. Good Shepherd Services has meeting and conferencing space next to the student cafeteria for students and their families. Families are invited to attend monthly Parent Association meetings, one on one meetings, Curriculum nights and Parent Teacher conferences in order to stay inform regarding their child’s progress toward graduation. The school will use Web Connect, a software to allow parents to participate to certain events (PA meetings and workshops) remotely. The school will continue to be a resource center for parents as well as the community and provide services according to their needs. Outreach will continue to be done on an ongoing basis through phone calls, mail, phone messenger, PupilPath, and e-mails regarding attendance, student’s academic progress and school events. The School Safety staff has been given training by the Climate and Culture team. The Level 3 meets with the AP of Climate and Culture on a daily basis. These meetings are a check in, as well as a place to gather information about any safety related issues at the school. The school leader has a constant message of respect and de-escalation. School safety knows that the principal is involved and wants to be kept informed of all school happenings. How will the school identify and develop families to take leadership roles in school decision making/school governance structures? The Community School Director and Parent Coordinator will continue to recruit parents to participate in the Parent Association meetings and the School Leadership Team, and city wide family engagement conferences. Additionally the Community School Director will continue to train “Parent Ambassadors” to assist with parent outreach and in the roles and responsibilities of governing parents. Parent Ambassadors will continue to serve a resource to other parents. Our CBOs, Good Shepherd Services and Sports and Arts, work closely with the Parent Coordinator on initiatives involving parents and families and provide support to parents. Sports and Arts has an advisory committee of select parents that assists in policy decision and program design and implementation. This allows parents to have a stake in what the year long provides for students in the school community. How will the school engage the community and families? How will they ensure that teachers are able to learn from families about the children being taught? Parents will have the opportunity to share information about their children during Freshmen Orientation, Curriculum night, parent-teacher conferences, Parent Association meetings, one to one conferences with counselors, Good Shepherd Services staff, and/or administrators, and teacher personal phone calls during the Parent Outreach time. The attendance office and Good Shepherd Services staff will also provide outreach to families regarding students’ attendance, academics and social emotional concerns. The school will be a resource center for parents as well as the community and provide services according to their needs. Through mailings, the school website, and Phone Messenger families will be kept apprised of important dates and events like the Parent Association meetings, workshops, curriculum night, parent teacher conferences and Annual Unity in the Community Day. Unity in the Community is a 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 75  forum designed to facilitate round table discussions around core components such as; school culture, attendance, family involvement, school needs etc. Good Shepherd Services will continue to conduct surveys several times during the year to determine students and parents social emotional needs, careers of interest, and workshops of interest, to name a few. What types of supports does the school provide to families to encourage them to take an active role in what their child is learning? Type of Support Rationale The DWCHS website provides information to parents and students about the Small Learning Communities, Academics, calendar of events, letters and voicemails, athletics and media. It also includes videos on how to read transcripts, report cards, and how to use the Parent Portal. We offer services for parents in the Welcome Room. We have laptops available with internet access for parents to use. We will continue to assist them in creating email account, registering to PupilPath and CASS and in navigating the web. It is our hope that this will develop a dialogue between parents and teachers as to what may or may not be working for their child. To empower parents to take a more active role in their children’s education and in their community. To better communicate with their children and their teachers and for self development. Through Good Shepherd Services we will provide community services and resources to parents and students (i.e. immigration clinics, Food Pantry and vision testing). To help parents connect with resources to eliminate the student's’ obstacles that create roadblocks to completing school. GSS will continue to offer monthly support groups for parents on various topics such as social emotional support, transcript literacy and how to navigate the DOE. To help parents better deal with social emotional issues and take a more active role in their children’s education and well being while empowering them to become advocates for their children. How do families partner with the school and CBO to support student success? Will there be dedicated space for families? Family partnerships with school: The LYFE program offers child care for the children of our student moms so they can attend school. The Montefiore clinic provides dental, medical and mental health services for students during the school day so they don’t have to miss a day of school and their parents do not need to miss a day of work for routine care. Sports and Arts provides tutoring, counseling, college readiness, opportunities to participate in a diverse activities and field trips to sports events, visit college campuses, and facilitates scholarships for students. Good Shepherd Services provides counseling for students and families, social emotional and economic support, referrals to outside agencies, tutoring, workshops and support groups for students and parents. The Good Shepherd Services has licensed social workers assigned to each SLC. These social workers provide social and emotional support to students and parents as necessary. The social workers can also connect families to additional resources outside the school, which may be more convenient for the family. Family partnerships with CBO: 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 76  The LYFE program provides our teen parents with social-emotional and academic support as well as support for graduation and post secondary education. The program also assists with transitioning the child from the LYFE program. They offer monthly group sessions for parents on health and social issues, such as reproductive health and domestic violence. Is there dedicated space for these partnerships? The school has a designated Parents Welcome Center, where parents are welcomed at all times (room 150). The LYFE Center is located in room 117. The Montefiore clinic is located in the second floor in room 262 Good Shepherd services is located in the basement in room B42-B44 Sports and Arts is located in room 201A Not signed in What is your vision for the role the school will take in providing access adult education classes within the community? We will establish linkages with community based organizations in the area and develop an annex in our building allowing our parents to take classes at our school or at local community colleges or libraries. Additionally, the school will offer classes and workshops based on community needs according to GSS surveys. What data and student progress feedback loops will be present at the school to ensure that families knowledgeable of their children’s scholastic success? The school has an active website which parents can access to read and understand a transcript, graduation requirements, college and financial aid application process and much more. In addition, the school will purchase Adobe Connect, to help parents participate at PArent association meetings and workshops remotely. The school will continue to provide workshops and training throughout the year on topics of interest to parents. We will make every effort to familiarize parents with PupilPath (Skedula) so they can better monitor their child’s progress. Additionally, counselors and grade advisors will help parents sign up to CAASS to get daily text messages notifying them if and when their child arrives to school. Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Renewal Benchmarks and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks. By June 2019, all families will receive progress reports via mail at each marking period midpoint, which teachers will reference during weekly parent engagement calls, resulting in 3% increase in ELA Regents results for ENL students and SWDs. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 77 Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Strong Family and Community Ties Annual Goal: Which Renewal and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Strong Family and Community Ties Annual Goal? List of Renewal Benchmarks expected to improve Progress to graduation year 2 and 3 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 78 How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) Monitor the connectivity of each call Attendance and MP passing rates Attendance and MP Passing Rates Attendance and MP Passing Rates and MP Passing Rates Attendance and MP Passing Rates History Teachers Assign Homework assignment for parents to register to pupil path Parents and students Guidance Parent Meetings - reviewing pupil path Parents and students Develop Orientation for 9th Graders and Engage Families in Summer Parents and Students Guidance Meetings scheduled with 9th grade parents Curriculum Night September 26, 2018 Parents and Students Parents and Students Attendance Attendance Attendance Attendance Attendance Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment AP History, History Teachers 1st and 2nd Marking period Fall Semester All year round AP Guidance and Guidance Counselors July - December Principal, Guidance, Good Shepherd September 26, 2018 Teachers, APs, Guidance, GSS Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Parents School Messenger voice mails- daily communications around absent messaged. Progress toward graduation year 2 and 3 Ongoing Parent coordinator, Principal and SLC team Guidance, Good Shepherd Attendance September - October 2018 Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. We will renew our pupil path accounts using FSF. Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA X P/F Set-aside 21st Century 2018-19 RSCEP-PF C4E 79  X Title I 1003(a) X Title III PTA Funded SIG Grant School Achievement Other Funding Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all families will receive progress reports via mail at each marking period midpoint, which teachers will reference during weekly parent engagement calls, resulting in Monitor: 1. 1. Summer Orientations (June- August)- Did 261 out of 308 incoming 9th grade families participate? 2. September 26 Parent Engagement Day- Did 261 out of 308 incoming 9th grade families participate? 3. October 25- 26 Parent Teacher Conferences- Did 261 out of 308 incoming 9th grade families participate? 4. Guidance Conferences called during Fall 2018 Semester 5. Guidance Conferences called during Spring 2018 Semester Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Attendance to parent meetings will increase over last year's numbers. Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 80  Section 6: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) Program Description Directions: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) activities are directly aligned to the elements of the Framework for Great Schools, Rigorous Instruction, Supportive Environments, and Strong Family and Community Ties. ELT provides enriching educational experiences that happen outside of the traditional school day and blend skill acquisition, relationship-building and fun to foster academic and social-emotional growth. Summer learning, afterschool programming, and extended-day ELT models, when well-implemented, play a critical role in supporting students in all grades and ensuring that they graduate from high school, college and career ready. SED requires that Priority schools offer a minimum of 200 additional student contact hours as Expanded Learning Time in addition to the current mandated length of 900 hours of instruction per year (25 hours per week) in grades K-6 and 990 hours of instruction per year (27.5 hours per week) in grades 7-12. Effective ELT models will blend school staff with community partners, and will provide a balanced curriculum that can include ELA, math, STEM, arts, physical activity, and leadership development. Complete the sections on this page to demonstrate how the school will meet these requirements. Part 1 – ELT Program Goal(s) Describe the summative goal(s) of the ELT program for the 2018-19 school year. Goals for ELT should align to the Renewal Benchmarks. How will the school will ensure that all students’ individual needs are served during the Renewal ELT and how the school’s vision for ELT will impact both academic achievement and social emotional growth? Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. The implementation of ELT provides students the opportunity to earn extra credit and reach our Renewal School Benchmark of 51.3% as highlighted in the Leading Indicator, “Student Progress – Year 2 and 3.” Part 2 – ELT Program Type Is the ELT program voluntary or compulsory? Voluntary X Compulsory Renewal ELT – Describe what accountability structures the school will employ to ensure participation of all students, including special populations, will participate fully in Renewal ELT. Additional ELT - If there is a voluntary ELT program in addition to the compulsory Renewal ELT, indicate how you will actively encourage the participation of all students, with the goal of serving at least 50% of students. Students all receive 8 periods of instruction. In addition, teachers provide various activities. Teachers who have 1-8 provide small group instruction for students during 9th period. This will be done as a pull out method to support students during 9th period. Teachers who have 2-9 provide tutoring, clubs, lab makeup during the immediate after class time from 3:20- 4:02. Part 3 – ELT Program Description Target Population: The ELT program for a Renewal School will be offered to all students in the school. Describe how the school will meet the following SED requirements for an ELT program: How will the school integrate academics, enrichment, and skill development through hands-on experiences that make learning relevant and engaging? How will CBO staff and the school’s teachers be integrated to provide a seamless learning day?  Offer a range of activities that capture student interest and strengthen student engagement in learning so as to promote higher attendance, reduces risk for retention or drop out, and increases the likelihood of graduation.  Actively address the unique learning needs and interests of all types of students, especially those who may benefit from approaches and experiences not offered in the traditional classroom setting.  What new content areas and opportunities will be offered to students? How will the school ensure all IEP and language mandates are met during ELT?  Contain components designed to improve student academic, social, and emotional outcomes, including opportunities for enrichment programs such as in music and art. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 81   Ensure instruction in any core academic subject offered in the program will be delivered under the supervision of a teacher who is NYS certified in that particular content area.  How will community educators receive professional development? Are there plans to provide joint PD to school faculty and community partner staff?  What content will be led by pedagogical staff and what content will be led by CBO partners?  How will the school best utilize CBO partners to impact student achievement?  How will effective outreach be conducted to families?  How will programming be made easily accessible to students and families in order to encourage participation? Students are divided into pathway majors: Macy Honors (liberal arts), Engineering, Health Professions, Art & Design. Each Pathway Major offers elective courses designed around its theme. Teachers of the Health Professions and Engineering course were trained at the University of Kentucky, Sinclair Community College, and Intellitek's forum to prepare to teach specialized courses in Principles of Biomedical Science, Human Body Systems, Engineering, and Robotics. The school maintains a Choral group Band, Orchestra, and digital recording studio. It is one of the few schools in NYC that publish a school newspaper. All instruction will be delivered by NYS certified teachers in their content area. GSS and SAGA tutors may work with small groups of students in close collaboration with a subject area teacher. Currently, GSS social workers attend weekly Attendance Improvement and Dropout Prevention Meetings along with SLC Coordinators and attendance teachers. These meetings will focus on an inquiry process for our students who are in danger of becoming chronically absent or already categorized as such. ELT time is included during the school day. Students are scheduled for a 9 period day using the additional ELT funding. As a results, all students have the ability to pick up an extra credit each semester, increasing their chances to earn an additional 2 credits a year. Part 4 – ELT Program Implementation and Oversight Part 4a. Who will implement the ELT program? Who will oversee the program? 1. Indicate the key personnel that will be responsible for implementing and overseeing the ELT program, including school-based staff and any high-quality community partners that will be involved. If applicable, describe the scope of involvement of all community partners and how the joint ELT program is structured. How will the school assess the impact of ELT on individual student achievement and social emotional development? 2. 3. All teachers will be programmed for a 1-8 or 2-9 schedule, to allow for all students to have a 1-9 schedule. The school will be able to monitor the progress and impact by looking at the scholarship report every marking period and seeing how many students are earning at least 5.5 credits every semester. Part 4b. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. The implementation of ELT will start day 1 and end at the end fo the school year. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 82  Part 5 – ELT Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the ELT program. The NYCDOE has provided the school with an ELT allocation which will be used for teachers who will teach the ELT assigned courses throughout the year. Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support the ELT Program. Note: If the program is funded by 21st Century Community Center Learning Funds, it must be offered in conjunction with a high quality, high capacity community partner. 21st Century Title I 1003(a) X Tax Levy X Title III Title I SWP PTA Funded Title I TA SIG Grant P/F Set-aside C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 6 – ELT Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound and aligned to the school’s Renewal Benchmarks We will monitor progress every marking period using the scholarship report. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Scholarship rates, regents pass rates, and credit accumulation Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 83  Section 7: Community School Description Directions: The Community School program is directly aligned to the Framework for Great Schools element – Strong Family and Community Ties. Part 1 – The Community School Program Goal(s) Indicate the summative goal(s) of the Community School program for the 2018-19 school year. Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Renewal Benchmarks and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks. By June 2018, Good Shepherd will have improved attendance from by 2% from previous school year. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Community School Program Annual Goal: Which Renewal and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Community School Program Annual Goal? List of Renewal Benchmarks expected to improve Student Progress - year 2 and 3 Attendance School Survey Safety Part 2 – Community School Program Description Part 2a. Identify the CBO partnerships that you will develop, their target student population(s), and scope of the services provided. As well as supporting schools’ supportive environment and attendance work, CBO’s should be helping to support your school’s instructional focus. CBO Partnership Target Population Good Shepherd Services All Scope of Service GSS is a leading youth and family development agency with more than 80 programs serving over 26,000 participants a year. GSS’ mission is to surround at-risk New York City youth and their families with a web of supports that promote a safe passage to self-2018-19 RSCEP-PF 84  sufficiency. Building on its relationship with DWCHS, and extensive experience providing services to the student population, under the CS model, GSS will provide student-centered, personalized services to students and families, grounded in a youth and family development (YFD) framework. This strength-based YFD approach builds on students’ and families’ existing competencies, while recognizing the importance of meeting their developmental needs. We will partner with GSS to provide individual and group counseling to high-risk students; student and family outreach to engage them to use the services 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 85  available in the school and community; peer leadership to target youth through soft skills and social emotional training, group work, and service learning; and Extended Learning Time activities based on the needs of the student population. College visits, scholarship rates Sports and Arts All Part 2b. Describe how the school will meet the NYCDOE requirements for a Community School in the School Renewal program. 1. Renewal Schools are expected to partner with a community-based partner organization (CBO) and together with members of the School Leadership Team, hire a Community School Director. The Director will lead implementation of the asset and needs assessment process, and other critically important coordinating activities. Indicate how you will leverage this aspect of the work. Renewal Schools are expected to personalize the needs of all students, through strategic programming and services, as determined by the asset and needs assessment, and must also offer Expanded Learning Time (ELT) and mental health programming. In completing this section, ensure that you think about how: (1) the right services are provided to the right students and families at the right time; and (2) how you will seamlessly coordinate services with instructional programming happening throughout and outside of the school day. Indicate how you will implement this work, and describe other programming you anticipate to be in place to strengthen this initiative. Renewal Schools are expected to emerge as Partnership Schools, which are places where parents and families feel welcome, actively participate in the conversation and decision-making around the renewal of their schools, and have many opportunities to advocate for their children. Monthly meetings and Community School Forums engaging families and community stakeholders will be a critical part of this family engagement strategy. Describe how you will implement this aspect of the work. Renewal School Principals are expected to meet on a weekly basis with their Community School Director, select Assistant Principals, key staff, and other CBOs, to analyze trends in data and case manage individual students. Data tools – including the New Visions Data Sorter - and training will be available for schools to use. Indicate how you will implement this aspect of the work. 2. 3. 4. Good Shepard Direct Services - GSS GSS is a leading youth and family development agency with more than 80 programs serving over 26,000 participants a year. GSS’ mission is to surround at-risk New York City youth and their families with a web of supports that promote a safe passage to self-sufficiency. Building on its relationship with DWCHS, and extensive experience providing services 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 86  to the student population, under the CS model, GSS will provide student-centered, personalized services to students and families, grounded in a youth and family development (YFD) framework. This strength-based YFD approach builds on students’ and families’ existing competencies, while recognizing the importance of meeting their developmental needs. We will partner with GSS to provide individual and group counseling to high-risk students; student and family outreach to engage them to use the services available in the school and community; peer leadership to target youth through soft skills and social emotional training, group work, and service learning; and Extended Learning Time activities based on the needs of the student population. The principal will meet with program director on a weekly basis. The Community School Tam meets once a month and the Principal meets with the APS on a weekly basis. Part 3 – Community School Program Implementation and Oversight Part 3a. Key Staff and Partners 1. Name and describe the scope of involvement of all community partners working in the school (include partners supporting ELT, counseling, enrichment, etc.) 2. Name the members of your Community School Team and how meetings will be organized and structured to engage all stakeholders and be focused on results. 3. Explain data strategies including the use of the data sorter, and steps that the school will take to ensure that the appropriate interventions are provided to the right students The GSS Resource Coordinator will be the central coordinator for CS services. She will work in partnership with the principal, NYC DOE staff, and partnering CBOs to assess current services and encourage students and parents to engage in the model; determine additional services that are needed and conduct outreach to potential service partners; and oversee GSS’ direct services. Partner communication will take place through summer planning sessions, weekly meetings during the summer and school year, monthly advisory council meetings that include at least one representative from each partnering organization (after year one, advisory council will meet every two months unless otherwise determined), and end of the year review sessions involving all participating partners. The GSS Resource Coordinator will report out to all constituencies during the Spring Legislative Breakfast. During these meetings best practices will be shared in addition to critical assessment of programming to ensure that supports align and target the school’s goals. Support Services As a large school, DeWitt Clinton HS is fortunate to have a wide range of support services in place that fit into the holistic CS service model. CBOs and other community partners, under the coordination of the GSS Resource Coordinator, will provide school day and after school support services, as outlined below: ● DOE Living for the Young Family through Education (LYFE) will provide free childcare and support services during the school day to help student parents stay on track to graduation. ● Pathways to Graduation (P2G) program helps young adults who are 18 – 21 years of age earn their high school equivalency diploma. ● Montefiore Hospital houses a full service program in the second floor of our building which provides the students with dental, medical and mental health services. The Montefiore Clinic and Hospital has been a partner with DWCHS for over 13 years and operates during school hours and during the summer. ● Project Bully Free Zone includes counseling sessions during the school day. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 87  ● Fuel Education learning – This online learning classroom operates from 10 AM to 4 PM when school is open. It is an alternative learning environment for under-credited students. ● Sports and Arts Foundation has partnered with DWCHS for the past 6 years, providing tutoring, regents exam preparation and college trips outside of regular school hours. ● Junior Reserve Officer’s Training Corps (JROTC) has two academic components, science and leadership and offers three or four year certificates towards college ROTC. Students enrolled in this program attend classes during the day, have tutoring after school, and go on ROTC related field trips. ● Middle School Leadership Academy in cooperation with the Office of Youth Development serves middle school students who are currently living in temporary housing at the school every Saturday, providing peer mentoring, academic and enrichment activities. ● Lehman College offers College Now courses, as well as a summer “Master’s Program” for honor students. These activities take place outside the scheduled school day. ● Bronx Community College offers college counseling and college visits. ● DWCHS Alumni Association sponsors scholarships, a leadership weekend for 20 students, and an annual Alumni Dinner where 20-30 students get to meet and converse with prominent alumni. ● Writing is Thinking through Strategic Inquiry (WITSI) is a high leverage writing strategies that close skill gaps which can be infused into curriculum across content areas. ● SAGA- 1:1 tutoring program for 230 incoming freshmen students), we will administer a baseline assessment to all incoming 9 th grade students. ● Identify the dates, room location and proctors to administer the assessments. Part 3b. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the Community School program. We will need to ensure that the CBO liaison meets regularly with the grade level attendance team in order to ensure all students are provided with the necessary supports. In addition, the SLCs must monitor attendance on a weekly basis to quickly respond to absences. Part 3c. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. GSS works with DWCHS throughout the calendar year. The anticipated start date is 7/1/2017, with an end date of 6/30/2018. Part 3d. Mental Health Work Plan Separate from this RSCEP, schools will complete a Mental Health Work Plan that will become an addendum to this document. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 88  Section 8: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) GMRT –Gates Mac Ginitie Rdg Tests. NYSITEL results. Incoming 8th grade ELA proficiency. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Fuel Education Small group instruction, one-to-one tutoring, blended learning Before school, after school, Saturday Academy, during the school day College Writing (Rewards Reading Program) Marking period and semester grades Creative Writing Mathematics Science Teacher/Counselors recommendation Incoming 8th grade Math proficiency Marking period and semester grades Teacher/Counselor recommendation Marking period and semester grades Teacher/Counselor recommendation, Incoming 8th grade Science performance Fuel Education SAGA Small group instruction, one-to-one tutoring, blended learning Before school, after school, Saturday Academy, during the school day ELT Program Small group instruction, one-to-one tutoring, blended learning Before school, after school, Saturday Academy, during the school day ThinkThrough Math Fuel Education Project Lead the Way Courses in - Principles of Biomed - Human Body Systems - Intro to Engineering 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 89  - Digital Electronics - Robotics - Environmental Sustainability Fuel Education Rebels and Reactionaries Elective This service will be determined based on student needs. Any of the strategies mentioned above may be used once the needs assessment is completed and a support strategy identified. Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Marking period and semester grades Teacher/Counselor recommendation Marking period and semester grades Teacher Recommendation GSS Recommendation SLC Coordinator/AP Recommendation Small group instruction, one-to-one tutoring, blended learning Before school, after school, Saturday Academy, during the school day Small group and one on one counseling Before school, after school, during the school day 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 90  Section 9: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) On the October 31, 2017 RATH report we identify 168 students in temporary housing. This includes Code A - awaiting foster care placement, Code D - doubled up, Code H - Hotel/Motel, Code S - Shelter, and Code T - Other Temporary Living Situation. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 91  On a regular basis, an updated RATH report will be given to each SLC Guidance Counselors to check the status of children in their respective caseload. In addition, the RATH report will go to our Community Based Organizations, Good Shepherd and Sports & Arts. Both CBOs provide omnibus counseling services in conjunction with the guidance counselors. If necessary referrals are made for medical, emotional, and other life altering situations. Each year we are mandated to provide up to $100 per child. With these funds we provide items that will enhance their educational and personal growth while they are living in a temporary situation. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). Not Applicable. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. Not Applicable. 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. Not Applicable. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 92  Section 10: Title I Program Information Directions:  All schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. In the past two years, over 16 new staff have been hired. To support these new staff which include staff new to the profession and new to the school, we conduct weekly Thursday New Staff Professional Development Workshops. These meetings are centered on teacher needs and providing hands on support for classroom management, unit planning, and lesson design. In addition, our PD plan is focused on helping staff define differentiation and developing stations based lesson planning that supports individualized student needs. Our goal is to improve MOTP in areas of 1e Designing Coherent Instruction and 3b Questioning and Discussion Techniques. This will set the groundwork for our teachers to develop the skills to begin creating a Google classrooms for the 2018-19 school year. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the strategies and activities for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, staff, and paraprofessionals that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). As a Renewal School, we are adopting a staggered schedule. PD will occur on Mondays, weekly, before and after school. This school-wide PD will continue to address Danielson 3c, Student Engagement, by working with teachers to "Make Thinking Visible" using multiple entry points. Five traditional professional periods are reallocated as follows: One period parent engagement, two periods Common Planning, two prep periods. This work will be grounded in further unpacking of the CCLS, looking at student work, creating and modifying unit and lesson plans, and creating rigorous tasks and assessments used to drive instruction. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 93  Assistant Principals will plan PD in cabinet meetings and with the Pedagogical Designers Team to facilitate for staff in departments on Mondays. The Assistant Principals will be responsible for following up with teachers in departments on the implementation of their recommendations to improve instruction. In this school year the focus will be on differentiating through stations based learning. Title I will be used to supplant teacher salary in support of this effort to increase the number of highly qualified teachers. Especially with the inception of Project Lead the Way in the school, we require teachers who are specially trained and open to learning. Title III LEP funding is used to supplant funds for AP of ENL Salary, which supports new ENL teachers on staff in becoming more effective. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. Not Applicable. 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). Not Applicable. Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/information, early intervention services, etc.). Not Applicable. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 94  Not Applicable. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds enables, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (RSCEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Title I Part A (Basic) Title I School Improvement 1003(a) Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funds Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Local $178,643 $1,081,788 $31,750 N/A $40,398 $12,763 $10,250,486 X x x X x X Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 95  conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I School Improvement 1003(a): To support implementation of school improvement activities identified through the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) reviews or a school review with district oversight and included in the DCIP/RSCEP.  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: To support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs.  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan.  Title I Priority and Focus School Parent Engagement Set-aside: Additional set-aside is to enable greater and  more meaningful parent participation in the education of their children. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process, including Title I 1003(g) SIG funds: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 96  Section 11: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. DeWitt Clinton High School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students DeWitt Clinton High School School will support parents and families of Title I students by:  providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology;  providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and  decision making in support of the education of their children; fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress;  providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments;  sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand;  providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 97  Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will:  actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact;  Title I Priority and Focus Schools and the parents of students served in the Title I program must jointly agree upon the use of these additional funds to support increased parent engagement/education to enable parents to effectively support their child’s learning.  engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills;  ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and  strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills;  maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home;   provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report;  host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions;  2018-19 RSCEP-PF 98    translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by:  holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference;  hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year;  encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; supporting or hosting Family Day events;   establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents;  encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers;  providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress;  developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress;  providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) DeWitt Clinton High School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards;  using academic learning time efficiently;    offering high quality instruction in all content areas;  providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 99  Support home-school relationships and improve communication by:     conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education;  providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact;   providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information;  ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff  ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents;  notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff  member; arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities;  planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents    creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents;   ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 100  advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; We, as parents, will support our children’s learning in the following ways: II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities  monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent;  ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games;     promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits;  encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child;   participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education;  communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested;   become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact;  participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child;   III. Student Responsibilities We, as students, will share the responsibility to improve our academic achievement and achieve the State’s high standards. Specifically we will:       attend school regularly and arrive on time; complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; show respect for myself, other people and property; try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; always try my best to learn. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 101 Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components: 1. 2. 3. The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers. Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. 1. 2. 3. 4. High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” 1. Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences. Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. 1. These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): K 6 1 7 2 8 3 9 4 10 5 11 12 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 102  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the · · · · · · rationale subgroups and grade levels of students to be served schedule and duration language of instruction # and types of certified teachers types of materials Begin description here: <!--{cke_protected}%3Cmeta%20charset%3D%22utf-8%22%20%2F%3E-->Total # of Teachers in this Program: 14 # of Certified ENL/Bilingual Teachers: 8 # of Content Area Teachers: 6 Overview: During the 2018-2019 SY, DeWitt Clinton High School will provide services for 220 ELLs and 130 FELLs, not including FELLs who have progressed beyond the mandated 2-year mark. Our NYSELAT data is as follows: 54 students tested at EN; 21 at EM; 40 at TR; 51 at EX; 29 at CO; 24 did not complete testing. During the 2017-2018 SY, 15 students were EN, 45 EM, 53 TR, 62 EX, and 52 did not complete testing. Compared to last year’s results, 69 (31%) students’ scores decreased, 75 (34%) students’ scored stayed the same, and 76 (35%) students’ scored improved. Rationale: Our primary focus area for this year is the English Regents, as illustrated by moving our EN and EM students at least one proficiency level by the June and preparing TR, EX, and FELLs for the meeting the college readiness score of 75 on the English Regents. We have targeted the EN and EM students because if we can increase their language acquisition, they will accrue credits and pass Regents exams as they progress toward graduation. We have targeted TR, EX, CO, and FELLs because we want to help students move past potential language plateauing and develop their academic literacy to meet the college readiness score on the Regents. In order to do this we will offer targeted Saturday tutoring to all students, by language proficiency level. The focus of these tutoring sessions for EN, EM, and TR students will be CCSS.ELA-LITERACY.W.11-12.1, writing an argumentative essay, and CCSS.ELA-LITERACY.RI.11-12.1, citing strong and thorough evidence. Students will be develop these skills through intensive practice, (This will be accomplished through) the use of teacher modeling, scaffolded writing materials (i.e.,graphic organizers and exemplars) and increasingly difficult texts. Students who are EX and CO (including FELLs) will focus on CCSS.ELA-LITERACY.RL.11-12.4, analyzing the impact of word choice, including determining the meaning of words in context, and CCSS.ELA-LITERACY.RI.11-12.6, analyzing how style and content contribute to the effect of a text. This will be accomplished through the use of teacher modeling, targeted strategies for critical reading and analysis, and increasingly difficult texts. Our secondary focus areas are (is) the Algebra, Living Environment, and US History Regents. In order for students to stay on pace (track) with the demands of these content-heavy courses (toward graduating), after-school tutoring will be offered twice a week in these areas. During this 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 103  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information time, students will review the content they have learned, but also learn and practice valuable language and study skills to ensure their long term success. Finally, we will focus on students’ overall language proficiency and comfort in all four modalities. During July of 2019, DeWitt Clinton HS would like to offer a summer class for EN, EM, and TR, students to practice their speaking, writing, reading, and listening skills in an experiential learning, project-based environment. This will enable students to move toward proficiency in a more sustained way, as well as impact their academic performance positively when they return to school in September. Subgroups and Grade Levels to be Served: Grade Level Proficiency Level # of Students 9 EN EM TR EX CO No data 10 EN 10 EM 5 TR 15 EX 11 CO 8 No Data 7 11 EN 15 EM 5 TR 8 EX 18 CO 14 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 104  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information No Data 3 12 EN 4 EM 2 TR 8 EX 9 CO 21 No data 2 Schedule and Duration: Saturday Tutoring: Saturday, 3 November 2018 – Saturday, 20 January 2019 Saturday, 6 April 2019 – Saturday, 15 June 2019 Saturday Tutoring will occur from 9:00 – 12:00 (20 days x 3 hours x per session rate = $2,700 per teacher) (2700 x 8 adults = $23,000) After-School Tutoring: Monday, 17 September 2018 – Friday, 14 June 2019 Department Day(s) Time(s) English (2 teachers) Tuesday/Friday 3:45 – 4:45 History (2 teachers) Monday 3:45 – 4:45 Mathematics (1 teacher) Wednesday 3:45 – 4:45 Science (1 teacher) Thursday 3:45 – 4:45 (5 hours a week x 6 teachers = 30 hours a week x per session rate = $1,350/week) Language of Instruction: English, with gradually released use of translanguaging support. Number and Types of Certified Teachers: 8 ENL Certified Teachers: Shneeka Center, Theodore Fawell, Patrick Lawlor, Erin McSpadden, Beth Karlin, Jonathan Shank, Michael Bailey. 1 Math Teacher: Richard Puentes. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 105  Speak slowly and clearly, modeling the language they want students to use and providing Design activities that foster the development of (include) note taking, studying Teach and regularly reinforce interdisciplinary skills Will provide students with structures that support students when they are practicing target Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information 1 Science Teacher: Sophia Suarez. 2 English Teachers: Patrick Lennon and Isabella Bartels. 2 Social Studies Teachers: Maseera Aibani and Mindy Krazmien. Types of Materials: Instructional materials will help students prepare for Regents exams in various disciplines by using different strategies to help ELLs acquire content through language acquisition. The materials will be adapted by content area teachers with help from ENL teachers. Teachers will: · samples of student work. · · skills and vocabulary (to talk about what they are learning). · techniques, vocabulary development, and student reflection and self-assessment strategies to help students self-assess. · Utilize an instructional approach that will help students connect new concepts with their prior knowledge and experiences. Such activities will include, but are not limited to, think-pair-share, quick writes, and anticipatory charts. · Students will also create drawings, videos, and games to demonstrate their understanding of text. Speak slowly and clearly, modeling the language they want students to use and providing samples of student work. Teach and regularly reinforce interdisciplinary skills Will provide students with structures that support students when they are practicing target skills and vocabulary (to talk about what they are learning). Design activities that foster the development of (include) note taking, studying techniques, vocabulary development, and student reflection and self-assessment strategies to help students self-assess. Utilize an instructional approach that will help students connect new concepts with their prior knowledge and experiences. Such activities will include, but are not limited to, think-pair-share, quick writes, and anticipatory charts. Integrate visuals in order to help students build conceptual understanding of content. Students will also create drawings, videos, and games to demonstrate their understanding of text. The materials used will be adapted from HMH Collections, New Visions LE, English, and Social Studies curricula, and Engage NY resources. Integrate visuals in order to help students build conceptual understanding of content. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. · · · · · Begin description here: <!--{cke_protected}%3Cmeta%20charset%3D%22utf-8%22%20%2F%3E-->Rationale: rationale teachers to receive training schedule and duration topics to be covered name of provider 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 106  Part C: Professional Development All teachers are teachers of ELLs. To this end, our school-wide professional development plan regarding ELLs includes all teachers and paraprofessionals. All teachers will engage in designing curricula with their content-area Assistant Principal; ENL teachers will also receive the assistance and feedback of Suzanne Pratt, director of Teacher Recruitment at Teachers College, Columbia University (TR@TC), and Rebecca Stanton, professor at TC and teacher at the Community Health Academy of the Heights (CHAH). In addition, our ELL teachers will participate in a PLC around Nonie Lesaux’s text Hallmarks of Advanced Literacy, attend professional develops sessions and cycles run by the FSC, and visit off-campus classrooms to discuss best practices and current research. ENL staff will turn-key applicable material at a full staff Professional Development as listed on our school Professional Development calendar. The ENL team will meet twice monthly to address department needs, run by the ENL liaison. This time will be used to solidify common practices across content areas, set goals for students, and measure progress toward student goals and graduation. The ENL liaison also meets weekly with administration to discuss departmental concerns and important deadlines. As ENL staff is integrated into all content departments to ensure best teacher practices, this evaluation and progress monitoring will continue in content specific classes as well. In addition to sharing methodology and research that ensure language development strategies are being implemented in their co-taught (and department-wide) classrooms, ELL teachers will provide appropriate data for all teachers to use to develop action plans based on student data and share student work to assess student progress and the effectiveness of implemented strategies. These conversations and this data will be used as the foundation for building common practices. Teachers to Receive Training: All teachers and paraprofessionals. Schedule and Duration/Topics to be Covered: School-wide professional developments will occur on Mondays (9/17, 9/24, 10/1, 10/15, 10/22, 10/29, 11/5, 11/19, 11/26, 12/3, 12/10, 12/17, 12/31, 1/7, 1/14, 1/28, 2/4, 2/11, 2/25, ¾, 3/11, 3/18, 3/25, 4/1, 4/8, 4/15, 4/22) and cover the topics: ELL Teaching Models, Differentiating Reading for ELLs, Differentiating Writing for ELLs, Engaging ELLs in Academic Discussions, Setting Goals for ELLs, Assessing ELLs: Goal Setting, and Assessing ELLs: Progress Monitoring. Name of Provider: Teachers College, Columbia University Anita Bushi, FSC ELL Support Claire Thomason, FSC English Coach Leadership Team at DWCHS Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. · · · · · rationale schedule and duration topics to be covered name of provider how parents will be notified of these activities 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 107  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Begin description here: <!--{cke_protected}%3Cmeta%20charset%3D%22utf-8%22%20%2F%3E-->Rationale: In order to build a stronger relationship between families and the school community, we will be offering six workshops throughout the school year, in addition to regularly scheduled parent-teacher conferences, so that parents can talk to teachers, guidance counselors, and assistant principals individually and in small groups about their child’s progress. Schedule and Duration: Parents will be invited to attend six workshops, one in October (evening), November (Saturday), one in January (morning), one in March (Saturday), May (evening), and one in June (afternoon). Each meeting will be at a different time to accommodate parents’ schedules. Parents will meet with ENL teachers to review their child’s NYSESLAT score and create a plan of progress for their child. These meetings will assist parents in providing their children with academic supports at home, as well as informing them of the supports we offer students and families. In addition to the formal discussion of NYSESLAT scores and graduation requirements, families will have the opportunity to meet with Guidance Counselors and ENL teachers to discuss their child’s progress in specific disciplines. Topics to be Covered: October 2018: NYSESLAT: What does it mean? Why does it matter? November 2018: FAFSA & the College Application Process January 2019: Fall Semester Showcase March 2019: College and Career Fair May 2019: Check-In on Language Acquisition Progress: NYSESLAT Lens June 2019: Spring Semester Showcase & Moving Up Ceremony Name of Provider: ENL Department, including AP, teachers, and guidance counselors Hispanic Federation Good Shepherd Services, College Advisory & Youth Leaders Parental Notification Method: Families will be notified via mail, Pupil Path, back packed letters, and phone calls. Light refreshments will be served. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) 1. 2. Purchased services Per session Per diem 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 108 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. 1. High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials 2. Must be supplemental. Additional curricula, instructional materials. Must be clearly listed. 3. 4. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 109  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 10 School Name Dewitt Clinton High School Borough Bronx School Number 440 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Pierre Orbe Coach N/A ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Patrick Lawlor Teacher/Subject Area Carmen Varela Teacher/Subject Area Bessy Martínez Related-Service Provider N/A Superintendent N/A Assistant Principal Preya Singh Coach N/A School Counselor Chris González Parent Florencia Ayala Parent Coordinator Inés Cariño Field Support Center Staff Member Anita Bushi Other (Name and Title) N/A C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 6 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 110  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 1260 Total number of ELLs 293 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 23.25% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 0 1 3 4 2 Lang. spanish Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 1 10 11 12 1 1 1 0 0 0 0 1 1 1 1 Tot # 4 0 0 0 0 0 4 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? The school uses NYSESLAT results, Modalities report from the NYSESLAT , NYSITELL scores for the newcomers, ELA regents scores as well as uniform classroom assessments (Pre-assessments, Interim assessments and post assessments) and Parental Option to guide instructional planning for ELLs. The data obtained from these assessments provides insights about our ELLs. In the fall 2017 we administered the NYSITELL to 100% of our current students. Sixty scored entering, 3 emerging, 1 transitioning, 5 expanding and 2 commanding. The NYSITELL scores have also allowed us to identify 5 SIFE students. The NYSESLAT 2017 scores results were as follows: 23 students scored entering, 44 emerging, 36 transitioning, 66 expanding and 9 commanding. The modalities reports indicated that our students are still struggling in reading and writing. The students always perform better in listening and speaking. Specific activities have been included into the daily lessons to help our ELLs become better 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 111 readers and writers such as text annotation, WITsi writing strategies, and discussion protocols to generate ideas for writing. Students are exposed to common core curriculum in the classroom in order to increase ELLs' ability to read and write with the support of academic and specific vocabulary words. The school-wide instructional focus has been revised focusing on open ended aims to increase student engagement and make their thinking visible. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Integrated team teaching for ENL/ ELA and ENL/content areas, common planning time for co teachers, ENL teachers meet with subject specific department AP's 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? We evaluate the success of our program by analyzing the data, the number of under credited students, and the number of ELLs in years 4 and 6 and 7. The identified area of need is writing, specifically, the argumentative writing skills that link to the ELA Regents. We incorporate ENL strategies and scaffolds into the language and content area courses to support our ELLs. We administer performance assessments in all class, targeting the skills that students need to improve. We review the item analysis report and implement strategies to help the students improve academically. We review the school data (on the January 2018, 12 ENL out of 85 students passed the ELA regents.) to see if the students improved in all regents, especially the ELA regents since many of our ELLs struggle with this exam. Moving forward, we are creating standards based pre assessments to drive our instruction and create purposeful groupings to target students' skills deficits.We are creating units that culminate in CCLS aligned performance assessments and creating lessons that target these standards. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? All content areas review scholarship and regents data to support students path to graduation. All content areas are designing unit plans that include pre- and post- assessment, which allows teachers to analyze data trends at the end of each unit. An item analysis of this data is used to modify instruction, re-teaching and reinforcing areas of weakness. The ENL team also looks specifically at Regents data to support students outside the classroom: they provide mentoring, one-one tutoring after school and during lunch. In the spring, Saturday tutoring will be available to further support these students. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] As a high school, this question does not apply us. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The ELA Regents, as well as NYSESLAT data reveal that most of the ELL students struggle in the reading and writing. Many of our ELLs have great resistance to writing. The students develop their skills in listening and writing faster than their reading and writing skills. The focus has been to use discussion protocols to generate ideas for writing, increase students ' literacy level. We have focused on text annotation,discussion protocols to generate ideas for writing and exposed them to common core curriculum. Performance tasks are administered at the end of each ELA unit. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Department meetings where teachers receive aggregated data and meet during common planning time to modify units and lessons. Data is disseminated to instructional AP's during cabinet and also disseminated to guidance counselors by the GC AP. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 112  Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. The students are programmed in accordance to the CR Part 154.2. Entering and Emerging students as per the NYSESLAT or NYSITELL (for newcomers) in the Freestanding ENL program are being programmed as follows: one unit or class of Stand-Alone ENL, one unit of study of integrated ENL/ELA according to their grade level and one to three integrated ENL content classes for math, social studies and science , Transitioning and Expanding ELL students are programmed for one unit of integrated ELA/ENL and and at least on unit of integrated ENL content area for math, social studies and or science. All Commanding students are programmed for one unit of integrated ENL/ELA. The integrated ENL courses are co-taught. b. TBE program. If applicable. This is not applicable as we do not offer bilingual courses. c. DL program. If applicable. This is not applicable because we do not have a DL program. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? The students are programmed according to their NYSESLAT scores. Students who are new to the DOE are administered the NYSITELL in order determine the English language proficiency levels. Entering students receive 3 units (540) minutes of ENL instruction, 1 unit of stand alone ENL, 1 unit of integrated ENL/ELA, and 1 unit of integrated ENL/content (science). Emerging receive 1 unit of stand alone, and 1 unit of integrated ELA/ENL, transitioning, expanding and commanding students get 1 unit of integrated ELA/ENL. Students whose parents opted for bilingual also receive 1 unit of native language Spanish and 1 or 2 units of bilingual content depending on their level, (Entering and emerging 2 units,transitioning and expanding 1 unit). 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Those students whose parents have chosen Spanish TBE, are placed in ENL classes depending on the NYSESLAT level and NYSITELL scores. The students are also placed in bilingual Math, and / or Social Studies classes according to their proficiency levels, Instruction is delivered bilingually. The teachers provide the instruction in English and Spanish to support the students (also depending on the language proficiency level of the students, the teachers will determine what language to use during instruction). Students receive glossaries in different languages to support their learning in the classroom not only in Spanish, but also in other languages. Classrooms are print rich, students are presented with content in both English and Spanish and English and another language when applicable, along with visual aids to support the different learning styles. We provide students with glossaries for content vocabulary. We use bilingual textbooks when appropriate and provide students with inquiry based laboratory experiences that supports content. We are shifting our teacher practice more towards student centered classrooms which will promote students acquisition of the language sooner. Teachers frequently set achievement goals with students and reflect upon them each marking period. Teachers chunk content and incorporate checks for 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 113  understanding frequently throughout the lesson. Depending on the language proficiency level of the students, teachers in the content area courses teach utilizing ENL strategies. Teachers use visuals, annotation strategies, and graphic organizers to address the needs of the students in the classroom. In many cases the textbooks are provided in Spanish for the Spanish speaking students. Those students who speak other languages are provided with content vocabulary glossaries to support their language and content progress. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Bilingual Spanish speaking students in the TBE Program, take the ELE Spanish Reading test each spring. This data provides us with insight as to the students' language information about how the students are doing academically in NLA. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status For the school year 2017-18 all ELL students will be served in accordance to the Part 154 mandates. All entering ELL students will be programmed as follow: one unit of ENL, one unit of integrated ENL/ELA (according to his/her grade level) taught by a ELA and an ENL teacher, one integrated content area class (Science) taught co-taught by a science and an ENL teacher for a total of 540 minutes. Emerging Students will receive one unit of ENL and one unit of integrated ELA/ENL. All other students (transitioning, expanding and commanding) will be programmed for one unit of integrated ELA/ENL. Our SIFE and Newcomers students are placed in our Newcomers classes. These classes have been created to better serve the needs of these students. In the classroom teachers strategize their lessons focusing on the following: -Intensive English language development instruction teaching social and academic language. -Concentration on essential knowledge and skills only. -We are in the process of revising once again the curriculum thematically organized connected to the CCLS -We teach the students study skills. -Rosetta Stone to increase language acquisition In all Departments teachers utilize informal and formal assessments to guide them with lesson preparation and differentiated activities. Vocabulary is incorporated into every lesson along with skill building techniques for writing and test taking. Teachers of ELLs, in all courses, use graphic organizers, dictionaries, visuals, sentence starters, exemplars, and modeling to support students. We also use a variety of grouping, using heterogeneous or homogeneous groups, as required by the activity in the classroom. ENL students with disabilities are served as per their IEP. Identified students attend State mandated ENL classes. The CCLS English/ENL curriculum is adapted to support overall learning and meet their diverse language needs. Visual and hands-on activities are regularly used by teachers to facilitate comprehension and ensure content retention. Students who test commanding as per the NYSESLAT continue receiving the support for two more years. They are also awarded testing accommodations. Our school invites our ELLs to fully participate in the programs that the school offers. Our ELLs are represented in all the pathways: engineering, performing arts, health professions, and AP classes. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 114  Students are provided with bilingual dictionaries and glossaries in ENL and content area classes. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? ELL-SWDs are given both language supports and academic/emotional supports, as dictated by their IEP. This may include: extended time, graphic organizers, visual aids, larger print, re-formatted documents, one-on-one tutoring, small group instruction, amended texts, revised texts, separate location, scaffolded writing and reading materials, and/or aural accommodations. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? ELL students with disabilities whose IEP recommends ENL or bilingual instruction are programmed according to their language levels and IEP recommendations. Instruction is modified to meet their learning needs. Identified ELL students attend state mandated ENL classes. Visuals, collaborative tasks, and hands-on activities are regularly used by teachers to facilitate students’ interaction, enhance comprehension, and to ensure content retention. Teachers provide multiple entry points to engage students in writing activities. Bilingual students are scheduled to attend a 45 minutes NLA Spanish class; the objective is to ensure NLA academic language development and literacy enhancement to enable students to transfer knowledge from L1 to L2. Alternate Placement bilingual paraprofessionals support classroom instruction and provide individualized assistance to students with IEP's. With regards to the students' schedules, the school makes the necessary modifications to make sure that all students are placed in the appropriate classes. When programming students, many factors are taken into consideration such as parental option, students' IEPs, etc. Entering and Emerging ELLs whose parents requested a bilingual program are programmed for a bilingual social studies and a bilingual math class in addition to their native language arts class. They will also be programmed for integrated ENL/ELA and ans integrated ENL science class. Transitioning and Expanding students in our bilingual program are programmed for one bilingual content class for math or social studies and integrated ENL. content area for science. Students whose parents opt for an ESL program are placed in integrated ENL/content area classes. Students who speak another language like Urdu, Bengali, Arabic, are placed in ENL classes and taught by an ENL and a content area specialist as per CR Part 154 . 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. DWCHS has a current student enrollment of 1260 students. We have 293 ELLS of which 45 are SWDs. We have 199 ELLs with 0-3 years of service, 25 with 4-5 years of service and 62 long term ELLs with 6-13 years of service, Of the 45 SWDs 5 have 5 years of service, 5 have 4-5 years of service and 34 are long term ELLs with 6-13 years of service. 32.89% of eligible ELL students passed the June 2017 ELA Regents. In the 2017-18 school year, we are creating regents based pre assessments and performance tasks in all content areas in order to expose students to regents tasks earlier in their schooling. Students will sit for the ELA regents in 10th grade giving them more opportunities for Mastery. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Full adoption of the HMH Common core curriculum in ELA/ENL Rewards AIS for struggling readers with a 3rd grade reading level 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 115  Continued implementation of the Engage NY Math Curriculum Daily opportunities for co-planning and/or department meetings Curriculum mapping co-plan lessons and assessments, including multiple entry points, school-wide formative and summative assessments Creation of pre-assessments, benchmarks, performance tasks that are all CCLS aligned in all content areas 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? NA 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. Our ENL students are integrated into all the pathways and clubs 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Student Support: In ENL we have Rosetta Stone for entering students to increase their English listening and speaking skills In ENL/ELA classes, the curriculum supports ELLs with audio readings and close reading passages and workbooks. In math, students have consumables in Spanish. Bilingual Dictionaries and glossaries are provided in various languages. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? In our TBE program, all the students are given the opportunity to have bilingual content area classes. The instructional approaches are aligned to the requirements stipulated as per CR Part 154. The students are provided with textbooks that are suitable for their level and needs. The bilingual teachers provide instruction in their native language as well as in English. The students are provided with bilingual glossaries and/or dictionaries in all content area classes. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. The ELLs are supported in every way possible. They are programmed as per the NYSESLAT scores/NYSITELL scores. They are given the choice / the parents are given the choice to select which program they want their children in: ESL/TBE. The materials provided in class are suitable for their grades and needs. They are exposed to the Common Core Standards, not only in their ENL classes, but also in their content area classes. These students are provided with glossaries and supporting materials. Translated materials are provided. Our ELLs/SWDs are provided with all the accommodations that they are entitled to receive, not only in class, but also during the administration of exams such as regents exams. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Schools are co-located in separate floors. We share the gym, auditorium, and library. We collaborate on after-school clubs, such as debate team and SAT Tutoring. Additionally, we inter-visit to build best practices across campus. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Our school invites our ENLs to fully participate in the programs that the school offers. Our ENLs are represented in all pathways, clubs and sport teams. Students are invited and given a tour of the building so that they know where to report. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 116  They are also introduced to key staff members in the school and taken to important offices such as the Montefiore clinic, the attendance office, APs' offices, the Culture and Climate security's office, the Principal's office and of course the counselors' offices. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? In our school we offer Spanish as a language elective. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? This is not applicable because we offer a TBE and a Free Standing ENL program. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? The Bronx Borough Support Center provides on going professional development for ENL and integrated ENL models. They also provide pd for ICT co teaching models. Weekly in house pd opportunities are provided by the PD team that consist of teachers, assistant principal and the principal. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. We do a lot of data analysis. It is important for us to know and understand the data because this will help us understand the need of these students who are coming from elementary, middle to high school. We provide the staff with the tools and strategies that they need in order to plan effective lessons. We also analyze the attedance trends, performance trends, NYSESLAT data, etc. We also discuss the socio economical needs of the students as well. For us this is an important area and these students need all the support in order to succeed academically. Our teachers meet the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154. Teachers. All teachers, bilingual and ESL teachers are required to attend all the Professional Development in our school. For every meeting we keep agendas and attendance sheets. These agendas and attendance sheets are kept in the Assistant Principal's office. The overall goal for the year is to increase the level of rigor in all classes. This will be done in collaboration with Scholastic. They will be providing professional development for the staff, including the Assistant Principals, will provide the staff with a better understanding of how to improve critical thinking in every lesson. Scholastic staff will work closely with the Assistant Principals in reviewing curriculum and developing unit/lesson plans, which are aligned to the common core learning standards, rigorous, performance based, engaging and provide connections to the students’ experiences. The Scholastic staff will model teaching, co-teach and then observe the teacher/AP to provide feedback on the implementation of the lesson. The Assistant Principals will be required to follow this same process when working with their staff. The idea is for each AP to work 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 117  extensively with a small group of 2-3 teachers for a couple of weeks. They will model, co-teach, observe and provide feedback before moving on to a new group of 2-3 teachers using the lens of the Danielson Framework via Advance. This will be an ongoing process with the AP looping back to the first group of teachers he/she works with to observe the changes in instruction, lesson and unit plan improvement and to provide additional support. We will work with teachers using the Depth of Knowledge chart to improve their questioning techniques delving into Danielson’s framework to better understand the instructional components 3b, c, and d All lessons will connect the content of the unit/lesson to students’ personal experiences. Other areas of focus for the year include ELA Common Core Shift 2: Knowledge in the Disciplines- Students build knowledge about the world (domains/ content areas) through TEXT rather than the teacher or activities and Shift 3: Staircase of Complexity- Students read the central, grade appropriate text around which instruction is centered. Teachers are patient, create more time and space and support in the curriculum for close reading. In Math, we will focus on Common Core Shifts 3: Fluency- Students are expected to have speed and accuracy with simple calculations; teachers structure class time and/or homework time for students to memorize, through repetition, core functions; and Shift 4: Deep Understanding- Students deeply understand and can operate easily within a math concept before moving on. They learn more than the trick to get the answer right. They learn the math. In math, we will focus on using manipulatives in all lessons and units in order to allow for multiple entry points for all students. Classroom expectations will continue for teachers to utilize a similar blackboard structure including : Aim, SWBAT, Do Now (starter) & assessment (check for understanding). In addition, we will emphasize bell-to-bell instruction and encourage teachers to ask questions that are levels 3 & 4 on the DOK chart (Depth of Knowledge chart). This will be reinforced during the on-going professional development, daily walkthroughs by administrators, and feedback obtained during the observation cycle. ENL teachers also attended a 13 day Professional Development series with Helen Krasnow, Pearson Instructional Specialist. This 13 day PD series focused on the following: Topic: CHANGE OF PRACTICE: MEETING THE NEEDS OF ELLs. Focus: Provide in class coaching, professional development opportunities, and consultative services in support of ELLs in meeting College and Career Readiness expectations as outlined in the CCLS Audience: This support is intended for all ELA and Science teachers and administrators. Service: P r o f e s s i o n a l D e v e l o p m e n t ( d e l i v e r e d i n 4 0 - 6 0 m i n u t e m o d u l e s ) p e r c o n t e n t a r e a a n d S h o u l d e r - t o - s h o u l d e r s u p p o r t , p e r c o n t e n t a r e a ( C o n s u l t a t i v e S e r v i c e s ) , d e l i v e r e d a s f o l l o w s : Services will be delivered between March 2015 and June 2015 and represents five days of support per content area D a y s 1 a n d 2 i n c l u d e f o c u s e d w o r k w i t h c o n t e n t t e a c h e r m e e t i n g s o n m e e t i n g t h e n e e d s o f E L L s u s i n g s t r a t e g i e s e m b e d d e d i n t h e S I O P a n d o t h e r s r e p r e s e n t e d i n t h e F i v e E s s e n t i a l P r a c t i c e s D a y s 3 t h r o u g h 5 i n c l u d e i n c l a ss modelling, coaching with feedback from peers and consultant based on the learning gained from the professional learning sessions Outcomes for School Support: •Identify and apply key instructional practices that support ELLs as they independently engage in text-dependent content discussion, and use that discussion to build content knowledge from that text. •Support coaching peers as they implement classroom practices that support independence as well as text-dependence in service of developing strong content knowledge •More effective implementation of the SIOP model 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 118  Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Families of prospective students will be notified of the opportunities this program will provide and encouraged to support the student in enrollment and attendance. In Kind Activities (Parent classes, meetings, and Welcome Center workshops) will be sponsored through the Parents Association using Title I Funding. Documents that are sent to the parents are translated into their native language, Spanish and English. For parents whose language it's not Spanish or English, we work with staff members (teachers) and administrators to help us translate documents that have to be sent home. We also contact the translation department from the Department of Education to translate for parents. Letters that the Principal needs to sent to the parents about their children's academic progress are translated in different languages. Lunch forms are sent home in different languages. Entitlement letters for ELL students are also sent in different languages. We offer workshops to all parents: College application process Financial Aide - presented the details of the financial aide process and wha they need to do to receive financial assistance. Curriculum evening - Parents are invited to come and meet with every teacher and counselor and the Principal to learn what the graduation requirements are and what credits are required in order for their children to graduate on time. Also, at this event, parents are given the opportunity to check the curriculum that is being taught in all the classes. They meet with teachers and assistant principals as well. Parent meetings on how to become parents leaders and how they become involved in their child's school. Parents are invited to the DOE academy - Parent Academy Parent Literacy classes are offered to every parents GED classes are offered as well. Computer classes are offered as well. Workshops on bullying (cyber bullying), substance abuse, IEP, Social behavior (how this affects their home) are offered to all parents. The counselors offered to the parents and students, school based counseling - external and internal counseling. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. ELL parents are an integral part of our school. As such they are invited to attend monthly Parent Association meetings, curriculum nights, and parent teacher conferences in order to stay informed regarding their child's progress toward graduation. Moving forward the school will use Web Connect, a software to allow parents to participate to certain events such as PA meetings and workshops from home. The school serves as a resource center for all our parents and provides services according to families' needs. Good Shepherd Services social workers engage parents at community events. They offer workshops, immigration clinics, vision testing etc. They have organized a campus food pantry which provides food and toiletries to all families in need. The school also offers ENL classes for parents in the evenings. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 119  2018-19 RSCEP-PF 120 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Pierre Orbe, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 121  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Dewitt Cinton High School School DBN: 10x440 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Pierre Orbe Preya Singh Inés Cariño Title Principal Assistant Principal Parent Coordinator Bessy Martínez ENL/Bilingual Teacher Florencia Ayala Parent Carmen Varela Teacher/Subject Area Patrick Lawlor Teacher/Subject Area N/A N/A Coach Coach Chris González School Counselor N/A Anita Bushi N/A N/A N/A Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Anita Bushi Other N/A Other N/A Other N/A Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 09/15/2017 09/15/2017 09/15/2017 09/15/2017 09/15/2017 09/15/2017 09/15/2017 N/A N/A 09/15/2017 N/A 09/15/2017 N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 122  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 440 School Name: Dewitt Clinton Superintendent: CarronStaple The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Ines Carino Parent Coordinator Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. We review the LAP to determine the different languages that are spoken in the homes. The material that is sent to parents is translated into the languages that the parents request. In addition, we utilize the materials available on the NYC Website to provide parents with information. At Parent Association Meetings and Open Houses we survey the parents as to the languages they need. We also use the data from the Home Language Survey to determine the translation needs of our students. We are constantly printing and reviewing reports from ATS to make sure that the information that is sent to all parents is sent in their language of proference of the parent. Based on our analysis of the languages that many of our parents speak, we have noticed that the main language spoken is Spanish.We download reports from ATS such as the RAPL and the UPPG reports. Based on the information provided by these reports, 403 parent prefer Spanish (oral and written), 6 prefer Albanian, 14 prefer Arabic, 41 prefer Bengali, 3 prefer French, 1 prefers Nahuatl, 1 perfers Swedish and 4 prefer Urdu. We inform the parents, commmunities about this need, through letters, meetings and even our website. We provide all the translation that is necessary for the parents based on their preference. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 123  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Albanian Arabic Bengali Estonian 8 19 66 1 .05 1.03 3.59 .05 8 17 65 1 .44 .93 3.54 .05 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. None. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to Families How do you plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Staff members; NYC DOE Translation Services. All months. All the information such as newsletters,memorandums from the Principal, newsletters, special invitations are sent in both English and in Spanish. In the Faculty Conference, the staff was notified as to the different languages that the parents speak. Since the majority of the languages spoken by our parents are English and Spanish, all material is immediately translated into Spanish. The material is sent to the Translation and Interpretation for languages other than Spanish. Our Parent Coordinator together with the Parent Association President works with the Translation and Interpretation Unit to have materials translated into languages other than English or Spanish. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 124  N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide During parent teacher conferences, or curriculum night most of the parents who come to the school speak Spanish or English. If the teachers are not Spanish speakers, we ask another faculty member or at times students who are responsible (12 th graders) and are willing to translate to do the translation. We have students who are bilingual who work as monitors and they assist parents and teachers during these meetings. When an attendance teacher or a guidance counselor has to contact the home of a parent who does not speak English, we either ask a staff member (if we have someone available who speaks the language) or we contact the translation unit from the Department of Education and they gladly assits us with any translation that we may need at the moment. N/A N/A N/A All months. interpretation service(s)? Staff members; Translation services via DOE, via phone and hired translators N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Staff members; translation services 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 125  Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Weekly Newsletters. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) We make sure that the information that is provided to the parents is given to them in the language of their preference. Most of our parents request information in Spanish and in English, but when requested, we provide important information in their native language. The Translation and Interpretation Unit is contacted once the parents request the information in their native language. We will make sure that parents receive information via mail about the translation services that are available for them. They will also have direct contact with the Parent Coordinator. She makes sures that parents receive all the necessary information in the language of their choice. Currently, we have the welcome poster posted by room 195 displayed on a large frame in different languages. Also, the language ID Guide is available at the security desk and main office so that any parent that comes to the school receives the necessary support and assistance. Also each Small Learning Community office has a copy of the Parents' Bill of Rights, The Parents' Guide to Language Access and the Language ID Guide as well. Guidance counselors also have a copy of this information to share with all parents as well. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? We will make sure that during the Parent Association meetings parents complete surveys to let us know how they feel about the quality and availability if services. We will also speak to the parents and conduct more surveys during the ELL orientation and during Parent Teacher conferences. We are in the process of scheduling a focus group of parents inclusive of all cultures and languages represented in our school to gather feedback and best practices on how develop strategies to increase parental involvement and improve our communication process. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 126 
