2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 10X445 School Name: BRONX HIGH SCHOOL OF SCIENCE Principal: JEAN DONAHUE 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information The Bronx High School of Science 10X445 School Number (DBN): 321000011445 9-12 75 Bronx Science Blvd., Bronx NY, 10468 718-817-7700 Phone Number: 718-733-7951 Fax: Jean M. Donahue, Ph.D. Donahue@bxscience.edu School Contact Person: Jean M. Donahue, Ph.D. Email Address: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Diane Steiker Rebecca Barreras Lisa Rocchio none Johanna Neggie Gareth Hui None Geographical District: 10 District Information Carron Staple Superintendent: 1 Fordham Plaza, Bronx NY 10458 Superintendent’s Office Address: CStaple@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 2018-19 CEP 3  718-741-3157 718-741-7098 Phone Number: FSC: Bronx Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) Executive Director: Jose Ruiz Executive Director’s Office Address: 1 Fordham Plaza, Bronx NY 10458 Jruiz2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-828-7776 Phone Number: 718-828-6280 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Jean M. Donahue, Ph.D. Diane Steiker Rebecca Barreras Willie Lugo Johanna Neggie Gareth Hui Lisa Rocchio PilarOlmedo Leslie Berger Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/CSA Representative, Co-Chair Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher 2018-19 CEP 5 Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Member/Parent, Co-Chair Jonathan Freedman John Keller JunnieMark Kobashi Irene Chang Kathy Qi Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Signature (Blue Ink) 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? The Bronx High School of Science educates an academically gifted community of learners through a rigorous STEM curriculum. All academic disciplines are taught through the lens of inquiry to emphasize critical thinking and problem solving. The school cultivates a diverse community of lifelong learners who discover their passions through a collaborative and supportive network of students, educators, parents and alumni. Drawing upon a long tradition of academic success, the Bronx High School of Science prepares students to flourish in the best colleges and universities, 2018-19 CEP 9  creating leaders and visionaries of the future. Included among the school's alumni are eight Nobel Prize winners and six Pulitzer Prize winners. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. The Bronx High School of Science is a specialized high school with a focus on science and mathematics. Students undertake a rigorous course of study well beyond the standards for NYC, including four years of laboratory sciences. Students have the opportunity to move beyond AP and avail themselves of Post-AP courses in Multivariable Calculus, Linear Algebra and Differential Equations, Game Programming, App Development, Genetics, Topics in Modern Physics, Analytical Chemistry and Psychology. There is also a successful Student Research Program with strands in Biology, Physical Science, Social Science, Mathematics, and Computer Science. All students take one semester of Introduction to Engineering and one semester of Computer Coding. Although we focus primarily on science and mathematics, we also have a strong humanities program that complements and reinforces the habits of mind developed in science. Courses in English, Social Studies, and Foreign Language apply the scientific method and logic applicable in “hard” science to a wide range of problems, from analyzing the causes of WWII to teasing out the theme of a novel. Students with strengths in the humanities will find a number of AP courses in which they might be interested. The English and Social Studies Departments offer every available AP course, and an elective course that manages the nation’s only high-school Holocaust Museum. The Foreign Language Department offers AP study in nearly every available language, as well as a wide range of electives. We also have strong social and emotional supports for our students. There are freshman and sophomore guidance classes, as well as an established college process. Beyond the classroom, the diverse student body is involved in extra-curricular activities and forty-four PSAL teams, which foster student camaraderie. All of our clubs and extra-curricular activities serve as a forum for students to coalesce around common interests (e.g., Science Fiction, Business and Entrepreneurship, etc.). Our Speech & Debate Team is nationally recognized, having won several prestigious awards last year. Recent initiatives include expanding our Engineering and Computer Science programs, including the opening of a new state-of-the-art facility for Robotics, Engineering, and Computer Science. There are currently 19 ENLs at Bronx Science receiving ninety minutes of extra writing instruction each week. Approximately 1% of students receive SETSS, and approximately 3% of students have IEPs or 504 plans. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. We have a new ENL class providing extra instruction and support in writing. Additionally, our IEP population is supported through a SETTS class. Sophomore guidance is being expanded to provide support in two areas. The sessions will focus on health decision making and will move the college process back into the sophomore year to better prepare students for Early Action and Early Decision applications. 2018-19 CEP 10  4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. We made the most progress over the past year in the area of rigorous instruction, particularly in the instruction of writing. Our key areas of focuse this year are on providing a more suppportive environment through appreciation of diversity and anti-bias efforts, and continuing to improve our instruction by focusing on student engagement and further strengthening our STEM courses. 2018-19 CEP 11  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 10X445 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 2995 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient N/A N/A 7 77 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 17 11 12 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 44.0% % Attendance Rate 36.0% % Reduced Lunch 0.0% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) 0.4% 6.2% 23.3% % Multi-Racial % Black or African American % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 5.06 1% 12% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 100% 100% 99.7% 95.6% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) Yes Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A YES YES N/A YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES YES N/A YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES YES N/A YES No N/A 2 1 1 96.8% 8.0% 1.2% 2.5% 65.6% 2.3% 16 4% 4.8 N/A N/A 100% 100% 100.0% 95% N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A YES N/A YES N/A N/A YES N/A YES YES N/A YES 2018-19 CEP 12  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Rigorous Instruction so as to prepare our students for admission to and success at top colleges and universities is central to the mission of Bronx Science. Part of this preparation, particularly for students going on to study STEM fields, is taking and passing advanced computer science and engineering courses. Data indicate that we had a total of 275 students enrolled in advanced computer science and engineering courses for the 2017-2018 school year (AP Computer Science, Game Programming, App Development, and Experimental Engineering.) While virtually all students take an introductory engineering course and an introductory computer coding course, our goal is to have more of these students take advanced courses in these fields. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the school will develop additional advanced computer science, engineering, and mathematics courses and provide increased small group instruction for students enrolled in these courses, resulting in a 40% increase in the number of students taking these electives and earning credit. 2018-19 CEP 13  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers will work together to develop new electives in computer programming using C++, environmental engineering, and mathematical applications in engineering. Teachers of computer science and engineering August 2018- October 2018 Teachers of relevant courses will work together to plan units and lessons, and discuss teaching strategies during Common Planning Time. Teachers will also engage in intervisitation. Teachers of computer science and engineering Teachers of relevant courses will work together during at least one Cycle of Inquiry to examine student problem solving and plan scaffolding as needed. Teachers of relevant courses Analysis of data from unit assessments and standardized midyear exams will be used to inform instruction of targeted students, including placement into Small Group Instruction (SGI) and recommendations for lunchtime tutoring. Targeted students Students receiving SETTS services will receive targeted help from the SETTS teacher and will be placed in Small Group Instruction (SGI) for extra help by the teacher as needed. SETTS students, SETTS teacher, teachers of relevant courses September 2018 - December 2018; February 2019 - April 2019 November 2018- December 2018 October 2018, December 2018, February 2019, April 2019 September 2018 Assistant Principal, Mathematics and Computer Science Assistant Principal, Physical Science Assistant Principal, Mathematics and Computer Science Assistant Principal, Physical Science Assistant Principal, Mathematics and Computer Science Assistant Principal, Physical Science Data Specialist; Assistant Principal, Mathematics and Computer Science; Assistant Principal, Physical Science teachers of relevant courses. Assistant Principal, Mathematics and Computer Science; Assistant Principal, Physical Science; Assistant Principal supervising SETTS; SETTS teacher; teachers of relevant courses 2018-19 CEP 14  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents of students enrolled in advanced computer science and engineering courses will be able to view classwork at the fall and spring Parent/Teacher conferences. Parents will be able to review students’ ongoing progress on assignments and assessments through the online gradebook PupilPath. The conferences will happen in November and March and the gradebook will be updated weekly throughout the year. The Assistant Principals of the relevant departments will oversee the implementation. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Supplies for engineering classes will be paid for from the school budget and Parent Association and Alumni Foundation contributions. There are already sufficient computers to support more students taking these classes. Activities described above will take place during regularly scheduled Common Planning Time, Circular 6, Teacher Team meetings or Small Group Instruction. The Data Specialist is funded through a separate budget line item by NYCDOE. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. An increase of 20% in the number of students taking and passing advanced computer science and engineering courses in January 2019 in comparison to the number taking and passing such courses in January 2018 will show adequate progress toward the goal. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Student enrollment and grades will be used to measure progress towards this goal. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 15  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? During the 2017-2018 school year, the school dealt with twelve reported bias incidents--an increase from six the year before. This increase has been disturbing, particularly because our students from many different backgrounds generally get along together very well and we have held many different cultural celebrations over the years. We also actively promote Respect for All, have increased the diversity of authors read in English classes, and have introduced the Facing History program in the Social Studies classes. As a result of the increase in bias incidents, we will increase our efforts to counter them, including seeking the help of outside organizations such as the ADL. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the school will promote anti-bias initiatives, resulting in a 25% decrease in the number of bias incidents (B40 OORS reports). 2018-19 CEP 16 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers, Assistant Principals, and Guidance Counselors Students January 2019 Assistant Principal, Guidance December 2018 Assistant Principal, Guidance; Guidance counselors February 2019 Assistant Principal, Guidance September 2018- May 2019 Assistant Principal, Social Studies; Social Studies teachers Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). ADL will provide anti-bias training to all administrative and instructional staff to address the issue of implicit bias, sustain inclusive classrooms, and establish a framework for use of ADL anti-bias curricula at Bronx Science Guidance counselors will discuss bias in freshman and sophomore guidance classes ADL will hold a Peer Training Program for students Students A new Facing History lesson will be added to each unit of freshman global studies. Freshmen Students The student organization will host a multicultural fair for all students. Students May 2019 Two monthly parent meeting will be devoted to anti-bias initiatives and a potluck celebrating diversity. Parents December 2018 and May 2019 Assistant Principal, Guidance, COSA, Student Organization Leadership Assistant Principal, Guidance The Underclassman (9th and 10th grade) Physical Education classes will have a unit dedicated to Project Adventure with a focus on working together in diverse groups, communication, and cooperation skills. Specifically, verbal and nonverbal communication, stress management, empathy, leadership and cooperative learning techniques will be discussed and practiced thoroughly. 9th and 10th grade students in Physical Education September 2018 - May 2019 Assistant Principal, Physical Education and Health 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. 2018-19 CEP 17  The "Breakfast with The Principal" meetings in December 2018 and May 2019 will be devoted to a presentation by the guidance department on the school's anti-bias initiative and ways that parents can help the students avoid bias, including online. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Activities described above will take place during regularly scheduled times. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Four or fewer reported anti-bias incidents (B40 oors reports) during the time period from September to January will indicate sufficient progress towards meeting our goal. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. OORS Reports will be used to measure adequate progress towards this goal. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 18  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. We believe that students learn best when they are given actionable feedback on their work and held accountable for implementing it. Therefore, it was discouraging when we saw that only 69% of students reported on the 2017-2018 NYC Quality Guide that they learn a lot from feedback on their work (Q2a). We hope to increase this percentage by having teachers work together to identify what type of feedback is most useful to students, and implementing such feedback. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Teacher teams will increase their focus on analyzing student work and providing regular quality feedback to students, resulting in a 5% increase in the number of students responding on the 2018-2019 School Survey that in most or all of their classes, they learn a lot from feedback on their work. 2018-19 CEP 19  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers will observe classes and share best practices around student feedback with teachers at the High School of American Studies as part of an inter-visitation plan Teachers At least one monthly school-wide Best Practices session will include a workshop on how to give specific, actionable feedback and how to hold students accountable for implementing it. Teachers Teachers will work together during at least one Cycle of Inquiry to analyze students’ work and plan appropriate feedback Teachers Analysis of data from unit assessments and standardized midyear exams will be used to inform instruction of targeted students, including placement into Small Group Instruction (SGI) Targeted students Students receiving SETTS services will receive targeted help from the SETTS teacher and will be placed in Small Group Instruction (SGI) for extra help by the teacher as needed. SETTS students, SETTS teacher, teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement October-November and March-April November 2018 Ongoing, October-May October 2018, December 2018, February 2019, April 2019 September 2018 Principal; Assistant Principals; and Professional Development Committee Principal; Professional Development Committee Assistant Principals Data Specialist; Assistant Principals; teachers Assistant Principals How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents of students will be able to view student work and teacher feedback that was examined, discussed, and refined by teacher teams at the fall and spring Parent/Teacher conferences. Parents will be able to review students’ ongoing progress on assignments and assessments through the online gradebook PupilPath. These conferences will happen in November and March. This will be overseen by assistant principals. 2018-19 CEP 20  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. There is no impact on the school budget. Activities described above will take place during regularly scheduled Professional Development time, Common Planning time, Circular 6, Teacher Team meetings or Small Group Instruction. The Data Specialist is funded through a separate budget line item by NYCDOE. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. In January 2019, students in English classes will be given a survey about the quality of the feedback they receive in their classes. A increase of 5% favorable responses on the survey compared to the School Environment Survey from the previous year will indicate adequate progress toward the goal. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The instrument will be a survey given to all students in their English class about the quality of feedback they receive on their work. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 21  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The NYC School Survey and School Quality guide show increasing ratings for effective school leadership, moving from 3.40 in 2015 to 3.94 for 2018. However, feedback from the superintendent around QR Indicator 1.2 Pedagogy, focused on continuing "to develop teachers around providing increased opportunities for student ownership and independence," a critical attribute of a highly effective rating for lessons in Danielson 3c, Engaging Students in Learning. The principal will lead the assistant principals and The School's Professional Development Committee in proving support for teachers to increase student engagement by providing more opportunities for student ownership and independence of their learning. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, student engagement will increase, as evidenced by an increase in the percent of Highly Effective Advance ratings in Component 3c (Engaging Students in Learning), moving from 47% to 50%, as a result of providing targeted professional development and feedback to teachers for classroom visits. 2018-19 CEP 22  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? At least one Best Practices professional development workshop session per month will be focused around teachers sharing various strategies to engage students. All teachers October 2018- April 2019 Professional Development Committee; Principal Teachers will focus on strategies to promote student engagement while planning lessons during Circular 6 and Common Planning Time, and take part in inter-visitation to observe these strategies. Feedback to teachers regarding setting goals and lesson observations will focus specifically on increasing student engagement. Teachers will meet guidance counselors to review IEPs of students with disabilities and discuss strategies to improve their engagement in the classroom. Parents will be able to review students’ participation grades in the online gradebook PupilPath. All teachers September - May Assistant Principals All teachers October Assistant Principals Teachers, students with disabilities Parents 2018- April 2019 September 2018 Ongoing, September to June IEP Guidance counselor; Assistant Principal, Guidance Assistant Principals 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will be able to review students’ participation grades in the online gradebook PupilPath starting in September through June. Parents will be invited to visit classes and focus on student engagement during Open School Week in November of 2017. The Assistant Principals will be in charge of making sure that grade books are up to date. The Parent Coordinator will promote Open School Week. The Principal and AP of Guidance will address parents at the September Parent Association meeting about how best to support their children's academic success. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2018-19 CEP 23  There is no impact on the school budget. Activities described above will take place during regularly scheduled Professional Development time, Common Planning time, and Circular 6. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 50% of observations being rated highly effective in component 3c by January 2019 will show adequate progress toward the goal. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Teacher Observation reports in Advance will be the instrument used to measure progress towards the goal. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 24  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Naviance is an online system used for both course selection and the college process. Information about individual colleges and universities as well as information about students from our school accepted at these colleges and universities can be accessed. Students and guidance counselors log into Naviance regularly, however, only 43% sophomore had at least one parents signed into it by May 2018. Since we have moved the formal college process to the spring of sophomore year from the fall of junior year, parents will have more information available to them earlier in the process if they sign into Naviance by the end of their student’s sophomore year. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. The school will deepen the college going culture by increasing the percent of sophomores with at least one parent signed into Naviance by 5% by June 2019. 2018-19 CEP 25  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? The Parent Coordinator will encourage and facilitate account sign-up at Parents’ Association meetings, Breakfast with the Principal, and other school events. Computers will be available and the parent coordinator will give out passwords for Naviance accounts and facilitate parents' logging onto their accounts. Parents of Sophomores September 2018 - May 2019 Parent Coordinator Opportunity at College Kick-off meeting for parents of sophomores to sign into Naviance Parents of Sophomores March 2019 Assistant Principal, Guidance Assistant Principal, Guidance Students will be apprised during their guidance classes of the importance of their parent as well as they themselves logging onto Naviance in order to learn more information about colleges and the application process Sophomore students and their parents January 2019 - March 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. N/A Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Per session will be allocated for the College Kick-Off event. School personnel will be able to implement the rest of this action plan as part of their regular responsibilities without any additional funding. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 2018-19 CEP 26  The school will increase the percent of parents of sophomores signed into Naviance by 2% by January 2019 compared to May 2018 through increased outreach to parents at various events. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 48% of parents of sophomores signed into Naviance by January 2018 will be indicative of adequate progress towards the goal. Data will be downloaded from Naviance at that time. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 27  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Former ENL students, Grades & Teacher Recommendations Grades, Feedback from online self-study (ALEKS), & Teacher Recommendations Grades in prior science and/or math courses, grades on in-class assessments and uniform assessments & Teacher Recommendations Former ENL students, Grades& Teacher Recommendations At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Study skills groups, Small Group Instruction, School Social Worker Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Extra instruction twice a week for former ENL students, help with forming arguments and writing essays Targeted Review of topics identified through classroom assessments and uniform assessments. Targeted Review of topics identified through classroom assessment, additional assessments for mastery, and strategic grouping in classes Targeted Review of topics identified through classroom assessment, additional practice with DBQs, and re-writing of essays Enrichment, Study Skills, Organization, Tutoring Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) One-to-one or small group One-to-one or small group, ALEKS, large group targetedreview, and student-to-student tutoring. One-to-one or small group and in class When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) During Small Group Instruction or during school day in tutoring center, as student schedule permits During Small Group Instruction or during school day in tutoring center, as student schedule permits In class, during Small Group Instruction, or during school day in tutoring center. One-to-one or small group One-to-one or small group During Small Group Instruction or during school day in tutoring center, as student schedule permits During the school day or during Small Group Instruction period, as student 2018-19 CEP 28  and provider schedules permit 2018-19 CEP 29  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) NA 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. NA Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). 1 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 30 Counselors are made aware of the STH population. The counselors regularly check up on the students, providing counseling and assessing student need. Students are offered emergency supplies, such as clothing and school supplies, as needed. Counselors monitor academic progress and are in communication with the teachers, if necessary. 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. $2070 2018-19 CEP 31  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools X Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. N/A 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). N/A Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A 2018-19 CEP 32  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. N/A 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. 2018-19 CEP 33  Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 34  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Bronx High School of Science, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students The Bronx High School of Science will support parents and families by:  providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology;  providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and  decision making in support of the education of their children; fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress;  providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments;  sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand;  providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality 2018-19 CEP 35  The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will:  actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact;  Title I Priority and Focus Schools and the parents of students served in the Title I program must jointly agree upon the use of these additional funds to support increased parent engagement/education to enable parents to effectively support their child’s learning.  engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills;  ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and  strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills;  maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home;   provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report;  host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help;    Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement 2018-19 CEP 36  The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by:  holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference;  hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year;  encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; supporting or hosting Family Day events;   establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents;  encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers;  providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress;  developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress;  providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) The Bronx High School of Science , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the No Child Left Behind (NCLB) Act; Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; 2018-19 CEP 37  ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents    creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents;   ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; 2018-19 CEP 38   advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities  monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent;  ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games;     promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits;  encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child;   participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education;  communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested;   become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact;  participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to         learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; III. Student Responsibilities attend school regularly and arrive on time; complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; show respect for myself, other people and property; try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 39  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information Borough Bronx District 10 School Name The Bronx High School of Science School Number 445 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Jean Donahue Coach ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Andrew Bausili Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Related-Service Provider Superintendent Assistant Principal Lisa Rocchio, Marci Mann Coach School Counselor Andrew Nasser Parent Betsy Newberry Parent Coordinator Cindy Golan Field Support Center Staff Member Other (Name and Title) C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 3 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 2 3 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 0.00% D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 3013 Total number of ELLs 2018-19 CEP 40  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 2 3 4 K Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 0 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Our school uses focuses across content areas on the use of checks for understanding three times per lesson (eg thumbs up/thumbs down, entrance and exit ticket), quizzes, conferencing notes, work in Small Group Instruction (SGI) across content areas, as well as the observation process (with teachers explaining to supervisors how they differentiate lesson plans for ELLs) to assess the progress of our former ELLs toward college readiness and success on high stakes exams (eg unit exams, finals,Regents, SAT, APs). 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Under the direction of the principal, Dr Donahue, Lisa Rocchio, AP LOTE, and Marci Mann, AP English, the PD Team support a team comprised of teachers from all subject areas that looks at data to plan "best practices" professional learning workshops for all school stakeholders involved with our former ELLs (eg Using Newsela to Differentiate Instruction, Using Softward to Build Academic Vocabulary such as Kahoots, College Essay Writing using Story2 Software, Celebrating the National Day on 2018-19 CEP 41  Writing, Flexible Grouping Based on Classroom Data, Co-Teaching Research Lessons with Librarians and Databases, Using Turn-it-in as a Formative Assessment, Vertical Alignment of Writing Tasks in English & Social Studies, Creating of a Writing Toolkit, Take-Aways from the Rhetoric & Composition Pilot ). Rocchio and Mann also supported the Literacy Team, new in 16-17 and also comprised of teachers from all content areas, who reached out to sister school The High School of American Studies at Lehman College to study how best to build academic language, conferring with the principal (an ELL instructor) regarding their explicit grammar and vocabulary instruction starting in the 9th grade and our continued focus on addressing CCLS speaking/listening standards, manifested in our school's heavy use of Socratic Seminar, Speech and Debate skills across content areas, as well as group work with differentiated roles, the use of sentence stems and word banks and the use of google docs and classroom laptop carts. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? Each year one of our CEP goals involves raising literacy for all students, and in particular with attention to our many former ELLs (both those identified as "commanding" and those who passed out of the ELL status many years prior to high school). To target their needs and the needs of our many former ELLs, we designed a baseline writing task done by all students in English, a benchmark (the teacher designed midyear exam) and an end of year exam (the final). The midyear involved PARCC assessment multiple choice items and an argument essay (for all grades). The coordinator of the CEP pulls the data from Skedula, our online gradebook, so that APs and teacher teams can look at progress in the target literacy area. In 16-17 the target literacy skill was argument writing and we showed growth. Students performed better on the Regents, with the average score 95.4%, where the previous year the average score was 94%. In 17-18, the target literacy skill will be thesis - driven writing requiring the synthesis of sources (with the metric based on the synthesis essay on the AP Language Exam given to 11th graders and the Regents' argument essay). Students in all grades are assigned these target literacy skill tasks and teacher teams examine resulting student work, generating lists of best practices to remedy deficits. When possible, former ELLs are the focus of "looking at student work" protocols used in teacher team work. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Under the direction of the principal, APs Mann and Rocchio reached out to city and state instruction and compliance specialists to create a structure providing our "commanding" students with mandated instructional time with a licensed ENL teacher as well as a plan to infuse PD for supporting academic language growth for these and our many other former ELLs across content areas through the PD team and Literacy Team work mentioned above. All APs supervised teacher team work in their departments so that "Looking at Student Work" protocols were used to brainstorm how better to build academic discourse in the various subjects, for former ELLs and other students. We did not have any students identified as "ELLs" (that is in the entering, emerging, transitioning, expanding categories) in the school year 16-17. The one class falling in the "commanding" category met twice per week for a total of 90 minutes with an ENL - licensed and English-licensed teacher, Mr. Bausili. These students were carefully followed, with AP Mann providing data regarding their progress to APs of all content areas at cabinet meetings and AP-PPG Nasser spearheading meetings of all stakeholders and parents of those struggling (one in particular who ended up passing English an avoiding summer school, a big victory, with the extra help of the AP and English teacher as well as the ENL teacher). Teacher teams and APs reported that their continual examination of data resulted in better structures in place to support strugglers. System-wide, the continued use of Small Group Instruction (SGI) --- voted in by SBO for 16-17 and continuing into 17-18 -- provided for targeted interventions based on summative data to our former ELLs. Students earning below an 85 are required to attend and for others they are welcomed to drop in. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] N/A 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The ENL teacher as an active member of his teacher team, with support from the English Department Data Specialist Mr. Kim and AP Mann, uses data from midyears and Regents as well as the SAT to target deficit areas in the 90 minutes weekly of instruction. From the 15-16 ELA Regents and AP Language exams, we knew students needed help in argument writing and 2018-19 CEP 42  multiple choice items involving close reading and academic vocabulary and the ENL teacher's instruction focused on those areas. Mr. Kim provided the English Department with item analyses of the midyear and Regents to steer instruction to deficit areas. For 16-17, as mentioned, the focus was argument writing, and for the coming year 17-18, the focus will be synthesis writing (as the AP exam showed our average to be 5.8 out of 9, lower than the national average) and text analysis (as our Regents in 2017 showed us to go down from 3.5 to 3.4 on average out of 4). The data specialist also analyzed our school's SAT results, which were used to plan for 17-18. These showed that we need to improve results on the “Words in Context” section of the SAT; results from March 2017 showed 30% of rising seniors were approaching the benchmark (a benchmark score is a designated cut-off that suggests that the student has a 75% probability of scoring a C or higher in the respective college course). Improving this result will require explicit instruction in vocabulary in context and an emphasis on attending to diction, syntax and GUM (grammar, usage and mechanics), this last being particularly important as 15% of our rising seniors were only approaching the benchmark in the “Standard English Conventions” part of the test. In that same area, 20% of rising juniors were only approaching the benchmark. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? With our many former ELLs in the school, we need to target the weaknesses in literacy skills described above, as detected in the data from our high stakes exams, across content areas for all levels of learners. Working with the principal, APs Rocchio and Mann will work with the cabinet with all APs from all content areas, the PD Team, teacher teams and the Literacy Team to continue to make differentiating for our former ELLs and both gathering and disseminating "best practices" for improving instruction in these areas part of our every day process. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. APs Rocchio and Mann attended the Bronx Borough Support Center's ELL Liaison month meetings in 16-17 with Ms. Bushi, instructional and compliance specialist, to glean best practices in programming and instruction for ELLs, consulting with borough specialists on the design of our program. Our commanding ENL students take two 45 minute ENL classes per week for a total of 90 minutes, per mandate, with a dual licensed ENL and ESL teacher, Mr. Bausili, who works closely with APs Rocchio and Mann to communicate needs and growth across content areas. b. TBE program. If applicable. n/a c. DL program. If applicable. n/a 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Students are programmed based on their level of proficiency performance as indicated on the RLAT Report as measured by the NYSESLAT and NYSITELL. We did not have any ELL students in 16-17. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. 2018-19 CEP 43  As mentioned, our one class of "commanding" students had instruction with a dual licensed ENL/ELA teacher, Mr. Bausili for two 45 minute classes twice per week for a total of 90 minutes per week (per mandate). 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? We did not have any ELLs in 16-17. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status As mentioned extensively above, APs of all content areas ensure that differentiation for our many former ELLs is a prominent part of the observation process (with the expectation that plans will include supports needed for ELLs and that teachers will have data to use for flexible and purposeful grouping based in part on former ELL status). As mentioned, students requiring additional time on tasks attend Small Group Instruction (an extra period each week in the content areas). 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Teachers from all content areas work with Mr. Bausili, ENL-ELA teacher for our commanding students, and with Guidance Counselor Sandra Smith, who consults on the IEP and instructional and testing accommodations (eg extra time, separate location, alternative ways of demonstrating understanding, small vs big group instruction, use of glossary, word wall, template, other supports). 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? All students are in the programmed with general education students and invited to attend Small Group Instruction (SGI - an extra 45 minutes instructional period daily) for extra time and support. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. As mentioned extensively above, APs on the cabinet and working with teacher teams guide teachers to provide interventions across content areas. Teacher teams, the PD team and the Literacy Team develop and share best practices for interventions for ELLs and other subgroups in all content areas. SGI is available for extra time and support in all content areas. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? As mentioned extensively above, English teachers will support our many former ELLs by targeting needs revealed by Regents, AP and SAT data (in particular the "words in content" section). Based on the work of the Literacy Team this year, English teachers in the Rhetoric class (an additional semester required in 10th grade English) will infuse explicit vocabulary and grammar instruction into their three units on personal narrative, argument and rhetorical analysis writing. APs Rocchio and Mann will continue to guide the work of the PD team and literacy team to share best practices in disciplinary literacy. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? n/a 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs are offered equal access to all school programs. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. 2018-19 CEP 44  Commanding students are provided with translations of works or alternative texts in English and across content areas are provided with glossaries and the ability to translate using Google translate using classroom laptops to read materials. The English Department now has three laptop carts used across the department. The library now has laptops to check out to students during lunch or study hall and teachers of all content areas use the library's multipurpose room to co-teach with librarians and laptops available. Librarians have conducted PDs on using Newela to teach nonfiction reading lessons with differentiated texts. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Parents of our commanding ELLs attend our Breakfast with the Principal monthly meetings, checking in with our parent coordinator and AP of English regularly to share progress, questions and concerns. Guidance counselors of our commanding ELLs make frequent contact with teachers across content areas on academic progress. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. APs Rocchio and Mann work with the LAP committee to ensure all needs of our former ELLs are met and all requirements mandated are fulfilled. Our program chair, Ms. Bales, provides ATS reports on progress and incoming students and Ms Man attends monthly borough center ELL liaison meetings to receive and review compliance reports. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? n/a 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Experienced ELLs will offer an orientation session for incoming ELLs. As a Specialized High School, we do not have over-the-counter enrollment, and so there is no possibility that an ELL will enroll throughout the year. Some students, tapped by the DOE, are eligible for our Discovery Program that takes place in July. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Standard LOTE electives are offered to ELLs. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? As mentioned above, under the direction of the principal, Dr Donahue, Lisa Rocchio, AP LOTE, and Marci Mann, AP English, the PD Team support a team comprised of teachers from all subject areas that looks at data to plan "best practices" professional learning workshops for all school stakeholders involved with our former ELLs (eg Using Newsela to Differentiate Instruction, Using Softward to Build Academic Vocabulary such as Kahoots, College Essay Writing using Story2 Software, Celebrating the National Day on Writing, Flexible Grouping Based on Classroom Data, Co-Teaching Research Lessons with Librarians and 2018-19 CEP 45  Databases, Using Turn-it-in as a Formative Assessment, Vertical Alignment of Writing Tasks in English & Social Studies, Creating of a Writing Toolkit, Take-Aways from the Rhetoric & Composition Pilot ). Rocchio and Mann also supported the Literacy Team, new in 16-17 and also comprised of teachers from all content areas, who reached out to sister school The High School of American Studies at Lehman College to study how best to build academic language, conferring with the principal (an ELL instructor) regarding their explicit grammar and vocabulary instruction starting in the 9th grade and our continued focus on addressing CCLS speaking/listening standards, manifested in our school's heavy use of Socratic Seminar, Speech and Debate skills across content areas, as well as group work with differentiated roles, the use of sentence stems and word banks and the use of google docs and classroom laptop carts. Each English teacher is expected to align all lessons with the instructional shifts mandated by the CCLS and is asked to explain how this is done in post observation conferences (see this link: https://www.engageny.org/resource/common-core-shifts ). The curriculum map in the English Department pinpoints "priority standards" from the CCLS for each grade, which students use to set academic goals and evaluate progress. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. All teachers partake in Monday "Best Practices" Professional Learning, per SBO agreement (for 16-17 and again for 17-18) which is designed by a teacher team forming the "PD team." APs Rocchio and Mann guide their work as well as the work of our cross-content area "Literacy Team" which discusses best practices seen in their own work and in that of our sister school, HSAS-Lehman College. To enhance our teachers' ability to attain the required 175 hours in five years, English teachers were sent to attend Bronx Borough Support Center's Literacy PDs on formative assessments, use of book clubs, UbD unit design, and writing across content areas using the new DOE's Writing Scope & Sequence. In order to enhance their ability to attain those hours next year in 17-18, the AP of English has arranged for two English Instructional Specialists, Clare Thomason and Bina Clifford to work with the English Curriculum Team (Brooks, Lewis, Kim, Chillemi) to plan a series of Monday PDs on literacy topics the team suggests. These will count toward that requirement as they will be facilitated by district facilitators. All PDs come with an agenda teachers are encouraged to archive toward their requirement. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Parent involvement at Bronx Science is generally high. As all of our ELLs test out at the first opportunity, there is only one "annual" meeting, which occurs when they are first accepted. We provide Translation Services at all open house and parent events. Meetings are conducted by AP Rocchio and the student's Guidance Counselor. Many parents of our commanding ELLs from 16-17 attended the Breakfast with the Principal meetings monthly and interfaced with the AP of English regularly. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. As mentioned, parents of our many former ELLs are quite involved with a high turnout for our Open Houses and parent events such as our monthly Breakfast with the Principal. Our parent coordinator is an integral part of our communication loop with parents of our many former ELLs. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 2018-19 CEP 46  2018-19 CEP 47 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Jean Donahue, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 48  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Bronx HS of Science School DBN: 10X445 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Jean Donahue Lisa Rocchio Cindy Golan Andy Bausili Title Principal Assistant Principal Parent Coordinator ENL/Bilingual Teacher Betsy Newberry Parent Marci Mann, AP-ELA Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Andrew Nasser School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 2018-19 CEP 49 2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools School Name: The Bronx High School of Science Superintendent: Staple, Carron DBN: 10X445 The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Cynthia Golan Parent Coordinator Yes ON 11/28/16 Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. We use Automate the Schools (ATS) reports - Parents Preferred Language Report (RCPL), Adult Preferred Language Report (RAPL), Emergency Contact Report (RCON). The Biographical Data staff member updates the language preference information from the Student Emergency Contact cards (Blue Card) into ATS. The Language Access Coordinator (LAC) will identify the parents whose preferred language is a non-covered language (covered languages by the New York City Department of Education's Translation and Interpretation Unit are Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). The LAC will work with staff members to contact the limited-English-proficient (LEP) parents who communicate in non-covered languages to confirm that the language preference data is up to date in ATS. This will be accomplished utilizing over the phone interpretation (Language Line) and if unable to reach some parents by phone, sending emails out using In-house and translation vendor (The Big Word). 2018-19 CEP 50  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral ALBANIAN AMOY (A.K.A.FUKIENESE) ARABIC BENGALI (BANGLA IN BANGLADESH) BIHARI BALUCHI BURMESE BULGARIAN CHINESE ANY CANTONESE CZECH DARI/FARSI/PERSIAN DUTCH FRENCH GUJARATI GREEK HEBREW HINDI INDONESIAN (AKA BAHASA) ITALIAN JAPANESE KHMER (AKA CAMBOGE) KOREAN MOLDAVIAN MANDARIN MALAYALAM NEPALI ENGLISH ONEIDA PILIPINO (A.K.A. TAGALOG) PUNJABI (A.K.A. PANJABI) POLISH PORTUGUESE 1 0 3 357 1 1 5 2 979 0 1 2 1 2 4 2 1 5 3 0 12 2 151 12 0 1 7 3809 1 2 4 5 3 0.02 0 0.05 6.49 0.02 0.02 0.09 0.04 17.8 0 0.02 0.04 0.02 0.04 0.07 0.04 0.02 0.09 0.05 0 0.22 0.04 2.75 0.22 0 0.02 0.13 69.25 0.02 0.04 0.07 0.09 0.05 2 5 3 369 1 1 3 2 828 29 1 2 1 2 5 2 1 5 2 2 13 2 152 18 128 1 7 3778 0 2 3 5 3 0.04 0.09 0.05 6.71 0.02 0.02 0.05 0.04 15.05 0.53 0.02 0.04 0.02 0.04 0.09 0.04 0.02 0.09 0.04 0.04 0.24 0.04 2.75 0.33 2.33 0.02 0.13 68.69 0 0.04 0.05 0.09 0.05 2018-19 CEP 51  ROMANIAN RUSSIAN SERBIAN SPANISH 2 8 1 80 (AMERICAN) SIGN LANGUAGE 0 TAMIL TELUGU THAI TIBETAN TURKISH URDU UKRAINIAN VIETNAMESE 3 1 2 5 1 11 3 4 0.04 0.15 0.02 1.45 0 0.05 0.02 0.02 0.09 0.02 0.2 0.05 0.07 2 8 1 80 1 3 1 2 5 2 10 3 4 0.04 0.15 0.02 1.45 0.02 0.05 0.02 0.04 0.09 0.04 0.18 0.05 0.07 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. NON APPLICABLE as per September 12, 2018 Parents Preferred Language Report (ATS RCPL) Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Incoming Parent Orientation July Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. We will use in-house staff and/or New York City Department of Education Translation and Interpretation Unit (T&I). For the non-covered languages we will include an attachment in the email, written in the non-covered languages, which states that this is important information from the school and to please have this notice translated, or to call the school for information about the notice. An in-house staff member will use over the phone interpretation to assist with the translation of the notice. 2018-19 CEP 52  First Week of School Information September Student/Parent Handbook September Fall Events (Fall College Night, Paying for College Night, Open School Week) September-November Open House for Prospective Students and their Parents October and June College Kickoff February We will use in-house staff and/or New York City Department of Education Translation and Interpretation Unit (T&I). For the non-covered languages we will include an attachment in the email, written in the non-covered languages, which states that this is important information from the school and to please have this notice translated, or to call the school for information about the notice. An in-house staff member will use over the phone interpretation to assist with the translation of the notice. An email will go out to all parents with a link to the handbook and we will include an attachment in the email, written in our 44 (covered and non-covered languages), which states that this is important information from the school and to please have the information translated, or to call the school for information about the handbook. An in-house staff member will use over the phone interpretation to assist. We are working with T&I to have our handbook translated into the 9 covered languages. We will use in-house staff and/or New York City Department of Education Translation and Interpretation Unit (T&I). For the non-covered languages we will include an attachment in the email, written in the non-covered languages, which states that this is important information from the school and to please have this notice translated, or to call the school for information about the notice. An in-house staff member will use over the phone interpretation to assist with the translation of the notice. We will use in-house staff and/or New York City Department of Education Translation and Interpretation Unit (T&I). We will use in-house staff and/or New York City Department of Education Translation and 2018-19 CEP 53  Parent-Teacher Conference Announcements November and March Midyears and Regents Exam schedules January and June Course Selection Process February Interpretation Unit (T&I). For the non-covered languages we will include an attachment in the email, written in the non-covered languages, which states that this is important information from the school and to please have this notice translated, or to call the school for information about the notice. An in-house staff member will use over the phone interpretation to assist with the translation of the notice. We will use in-house staff and/or New York City Department of Education Translation and Interpretation Unit (T&I). For the non-covered languages we will include an attachment in the email, written in the non-covered languages, which states that this is important information from the school and to please have this notice translated, or to call the school for information about the notice. An in-house staff member will use over the phone interpretation to assist with the translation of the notice. We will use in-house staff and/or New York City Department of Education Translation and Interpretation Unit (T&I). For the non-covered languages we will include an attachment in the email, written in the non-covered languages, which states that this is important information from the school and to please have this notice translated, or to call the school for information about the notice. An in-house staff member will use over the phone interpretation to assist with the translation of the notice. An email will go out to all parents with a link to the Course Selection Process presentation in the 9 covered languages (we are working with in-house staff and the T&I Unit to have the presentation translated in these languages). We will include an attachment in the email, written in the non-covered languages, which states that this is important 2018-19 CEP 54  Course Guide February Advanced Placement Exam Registration and Schedules February In-House College Fair April information from the school and to please have the information translated, or to call the school and an in-house staff member will use over the phone interpretation to assist with the translation of the notice. We are working with T&I to have our handbook translated into the 9 covered languages. We will include an attachment in the email notice, written in the non-covered languages, which states that this is important information from the school and to please have the information translated, or to call the school for information about the Course Guide and an in-house staff member will use over the phone interpretation to assist with the translation of the notice. We will use in-house staff and/or New York City Department of Education Translation and Interpretation Unit (T&I). For the non-covered languages we will include an attachment in the email, written in the non-covered languages, which states that this is important information from the school and to please have this notice translated, or to call the school for information about the notice. An in-house staff member will use over the phone interpretation to assist with the translation of the notice. We will use in-house staff and/or New York City Department of Education Translation and Interpretation Unit (T&I). For the non-covered languages we will include an attachment in the email, written in the non-covered languages, which states that this is important information from the school and to please have this notice translated, or to call the school for information about the notice. An in-house staff member will use over the phone interpretation to assist with the translation of the notice. 2018-19 CEP 55  Letters from the Principal As needed throughout the school year Chancellor's Back Packed Notices Ongoing Parent Coordinator Emails - "Next Week in Preview" (includes Parents' Association/PA and School Leadership Team/SLT Monthly Notices) Weekly IEP/504 Communications As needed School-wide Memos and Flyers Ongoing We will use in-house staff and/or New York City Department of Education Translation and Interpretation Unit (T&I). For the non-covered languages we will include an attachment in the email, written in the non-covered languages, which states that this is important information from the school and to please have this notice translated, or to call the school for information about the notice. An in-house staff member will use over the phone interpretation to assist with the translation of the notice. We will use in-house staff and/or New York City Department of Education Translation and Interpretation Unit (T&I). For the non-covered languages we will include an attachment in the email, written in the non-covered languages, which states that this is important information from the school and to please have this notice translated, or to call the school for information about the notice. An in-house staff member will use over the phone interpretation to assist with the translation of the notice. We will use in-house staff. For the non-covered languages we will include an attachment in the email, written in the non-covered languages, which states that this is important information from the school and to please have this notice translated, or to call the school for information about the notice. An in-house staff member will use over the phone interpretation to assist with the translation of the email. We will use in-house staff and/or T&I and translation vendor (The Big Word - Department of Education vendor). We will use in-house staff. For the non-covered languages we will include an attachment in the email, written in the non-covered languages, which states that this is important information from the 2018-19 CEP 56  school and to please have this notice translated, or to call the school for information about the notice. An in-house staff member will use over the phone interpretation to assist with the translation of the memos and flyers. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to Incoming Parent/Guardian Orientation September Fall and Spring Events (Fall College Night, Paying for College Night, College Kickoff) Fall and Spring Parent-Teacher Conferences November and March Breakfast with the Principal Monthly Guidance Counselor/Attendance Teacher/Deans/IEP Coordinator- phone calls or meetings with parents As Needed provide interpretation service(s)? School Personnel, vetted volunteer parents, interpretation services (The Big Word - Department of Education vendor), over the phone interpretation (Language Line). School Personnel, vetted volunteer parents, over the phone interpretation (Language Line). interpretation services (The Big Word - Department of Education vendor). School Personnel, over the phone interpretation (Language Line). School Personnel, vetted volunteer parents, over the phone interpretation (Language Line). School Personnel, over the phone interpretation (Language Line). interpretation services (The Big Word - Department of Education vendor). 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Our automated communication system, ParentLink (Blackboard), has translation capabilities in 86 languages (uses google translate-messages will be kept short so misunderstandings will not arise) and we will utilize these when making mass emergency calls. For emergencies, where time is of the essence, each teacher will have a class list with the parent/guardian's preferred language and Language Line's number in bold at the top of list - the teacher will use over the phone interpretation to call these LEP families. We can also utilize school personnel to communicate via text and email as a way to reach out to our LEP families. If a LEP parent has an emergency and calls the school, our staff has been trained to assist the parent using over the phone interpretation services. 2018-19 CEP 57  Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. A copy of Chancellor's Regulation A-663 will be provided to all staff members at the beginning of the school year. At the staff orientation before school begins in the Fall, the Language Access Coordinator will educate all staff members on the language resources available to comply with Chancellor's Regulation A-663 (such as over the phone interpretation, requesting document translation from T&I). Language Access Coordinator will distribute the School Staff Language Survey to ascertain the languages other than English that staff members read, speak or write and if the staff members would be interested in serving as interpreters or translators. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) As per the Chancellor's Regulation A-663: Notifications will be available via our website's translation tool with indication in non-covered languages to call the school with questions and state their preferred language. We will use over the phone interpretation to respond to these calls. We will post a Multilingual Welcome poster and provide a language ID guide at the entrance of building in all the languages indicated on the ATS RCPL, stating that if LEP parents needs further information to state their language, and we will use over the phone interpretation or in-house school staff to assist them. In addition, we will email a pdf of the sign, instructing parents that if they need to communicate with the school - to call, state their language and we will use over the phone interpretation to assist them. Weekly e-newsletters are emailed to all parents (translations by in-house staff members who indicated on the Language Survey that they can serve as translators). The weekly e-newsletter will include a pdf attachment with instructions to call the school and state their preferred language and an in-house staff member will use over the phone interpretation to assist. As a common practice, the principal and staff utilize in-house resources for translation and interpretation services. In addition, the school uses the T&I Unit for translation and Department of Education (DOE) vendors (Big Word) when necessary for translation and interpretation needs of parents. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? The Language Access Coordinator will email the Language Access Parent Survey to gather data to evaluate and improve upon our provision of language access services for families. The survey will be administered by phone to the non-covered languages by in-house staff and by over the phone interpretation. The school will follow up with families who don't respond to the emails or phone calls, using over the phone interpretation. Results of the survey will be used to evaluate and further develop the school's translation and interpretation plan. 2018-19 CEP 58 
