2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 12X446 School Name: ARTURO A. SCHOMBURG SATELLITE ACADEMY BRONX Principal: MARSHA VERNON 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Arturo A. Schomburg Satellite Academy Bronx 321200011446 10-12 1010 Rev. James Polite Avenue (718) 518-3050 Phone Number: School Number (DBN): 12X446 (718) 589-3710 Fax: Marsha Vernon mvernon@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: 12 Superintendent’s Office Address: Email Address: Marsha Vernon Kirsy Duverge Patricia Henderson Princess Campbell IvelisseMejia TionaHill Jorge Duarte DontaiNottingham District Information Paul Rotondo Superintendent: 198 Forsythstreet, NY, New York PRotondo@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 646-654-1261 Phone Number: 646-654-1742 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 CEP 3  Affinity FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Alexandra Anormaliza Executive Director: 335 Adams Street Brooklyn New York AAnorma@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: (212) 374-0215 Phone Number: 718-935-5941 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Marsha Vernon KirsyDuverge Patricia Henderson Princess Campbell IvelisseMejia TionaHill Jorge Duarte DontaiNottingham Irene Kawamura Tracy Mendez *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/UFT Member/ UFT Member/Parent 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Edwin Sanabria DestineeCartagena Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/ Parent Member/ student Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Section 4: CEP Overview MISSION: Arturo A. Schomburg Satellite Academy Bronx (AASSAB) embodies our namesake, a man who refused to accept stereotypes about cultural histories and thus researched the truth for himself and the world. In his memory, we embrace students without labels and appreciate them as learners who investigate the truth, forge their own paths to success, and internalize social justice. 2018-19 CEP 9  VISION: By re-engaging students in a safe and caring space, we cultivate a sense of agency and the resilience necessary to flourish in the face of challenges. Through authentic, engaging curricula and performance-based tasks, members of our community strive to become reflective and accountable lifelong learners, who excel in all post-secondary pursuits. As a school we are working on aligning all of this work through the following methods below. 1. We look at ways to modify CCLS aligned curriculum to make the concepts connect first hand with students’ lives or real world situations. Teacher’s also have choice in the topics/concepts they cover each semester based on curriculum resources that have been approved by the administration. They can also bring in additional primary/secondary resources to supplement their courses and work with administration to finalize and approve. This is a structure that we have developed and improved upon over the last year and plan to continue with this work to bring quality instruction to our students. Now the school community has chosen to have curriculum be themed based with a focus of the concept of change. We are also following a faculty wide structure of focusing on the theme of change through the use of school wide long term learning targets: • I can be an agent of change • I can evaluate the intended and unintended outcomes of change • I can synthesize the stages of change ● Students are consistently conducting independent research to prepare for their final graduation requirement and are given choices in topics they would like to delve deeper into. ● Our community also believes in restorative justice practices and use conflict resolution strategies such as "mediation" to deescalate altercations and allow community members to speak their truth and come to a resolution. 2. Equipping our community members with the critical real life skills and resilience necessary to combat the inequities in society that threaten their success. ● Our Seminar structure allows for all students to take a semester long class first thing in the morning that focuses on college and career skills, civil & personal responsibilities, and social emotional development. All students are required to take at least one sections of this class. ● We do block scheduling in a Cycle system to imitate a schedule that is more closely aligned to a college course, and allows for our students to be able to gain some/most of their credit if they end up being in a situation where they cannot be in school to complete their academic work in a certain time period. Teachers are also able to have extended time with students to thoroughly cover a concept. 3. Through our project and performance-based curriculum, our students become reflective and accountable life-long learners. ● In classrooms, teachers are using thoughtful total participation strategies/student groupings, Learning targets, and UDL-designed curricula/units/lessons to ensure that all learners, including students with disabilities and English language learners, are achieving success. All classes are expected to have benchmark task/projects that align to the final assessment, PBAT, or Regents. Lastly, our PD and classroom practices focus on building culturally responsive and student centered strategies that allow for students to be empowered and take ownership of their own learning. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. 2018-19 CEP 10  We have made strides in showing effective leadership by creating a collaborative community that allows our students, parents, and staff to have a voice in school wide decisions which can be seen through the following structures that were created by faculty members: ● We have a House structure that has evolved into two houses (Core & Scholars) so that students can have an orientation semester where they not only receive academic instruction but also gain a better understanding of the schools structures and positive habits that will make them successful. Then in Scholars the structures can continue while students have more opportunities to take the academic classes they need in order to reach their graduation requirements. In the past, this structure was much more rigid and limited our student academic opportunity. ● Currently, we have a block scheduling/cycle structure that our teaching staff and students voted on last year which allows for us to have academic blocks of 95 minutes that rotates 3 times a semester. This allows for students to experience a class that is more closely related to what a college course would look like, allows for teachers to have more time to facilitate; hands-on, group work, independent research opportunities. This structure also allows for students to be able to focus on 1-3 academic classes at a time and then transition to a different set of classes when the cycle ends. ● We have have Elective courses to help facilitate more in-depth work in our PBAT structures, offer non academic opportunities for students, and be a place were students can conduct more community service whether it be working in our Community Garden, helping with the schools Sustainability plan, working with different community groups, etc. We have put resources into establishing a Peer Collaborative Teacher and Mentor Teacher positions along with a UFT Professional Developer role so that all teachers can be mentored by a Highly Effective - Effective mentor teacher that will provide opportunities for coaching, classroom visits, peer feedback and modeling of effective classroom practices that reinforce student centered or culturally responsive education. We will continue to grow our partnership with Outward Bound and will be building teacher capacity and student achievement around the development of learning targets and student engaged assessments. Part of the work that Outward Bound will be doing with the school will be around the professional development of the administrative cabinet as well as the teaching staff around Learning Targets/Mastery Based Learning (MBL), data driven outcomes, and student engaged assessments. For the 2018-2019 school year we will build on our partnership with The East Side House Settlement CBO to build on our Learning to Work program as well as structured services, supports, and interventions the organization provides the Schomburg community. Targeted areas of improvement that East Side House will help with are: attendance, improving our offerings for career readiness through internships, skills that will lead to post secondary success, college and career readiness, school wide student engagement within the social, behavioral and academic aspects of our community. This is now our second year being apart of the College Access for All grant (CA4A) which has a collaborative team of attendance teacher, teachers, guidance counselor, and administrator that will work to build consistent structure with all community members to ensure that all Schomburg students have access and knowledge of the college and career opportunities. In addition, we have partnered with Bronx Regional High School this year to work within a 21st Century grant that provides more opportunities in career development after school through; trips and events during and outside of the school day. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Arturo A. Schomburg Satellite Academy is a transfer school with approximately 200 students from grade 10 through grade 12. Our school population comprises 36% Black, 59% Hispanic, 8% White, and 1% Native American students. For the 2017-2018 school year our student body included 9.36 % English Language Learners and 18% Special Education (5% increase from previous year) and for this year our numbers have risen to 13% English Language Learners and 21% Special Education students. Boys account for 43% of the students enrolled and girls account for 57%. The average 2018-19 CEP 11  attendance rate for the school year 2017-2018 was 67% and our Attendance committee is doing a lot of work around increasing that rate into the 70's for this year. The graduation rate is currently at 47%, and we scored a mostly Proficient on our 2016-17 QR while receiving scores of Good to Excellent in our 2016-17 School Quality Snapshot. Currently 83% of our student body is considered economically disadvantaged and are between the ages of 16 - 21 years of age. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. 1) In the area of Rigorous instruction we have made progress in utilizing assessments school wide to deliver actionable feedback during observations (formal, informal and walk through) and coaching opportunities that allowed our teacher's to modify instruction and/or develop pedagogy skills within an earlier time frame. The outcome was that we saw consistent practices across classrooms in which PBAT work was conducted regularly and assessed with both teacher made and consortium rubrics. We additional saw assessments aligned with CCLS and embedded into the curriculum of each subject area with regularity. This strengthened the quality of the student products (PBATS), the quality of actionable feedback and the quality and confidence of the PBAT evaluator. The pass rate data also increased from 84% (170 completed PBAT's out of 192 students) to 91% (168 completed PBAT's out of 164 students) and now 95% (182 completed PBAT's out of 178 students)indicating that our structures to increase rigorous instruction in this area are progressing. 2) In the area of collaborative teachers we focused on developing student centered practices. All teacher were coached around the areas of student engagement, student lead discussions and group work by our Aussie and/or Outward bound consultants as well as the administration. Teacher's were then able to choose which practices to focus on and reflect with each other on what worked and did not work in the classroom. This work was also a focus during teacher facilitated PD sessions/share outs and was a part of the inter-visitation sequence that all teachers participated in. When looking at school wide MOTP data we went from 88% of teachers being Effective or above in 2016-17, to maintaining this rate at86% with 5 new teachers in the 2017-18 school year. Lastly, teachers modified the inter-visitation format and schedule to ensure everyone had a chance to visit a classroom with a focus in mind. At the end of the year the teachers decided to revamp the schools mission and vision and then create a structure that aligned our curricula work to the tenements of the school wide beliefs of how students learn best. They did this through a modified version of Thematic teaching where a focus on a year long theme accompanied by School wide Learning Targets would be reinforced in all classrooms to build consistency and deepen students critical thinking skills. The tools coming from the work will be one of the foundations for early round of inter-visitations in the school year. In the area of creating a supportive environment our attendance team developed an attendance action plan in which interventions and incentives helped to improve school wide attendance. One intervention employed was to increase home visits and outreach by our attendance teacher, guidance counselor and social worker. Additional interventions included specific attendance groups that were tracked by a member of the attendance committee and incentives such as awards, movie tickets and raffles for various products. Though our attendance average decreased from the previous year we have noticed that it is a city trend that the attendance of a majority of transfer schools went down approximately 10 points in comparison to our 4 point (67% for the 2017-18 school year in comparison to 71% in 2016 and 68% in 2015) decrease. So there is a larger issue that we are currently looking at. We also have our College Access For All (CA4A) committee as mentioned earlier who are doing work around post secondary opportunities, a Student Led Conference (SLC) committee conducting a pilot to empower students and families to take more ownership/involvement in student learning. 2018-19 CEP 12  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 12X446 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 181 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 3 2 1 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 99 70 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 86.0% % Attendance Rate 85.1% % Reduced Lunch 11.0% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 1.1% 57.5% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 2.2% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 7.36 0% 27% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 50% 7% 14.5% 0.0% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A YES N/A N/A YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A N/A NO No N/A 5 6 66.7% 0.6% 16.0% 39.2% 0.0% 1.1% 2 18% 3.3 N/A N/A 35% 11% 43.0% 1% N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A YSH N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A NO 2018-19 CEP 13  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Based on the results of the 2016-2017 Quality Review, the school made progress in areas that were previously Developing (1.1/Curriculum, 2.2/Assessment, 3.4/High Expectations, 4.1/Teacher Support & Supervision, and 5.1/Monitoring & Revising Systems) by receiving a Proficient in all categories except one: 1.2/Pedagogy, where the evaluator stated that “Across classrooms, teaching practices are beginning to reflect student centered strategies and practices that require students to use rubrics as learning tools. Instruction does not consistently allow students to produce challenging work products or engage in rigorous discussions". Subsequently PPO feedback in the 2017-18 school year has indicated that pedagogy is still an area for improvement though observers are starting to see some strides. This factor can also be connected to our recent struggles with teacher retention for multiple reasons Based on the data from Danielson Framework observations conducted in 2016 - 17; only 1 teacher - 11% earned an Ineffective rating while 78 earned an Effective and 22% earned an Highly Effective rating (this is an improvement to the previous year where 46% of our teaching staff earned a Developing or lower rating in component 3B (Questioning & Discussion) and an average of 44% earned a Developing or lower in Domain 3 as a whole thus confirming the need to improve on implementing rigorous instruction through discussion, assessment, and engaging all students through the use of multiple strategies. In 2017 -18 we have seen an increase in Domain 3 where only 14% of teachers earned a rating of Developing or below while the rest of the school showed a gain in that area. So this year we will continue to look at how we are building consistent practices across all classrooms to engage students in rigorous tasks/discussions and scaffold our assessments to align to all standards (CCLS, NGSS, Consortium). We will also work on building more teacher leadership roles in the community through implementing teacher leader roles like Peer Collaborative Teacher, Mentor Teacher, UFT Professional Developer, mentors and C6 positions that help to facilitate the schools year long PD program and different levels of coaching in tandem with administration. One of the strengths of our school is the actionable feedback we provide to our teachers. From the last PPO visit, it was stated that we provided extensive actionable feedback to support our teachers growth. This observation influences the schools PD plan for the year as we continue to work towards making PD more individualized for our staff. We have also learned from teacher feedback that for school wide PD they would prefer to have a consistent PD focus instead of a menu of different PD options throughout the year. With that said we have begun to streamline our PD plan for the fall while having reviews of the work we have done in the past year to ensure that all pedagogues and staff are on the same page. The Spring calendar will use more teacher feedback before being finalized. 2018-19 CEP 14  We have also done a lot of work making sure that curricular tasks were aligned across all classrooms to Common Core State Standards and scaffold to provide access to all learners. This was highlighted as an area of celebration (as we were Developing in the past) though the next step is to now work on aligning all assessments in all classrooms to do the same and connecting all subject areas under the theme of "Change". Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, AASSAB teachers will continue to improve rigorous instruction by developing targeted instructional outcomes aligned with effective student centered practices such as groupings, providing clear expectations for peer feedback, and student choice on benchmark projects. The outcome will be a 3% increase in overall PBAT pass rates. 2018-19 CEP 15  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? 1. The professional development program will include departments presenting student work to the faculty and through a peer feedback moderation process to ensure expectations for benchmark assessments are consistent across the faculty. Teachers Sept. 2018 to June 2019. On a 6 week rotation Administration, Teachers, Professional Developer, Consultants/Coaches. 2. Teacher’s will be grouped in collaborative inquiry teams that will be based on either subject area or pedagogical needs to work on loking at Student Work & Data to inform whether something is working, needs modifications, or needs to be changed. Teachers 3. The Outward Bound Professional Developer will work with all teachers and admin on how to create Instructional outcomes that are measurable and based on individual student needs. This work will include low stakes observations of specific instructional practices as well as 1:1 coaching and whole group targeted discussions. Teachers Admin Administration, Teachers, Professional Developer, Consultants/Coaches. Outward Bound PD Admin Teachers Sept. 2018 to June 2019 With a mid year check in by Feb. 2019 Sept. 2018 to June 2019 With a mid year check in by Feb. 2019 4. AASSAB curriculum will be designed in thematic units that will deepen relevance and connection to real world issues. The successful implementation of this curriculum and these strategies will be monitored through formal and informal observations, low stakes feedback, peer inter-visitations, professional development and coaching, and curriculum tuning. Teachers Admin Sept. 2018 to June 2019. On a 6 week rotation Administration, Teachers, Professional Developer, Consultants/Coaches. 5. Administration and teacher teams will re-structure PBAT paper and process so that it reflects projects and activities that align to CCLS, Consortium Standards, and reflect student centered strategies outlined by this plan. This will help all departments to work efficiently and increase PBAT outcomes. Teachers Admin Sept. 2018 - June 2019 Administration, Teachers, Professional Developer, Consultants/Coaches. 2018-19 CEP 16  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We will develop a structure for academic shares with parents and families by inviting them to sit in on student practice PBAT presentations. The school will also work towards getting every parent a school email address and access to the electronic grading system to track their child's progress (Jupiter Grades). Working with the Parent Coordinator, PTA, and CBO there will be an academic share events through student led conferences at least twice a semester where parents/guardians/families can come and be exposed to the projects students are working on. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 1. Two administrators to 15 teaching staff members allows for the two administrators to create an observation rotation schedule to ensure that all staff are receiving timely feedback whether they are primarily in the classroom . In addition to implementing a plan where teachers can receive additional support from administration, coaches, and professional developer. 2. Due to a number of SBO votes the schools schedule is created to be a block schedule that allows for teachers to have two additional preparation periods that are slated for Professional Development, Inquiry work or Curriculum development. There is also an opportunity to have common planning time for each department 3-4 times a month which equates to a significant amount of time for staff members to be professionally developed and receive feedback from administration, coaches, and peers. 3. We have been approved to be a part of a shared SIG grant which allows us to work with an Outward bound consultant through out the year on our PD focus of student centered classrooms. In addition, we are also a part of the College Access For All grant which allows for the school to build consistent academic and social emotional practice across the school so all students can be successful and understand their future options. 4. Per - Session and Per - Diem will be allocated to staff who are working to implement this plan. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring X SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Our progress towards this goal will be on a quarterly basis: October, January, March, & June. The benchmarks will be as follows: ● Danielson data review and comparisons; there will be comparisons from last year to current rates and quarterly to track pedagogical growth and areas of improvement. With this in mind our goal will be to have 85% of teachers averaging Effective in the 3C area by January 2019. The hope will be to end the year with that average or higher in this component. We will also conduct learning walks (at least 4 for the year) to give timely feedback to teachers on the structures/practices they are using or can be using. 2018-19 CEP 17  ● Feedback and final reviews/implementation of unit plans and student work products from said plans. This will be done in PD or individual meetings with teachers. Each semester there will also be a specific amount of time dedicated to doing learning walks and conducting inter-visitations within the school and with colleagues in other schools with constructive feedback. With this in mind our goal will be to have 70% of teachers averaging Effective in the area of 3D (in the Advance system) by January 2019. The hope will be to end the year with that average or higher in this component. ● There will also be a review of class pass rate data (from the STARS system) and comparisons from years or cycles. By January 2019 our goal is to have 70% of classes have a 70% or higher pass rate. With the hopes of ending the year with those numbers. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Administrative Review of all tools: STARS Grading system. Jupiter Grades Grading/Attendance system. PBAT Results in January and then June. Advance rating system with a focus on Domain 1 and 3. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 18  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? In the past, due to a lack of man power, funding, and resources we have struggled to make major strides in College and Career readiness for all of our students. Though their is growth in our graduation rates (40's-50's percentages in the past 2 years) their are still a number of students that slipped through the cracks even with those gains. Also our past school surveys have reported that approximately 81% of students responded positively to there being a supportive environment in 2016, where students were at 87% in 2017 showing an increase but still room for growth. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. For the 2018-2019 school year, Arturo A. Schomburg will improve upon fostering a supportive environment for our students by creating new opportunities in the areas of career and college readiness. This will be seen in growth in student matriculation increasing by 10% from previous year, at least a 3% increase in student responses in a supportive environment, and a plan of implementation of a CDOS program for the following school year. 2018-19 CEP 19  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). 1. Our CBO East Side House (ESH) will continue to strengthen Schomburgs structures in the area of student progress as they will help to update course code trackers, attendance by serving on the committee and helping with home visits/phone calls, behavior supports by helping with mediation, higher education and/or vocational interests by serving on the CA4A committee/planning college trips/helping with CA4A events. They will also develop a stronger internship program that has a focus area on career categories that can culminate in some form of certification completion program or will prepare them for a career after high school. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Students & Staff Sept. 2018 – June 2019 East Side Settlement Admin We will look at the mid year data in Feb. Staff SLT 2. A survey process will be created to determine student interest and place a targeted 50 students or more in specialized internships in and out of the school community. Students Sept. 2018 – with Feb. check in & June 2019 Sept. 2018 – June 2019 East Side Settlement East Side Settlement Guidance Counselor Students Parents/ Guardians Staff who volunteer Sept. 2018 – with Feb. check in & June 2019 Students Parents/ Guardians, School Staff Guidance Counselor, Teachers, East Side Settlement, Admin Students & Families Sept. 2018 – June 2019 East Side Settlement Admin Staff 3. College and career readiness workshops and excursions will be facilitated by our CBO's and Committees (like ESH, SAAF, CA4A) in the areas of college or vocational training selection, healthy habits of mind, college life, interview skills, resume writing, essay writing, financial aid, and other various aspects based on student interest. 4. Through the College Access For All grant the school will build consistent practices in the classroom and school where students are exposed to the skills and knowledge needed to be ready for their post secondary future by: Updating curriculum to stress the skills/knowledge in all classrooms, facilitate school wide events open to all students and their parents/guardians, use per-session funds so that school staff and CBO staff can conduct after/before school workshops/seminars with individual or small groups of students and devote resources to providing out of school experiences for students and their families. 5. Special activities will be conducted with ESH and all staff to serve as student incentives in the areas of attendance and academic progress as well as in building unity and school community. Such activities include but are not limited to field day, award dinners, spirit week, six flags trips and ventures to various vocational training and higher education facilities in and 2018-19 CEP 20 out of the state. In addition, SAAF and CA4A committee will help to plan college and career experiences in and out of the school. Guidance Counselor PTA & SLT 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. There will be more parent workshops around College and Career readiness topics around applying for college, FASFA, ACCESS VR, how to support your child's post secondary plans, etc. In addition to outreach to schedule individual conferences for student and their parents/guardians who are in need of individual attention when it comes to a student's post secondary plans. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 1. The Learning To Work Grant of approximately $500,000 which provides us with the East Side House Settlement CBO who will help the school in these efforts that it has struggled with in the past. In particular we will now have more man power to help more students and their families who have struggled academically, with resources, or with post secondary plans. 2. The College Access For All grant of approximately $25,000 which will provide our school with some funding that is needed to build a consistent school wide effort that ensures that all students are exposed to post secondary options. 3. Our SLT and PTA will work with our new parent coordinator to conduct more parent outreach. and conduct a needs assessment on what items they truly need help from the school so they can feel supported at all times. 4.Lastly, we have been approved to partner with BRHS to be a part of a 21st century grant with AIM and Sports and Arts. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E X X Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2019 we will conduct a quarterly survey for parents and students on the school culture and how much they feel their voices are valued. We will look at School Survey results. We will look at the amount of events conducted in the past and do a comparison analysis. We will look at class pass rates and parent participation to see if it has increased from the previous year. 2018-19 CEP 21  Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Administrative Review of all tools.: STARS School Survey reports Google Sheets Summary logs of events and or counseling sessions with students/parents. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 22  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. After review of school data with regards to the ELA Regents it was noted that the pass rate had decreased over the last 3 years before 2016 from 70% to 55%, then to 45%. In 2016, our pass rate went up to 60% of our student population has passed the ELA exam and now 65% in 2017, showing some growth but now in 2018 we are back at a 55% pass rate which shows a major need for improvements. The improvement was based on the English department having an outlined plan to support students in their ELA prep classes during the school day and provide additional tutoring after school. However as stated earlier their were still 35% of our students who struggled to pass the exam. This can be due to many factors such as the passing standards changing from a 55 to 65 depending on the student’s cohort or the fact that the exam has changed and so has our teaching staff. With these factors in mind upon a deeper review of what our students struggled with (by looking at pre-diagnostic results in-house and Regents) we were able to determine that they had some challenges in reading comprehension in the multiple choice areas of the test and in the argumentative writing areas of the short answer essays. So there was a strong need for our English department and all other subject areas to begin focus on improving our student’s literary skills and aligning all courses to CCLS (which has a strong focus in this area). In addition, based on the past year's Framework for Great Schools Report, 2.72% out of a 4.0 scale of teacher feel that their colleagues add to a collaborative teaching environment. Thus show that teachers need to be given the opportunity to take the lead on this work, be provided with clear structures and expectations, and given access to all resources. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, AASSAB will increase opportunities provided for teachers to collaborate and build common practices/structures within the school that focus on student centered learning that gives students the skills to be college and career ready. This will be measured through a department/school wide analysis of curriculum outlines, thematic units that use learning targets, diagnostic assessments/testing that align to PBAT/research skills that will help students to become critical thinkers. Thus resulting in a 3% increase of students who receive a 65% or above on the ELA Regents by June 2019, and a 5% increase in students receiving Pass or higher on Performance Based Assessments Tasks (PBATs) in Math, History, and Science from the previous year. 2018-19 CEP 23  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? 1. Teachers will refine and continue to implement a best practices strategies in literacy from school wide structures from MOSL manual and Total Participation Techniques (TPT) to enhance students critical thinking and comprehension skills. Administration will look for the use of these strategies in all observations. Teachers & students Teachers Administration Sept. 2018 -January 2019 February reflection March - June 2019 2. Teachers will participate in 2 rounds (a semester) of focused inter-visitations that will include a pre and post conversation culminating in the opportunity to present student work from the inter-visitation during inquiry meetings. The focus will be the teachers choice but should be connected to ways of improving student achievement through school wide practices that build on enhanced literacy skills and Mastery Based Learning (MBL). 3. All staff will have access to each others curriculum and departmental benchmark assessments with space in the PD plan for them to meet and collaborate. There will also be a 3 tiered AIS plan so that all students will be able to receive an individualized structure for receiving support in completing their designated assessments. At the end of each cycle students will be given a post assessment to track growth, gauge how prepared they are for the final assessment, and what additional supports they need. 4. The schools' professional development structures to provide teachers with ample opportunities to meet as a department, as inquiry groups, for specific professional development, help to facilitate sessions for their peers thus contributing to a professional learning community, coaching/mentoring, and monthly new teacher meetings. Teachers & students Sept. - Dec. 2018 Teachers, Coaches and Admin February reflection March - June 2019 Every 5-6 weeks throughout the year. Teachers, Department Heads and Admin All Students who are slated to take final assessments: PBAT’s & ELA Regents Teachers & staff September Teachers, Admin, Staff 2018 and June 2019 With monthly check ins. 2018-19 CEP 24  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. The school will set up multiple opportunities in the semester for teachers to communicate with parents verbally or in writing/on-line. The collaborative efforts will be shared with parents in th schools quarterly news letter. Parents will be invited to participate in PBAT presentations and events throughout the school year. The school will also work to host student led conferences (SLC) for parents to experience what the students have learned and produced. ● There will be parent workshops with topics that may include: understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy and how to ensure that your child is meeting deadlines, and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 1. We have a Guidance Counselor who worked over the summer to begin program students for what they needed in collaboration with the administration and teaching staff to ensure that classes and content aligned with that goal. 2. The Learning To Work Grant of approximately $500,000 which provides us with the East Side House Settlement CBO who will help the school in these efforts that it has struggled with in the past. In particular we will now have more man power to help more students and their families who have struggled academically, with resources, or with post secondary plans. 3. The College Access For All grant of approximately $25,000 which will provide our school with some funding that is needed to build a consistent school wide effort that ensures that all students are exposed to post secondary options. 4. We are a part of the NYS Consortium which allows for us to have a waiver from most (excluding the ELA Regents) of the NYS Regents examination by having our student complete Performance Based Assessment Task that are aligned to Consortium and state standards. The work the Consortium does is directly aligned to CCLS which allows for students to have multiple opportunities to practice making claims, gathering supporting evidence, and citing sources. 5. Our Block scheduling allows for opportunities for common planning sessions and department meetings on a weekly/bi-weekly basis and for students to attend tutoring session a minimum of four times a month. In addition, all departments conduct moderation studies so that the whole staff can know and understand what is expected for each assessment. 6. We also have an attendance committee that helps ensuring that students come to school for all classes/prep and appropriate outreach is made to the parent/guardians if they are not coming to school. 2018-19 CEP 25  7. Due to a SIG grant that is shared with Queens and Forsythe Satellite we are able to work with an Outward Bound coach who will be working with teachers to strengthen their student engaged assessments across all departments and developing MBL practices that ensure that students are critically thinking and understanding their own learning/achievement. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring X Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. We will look at ELA data for students in English classes every 6 weeks. We will look at bench mark assessments/Interim Assessment in all subject areas and track student growth. We will collaborate with other schools who have a high pass rate and implements some of the strategies that prove success rates by the end of each semester. Give Quarterly pre-assessments for final exams/assessments. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Administrative Review of all tools at the end of each cycle: We will look at the pass rates of all ELA prep classes every 6 weeks. We will look at how many students are attending additional ELA prep sessions. We will also look at pre-diagnostic assessment data in Nov., Jan (Regents), March, and June (Regents). Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 26  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. It has been noted in the 2017-2018 School Survey (2.72 out of 4 for collaborative teachers) results that the leadership sets high standards, however, there seems to be a disconnect with teachers taking more of the lead to set high standards and develop/implement initiatives that will help the student, teacher, school progress. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. During the 2018- 2019 school year, there will be an increase of teacher led initiatives that will occur through inquiry teams, teacher mentoring, and teacher led PD to continue to build a community of shared leadership as requested on in-school teacher surveys. Doing so will create a safe space and collaborative environment to promote growth and there will be a 5% or more increase in the school's survey results for collaborative teachers. 2018-19 CEP 27  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). 1. New positions for a HE to Effective teacher coach(s) like a Peer Collaborative Teacher (PTC), Mentor Teacher (MT), and UFT Teacher Center Teacher (UFTCT) will mentor new teachers on school wide initiatives and best practices. The teachers in this position will use data and teacher feedback to determine next steps. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teacher Sept. - December 2018 Administrators, Teachers, and Teacher mentor Survey Analysis by Feb. March - June 2019 Sept. 2018- Jan. 2019 with Feb. check in. March -June 2019 Oct. 2018 - Jan. 2019 February Analysis March -May 2019 Administrators, Teachers, and Outward Bound coach Teachers, Administrators, Outward bound consultant 2. Outward Bound coach will work with the administration on developing a better understanding of learning outcomes and teacher coaching. This may be supplemented through DOE, Consortium, and Affinity professional learning opportunities. They will also work with teachers on developing culturally responsive student centered practices in their pedagogy. Admin 3. Teachers will develop inquiry teams that will allow for them to discuss and evaluate the implemented efficacy of thematic teaching or MBL through the use of Learning Targets which is a teacher led initiative. They will also have an opportunity to look into best practices for focus areas of their choice. Teachers, 4. There will also be increased shared leadership through committee work and teacher leadership roles. All groups will be expected to check in with administration who will support and promote approved endeavors. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. 2018-19 CEP 28  1) Parents are invited twice a year to attend family night and meet teachers and student ambassadors that will discuss and/or provide evidence in the form of presentations or student work regarding specific strategies and protocols that are developed implemented by the teachers. 2) The school will also conduct SLCs in tandem with resource fairs so they can learn about all the collaborative inititaves from members of the community. 3) Teachers within our specific house meet every Tuesday to discuss student progress and the information is relayed to the family. In addition to meeting on Tuesdays to discuss specific students within a house, teachers helped to develop inquiry teams that aid in looking at Learning Targets and student work. This helps foster a deeper conversation with family members and students during conferences regarding progress and actionable next steps. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Part of a SIG grant, obtained through Queens Satellite, that allows us to have 15 days of professional development from an Outward Bound coach, in the focus areas of Learning Targets and inquiry teams to look at student work and student progress. The principal has allocated additional funds for additional days with t he Outward Bound professional developer. The Principal has set aside funds for per-session opportunities that allow for teacher to collaborate on varying school committees and projects. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA C4E 21st Century Grant X SIG Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. We will look at: coaching logs and/or communication notes. Teacher facilitation Schedule on PD calendar for the year. Teacher surveys (schools specific and NYC DOE) Danielson Data on Domain 3 and 4E in Advance on a quarterly basis (Nov., Jan., March, May) Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Administrative Review of all tools in Advance, Google Docs,and email. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 29  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Last year, there was a barely functioning PTA board with only 3 main PTA board members that participated in school/PTA events and we struggled to conduct PTA events outside of the bare minimum. We also had low numbers of parents who attended Open School Nights/Parent Teacher Conferences and other events scheduled for them with an approximate number of 40 participants for the whole year. However, we still have a good number of parents who are willing to speak to us on the phone and fill out the school level surveys on the internet they have given positive feedback on school survey results showing that they appreciate our efforts as a school but need more motivators to come in for events. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 AASSAB will work with its Parent Coordinator, CBO (East Side Settlement House), SLC committee, and College Access for All (CA4A) committee, to increase parent involvement by 5% or greater from the previous year. 2018-19 CEP 30  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? 1. Parents and stakeholders will be fully appraised of events that will be planned around celebrations that are happening within the school such as the Thanksgiving share, Holiday share, field day, College and Career trips, Incentives, workshops, SLC, and Community Garden events. Parents, teachers, students and campus staff PTA President, Parent Coordinator, Admin Sept. 2018- Dec. With Feb. Analysis March -June 2019 2. Parent/guardians will be encouraged to utilize at least one of 3 means for obtaining access to current student information on academic progress and class attendance. The means of gaining access to their child's academic progress will be through Jupiter Grades, paper progress reports, weekly phone calls, open school nights and/or special events held by the college access team or guidance counselor. Teachers and Parents Sept. 2018 - June 2019 3. East Side House settlement, New York Edge/Sports and Arts, CA4A committee will help develop and facilitate parent workshops that will foster a culture of information on internship's and post secondary education opportunities. Parents and students 4. AASSAB will work with EAST Side Settlement House to further develop a working relationship with CBO's that will produce student internships and/or workshops in the Schomburg community. 5. Resources will be provided from the school budget to allow for initiatives and events that include parent involvement in multiple community events and resource fairs. Local Comm. members, parents, students, campus staff Local Comm. members, parents, students, campus staff Sept. 2018-June 2019 with monthly check ins October 2018-June 2019 Sept. 2018- Dec. With Feb. Analysis March -June 2019 PTA President, Parent Coordinator, Guidance counselor, Admin, East Side settlement house PTA President, Parent Coordinator, admin, CBO Admin, East Side Settlement, other CBO partners All school staff 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Parents on the PTA and with in the community will be invited to help out with school events and be a part of school wide discussions that lead to decisions. Our Parent Coordinator and CBO (ESH, SAF, etc.) will also partner up to ensure 2018-19 CEP 31  that more parents have access to resources and opportunities connected to the school. Partneships with College Access for all, teacher led committees will help support events, incentives and programs for families and the community. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 1. We have dedicated funds to in our budget to pay for parent/student stipends to be a part of SLT. 2. Our SLT and PTA will work with our parent coordinator to conduct more parent outreach. 3.Our partnership with ESH allows for 6 additional ESH staff to work with our school to conduct and fund trips. The additional staffing allows for more home visits and parent outreach to occur. 4. There will be some funds set aside to provide light snacks and supplies for all parent events. 5. The College Access for All program has dedicated $25,000 for activities such as college trips (local and out of NYC), information sessions with students and parents and college application process. 6. Money has been set aside to help fund some restoration and events within the Schomburg Community Garden. Organizations such as grow NYC will help provide materials such as soil and assistance with pruning and maintenance of the spaces for community events. 7. We are apart of a 21st Century grant which allows for us to work with New York Edge formerly known as Sports and Arts who will provide 2 Mentors during the school day and after school for students and will facilitate add will facilitate additional leadership/career development activities after school for students and their families. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E X X Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 2018-19 CEP 32  By January 2018, the school administrators will look at sign in sheets and any exit summaries/surveys that parents participated in to write a mid-year summary that will be reviewed with the school community and shared in the next news letter. The school will adjust any goal area that needs to be addressed. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The amount of parent involvement in community events based on sign in sheets will be reviewed and compared to the previous year. Parent responses to the school survey regarding culture and community will be reviewed at the end of the year. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 33  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) *The method will vary based on the individual student. Some of those strategies will be: small group instruction, study labs, peer tutoring, one –to – one tutoring, on line remedial programs for independent work, etc. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) *Our strategy will be individualized for each student that takes into consideration their academic challenges, needs, pre-diagnostic breakdown, and graduation cohort. These strategies will start with some diagnostic testing/data review with the students to assess actual academic short falls, support structures, schedules, and then lead to devising a plan to help the student be successful. Note in order for this plan/any plan to work the student has to commit to being present. Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) * ASSAB has a 3 tired AIS plan for all students to help them to complete PBAT/Regent final assessment. Students who are on track (this can be seen with report cards, CCT's, progress reports) receivesome assistance to stay on track by being required to complete at home review work, attend the minimal requirement of after school/office hours prep sessions, and check in with the teacher at least once a week. When a student has not completed bench mark tasks/assessments , is struggling in the course, and/or have attendance issues they are then placed in the other two tiers depending on the severity of their challenges where they are When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) *Depending on the students schedule these services will be provided during the school day: Our block schedule allows for students to sometimes have a schedule where they only need one class and then can do independent work or work with a tutor to complete final task/assessments. There are also office hours in our schedule to allow for students to have a set time every week where they can get additional help from their teachers. Before: Some teachers arrange to work with students an hour before the school day begins. After school: Some teachers arrange to work with students after school depending on students work schedule. 2018-19 CEP 34  Mathematics Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) mandatedfor a certain amount of tutoring and progress conferencing. Students will also be apart of the development of their own plans. *The ELAstructure is repeated for the Mathematics department. *The ELAstructure is repeated for the Science department *The ELA structure is repeated for the Social Studies department *Student’s that need at risk services first participate in a meeting with their parents and school personnel. Then a plan is devised that includes a regular frequency of meetings with Social Worker and/or outside services (depending on severity of concern). The plan will also include academic deadlines and requirements. The ELAstructure is repeated for the Mathematics department.* *The ELAstructure is repeated for the Mathematics department The ELAstructure is repeated for the Mathematics department.* The ELAstructure is repeated for the Science department* The ELA structure is repeated for the Science department* The ELA structure is repeated for the Science department* The ELAstructureis repeated for the Social Studies department* The method will vary based on the individual student. Some of those strategies will be: small group sessions, individual sessions, phone sessions, sessions with parents/guardians, sessions with teachers,etc. The ELAstructure is repeated for the Social Studies department* Depending on their needs students can be slated to: receive mandated counseling weekly/monthly by school Social Work team, be referredto outside counseling, join a weekly/bi-weekly support group facilitated by in house S.W. team, have monthly meeting with Guidance counselor, S.W. team, and teachers on their progress, just to name a few. The ELAstructure is repeated for the Social Studies department* Depending on the students schedule these services will be provided during the school day: Our block schedule allows for students to sometimes have a schedule where they only need one class and then can participate in at risk service sessions. Before: Some students can be scheduled to meet with a service provider an hour before the school day begins. After school: Some students can be scheduled to meet with a service providerafter school depending on 2018-19 CEP 35  students work schedule. 2018-19 CEP 36  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) An approximation of 10 students were in temporary housing. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Our Social Worker and Guidance Counselor works closely with the students and the ESH CBO to provide supports that will help the students find sustainable housing solutions and social programs available;e for the student. The school also provides clothing, toiletries, and food when needed to students who do not have these basic needs. The school's CBO will be creating a laundry washing internship and food pantry to help students in temporary housing to have some social emotional stability at the school. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). TBA due to the fact that we are a transfer high school with a transient population, however we usually average around 10 students a year. 2018-19 CEP 37 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. Our Social Worker and Guidance Counselor works closely with the students and CBO's to provide supports that will help the students find sustainable housing solutions. The school also provides clothing, toiletries, and food when needed to students who do not have these basic needs. 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 CEP 38  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. The leadership model of Arturo A. Schomburg Academy is to have collaboration with teachers and the community in the decision making process when possible. The teaching staff at Schomburg is involved in the recruitment of new teachers if there are any vacant positions.  The administration and teacher committee recruits at various teachers colleges, fairs, and organizations for candidates who are highly qualified.  The candidates then go through the schools hiring process of having their resume reviewed, a phone conversation, followed by a demo-lesson and group interview conducted by the schools hiring committee which includes students.  Once a background check is complete that also checks in on the teachers certification then they are hired. Thus ensuring that all new hires are either highly qualified or working on completing their certification so that they can be highly qualified. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). We have developed a comprehensive Professional Development plan for the whole year which averages 1000 minutes (16 hours) of PD a month for the teaching staff in addition to having the option of participating in specialized PD outside of the school. The focus in these PDs are CCLS and Consortium alignment, tools and strategies for effective teaching practices, creating student centered classrooms, creating and utilizing specialized teams (inquiry), chancellors expectations, looking at student work & data and developing a unified standard method for thematic teaching and creating learning targets tied to specific instructional outcomes. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. 2018-19 CEP 39  It provides per-session and resources to help students to get either one on one assistance in their academic classes, creating student centered curricula that will allow students to be empowered in their own learning, and attaining school supplies or services that are necessary to do this work. 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. The school forms a MOSL committee that is composed of any teacher that volunteers to be a part of it. The committee is required to have one member from each department and the teachers discuss what the MOSL selection should be for the year. Professional development is provided by the committee when the Principal reviews the MOSL manual with them and informs them of the past year's data in order to make informed decisions about what is best for the school. The committee also meets mid year to review the data and discuss possible next steps for the community. Teachers work in collaboration (through inquiry teams, coaching sessions, department meetings, committees, and PD/PLC sessions to modify PBAT benchmarks, PBAT paper outline and presentation format and department wide pre and post assessments that inform student knowledge on skill sets and content. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount 2018-19 CEP 40  each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column B Column A Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) SWPfunds amount for the year are $122,907 and the brake down to how they are used is as follows: a Paraline. Supplementation of some teaching positions. Computer Consultants Serv. X Contractual Services. Curriculum & Staff Dev. Supplies General. Non Contractual Serv. N/A N/A N/A FSFfunds amount for the year are 1,464,076 and the brake down to how they are used is as follows: 2 administrative positions . N/A N/A N/A X 5A action plan 5C action plan N/A N/A N/A 5A action plan 5B action plan 5C action plan Title I Part A (Basic) Federal Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Federal Federal Federal Tax Levy (FSF) Local 2018-19 CEP 41  5D action plan 1 school secretary - 14 teaching positions 1 Attendance Teacher 1 Guidance Counselor 1 Social Worker 2 School Aides - Teacher Per Diem - Per - Session - Equipment General - Furniture Set asides for Register gain - 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools 2018-19 CEP 42  may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. 2018-19 CEP 43   IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 44  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Arturo A. Schomburg Satellite Academy Bronx ,, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students Arturo A. Schomburg Satellite Academy Bronx will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 2018-19 CEP 45  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; We will also work on building a Student Led Conference structure to have students help the community to get more parents and their families engage in the educational process and school community. Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; 2018-19 CEP 46  ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act. ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee ● supporting or hosting Family Day events ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) Template School-Parent Compact (SPC) Arturo A. Schomburg Satelite Academy Bronx in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum 2018-19 CEP 47  Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act. And continuing to encourage teacher collaboration on committees and initiatives that focus on building consistent pedagogical/curriculum practices across the school. I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences and family evenings each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff 2018-19 CEP 48  ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member encouraging parents to utilize Jupiter Grades to obtain current information on student progress and attendance encouraging parents to utilize the AASSAB e-mail through Google as a means to communicate with their child's teacher ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Every Student Succeeds Act.Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; 2018-19 CEP 49  ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. ● Strive to find the truth for myself beyond what I am exposed to in the classroom. advocate for my own needs Utilize Schomburgs support staff when a disruption in my education occurs, I am having conflict, i am struggling in school and/or at home 2018-19 CEP 50  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 12 School Name Arturo A. Schomburg Satellite Academy Borough Bronx School Number 446 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Marsha Vernon Coach ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Kirsy W. Duverge Teacher/Subject Area Catalina Colon/ESL Teacher/Subject Area type here Related-Service Provider Irene Kawamura Superintendent Kathy Pelles Assistant Principal Flora Padro Coach type here School Counselor Mery Lawrence Parent Keisha Clark Parent Coordinator Kerri Grinage Field Support Center Staff Member type here Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 2 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 175 2018-19 CEP 51 Total number of ELLs 28 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 16.00%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 2 4 3 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? As a transfer school, part of our application process entails a reading and writing prompt, requiring students to display their literacy skills. This prompt is graded by an ESL or English teacher and the results are shared with teachers. After this initial assessment, teachers are instructed to give a pre-assessment as an additional way to gain insight into students' literacy strengths and areas of literacy development. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? We have ELL teacher-led PD workshops and common planning time with our ELL service providers built into the school schedule. We also have per-session opportunities available for staff if more time is needed to develop differentiated worksheets, activities and benchmark assignments. 2018-19 CEP 52  3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? When evaluating the success of our ELL program, we look at several factors. One, the pass/fail rate of ELLs taking the English Regents offer insight into the areas of this assessment where students need more instruction and which areas are strong that can be used as a foundation block. Two, the pass/fail rates of ELLs completing a Portfolio Based Assessment Task helps us assess our program by reviewing final written products and re-evaluating a student's instructional minutes beyond the mandates. In addition to evaluating the written work, the oral component is also evaluated to determine areas of improvement. Lastly, using the NYSESLAT scores to examine the success of our ELL program is likely our greatest tool. The modality scores allow us to better create individualized goals for each students. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? We have developed a 3 tiered AIS program in all content areas for all students that supports them academically and social emotionally with: individual tutoring, push-in/pull out services, conferencing sessions with students & their family, home visits, counseling sessions with the Social worker, with the flexibility to modify the plan based on the students needs. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] N/A 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. We have noticed that our ELL student population are generally stronger speakers and listeners than readers and writers. The latest NYSESLAT scores are indicative of this trend in data where scores were lower for reading and writing and higher for speaking and listening. As a portfolio based school, our students tend to struggle through our PBAT process and require a lot of support from our ELL teachers and other teachers in order to scaffold the work which require a certain amount of reading and writing skills. PD on building scaffolds and differentiated essay organizers that include sentence starters from the book 'They Say I Say' as well as developing a writer's manual that all teachers and students have access to will aid in supporting these data patterns. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? We have weekly staff meetings where data is shared and next steps are discussed. We also send information out in email communications. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Our ENL program is based on a mainstream structure with heterogeneous groupings during classes. However, when students are pulled out the ESL teacher tries to do it on a homogeneous level to focus on specific skills for the students or specific class projects. ESL teacher co-teaches with a content teacher to provide mandated support minutes using an integrated model. There is one freestanding ESL classroom that provides mandated support using the standalone model. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A 2018-19 CEP 53  c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? The ESL teacher meets with the administration and school programmer on a regular basis to work on programming students to meet these minutes and determine the model that may best support learning depending on the proficiency level determined by the NYSESLAT and by the student's individual needs. Available programming options include both standalone and integrated ESL instruction models. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. ENL students are mainstreamed into core content for all classes. Core content is taught by a licensed content teacher and classes are co-taught with an ESL teacher using an integrated model. Materials used in all classroom includes a Promethean board to provide multiple access points including visual support for instruction and modeling, graphic organizers, glossaries and manipulative, whenever applicable. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? As a portfolio school, we only administer the ELA Regents exam. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a. We do not often have SIFE students applying to our school, but if we did, we would create and AIS plan that involves assessing skill level. This plan would be carried out by the ESL teacher and other support staff such as the Social Worker and the Special Services teacher. b. We do not often have newcomers apply to our school, but if we did, we would ensure student was receiving the mandated hours by an ESL teacher. We would work closely with parent/guardian to ensure that the student could test out before becoming an LTE. c &d. Because we often have students who have received (6) or more years of ELL instruction, we ensure that these students are provided with their mandated minutes as well as offer additional meeting times with an ESL instructor. Testing accommodations are provided for the ELA Regents exam as well as testing accommodations as per the Consortium. e. F-ELLs receive their mandated minutes of instruction during two years after testing proficiency or commanding. Testing accommodations are provided for the ELA Regents as well as testing accommodations as per the Consortium during this time of extended support. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Anything that works: sentence starters, image prompts, use of various media, minimal interpretations, recasting, use of graphic organizers and scaffolds are just to name a few. All IEPs are reviewed by the Special Education Coordinator who annotates, schedules, communicates and coordinates the service mandates required by each student. We have not had a student apply requesting bilingual services but in the event that we did have such an applicant we would see if we could elicit more interest in such a program and hire the appropriate personnel and/or refer the student to nearby schools that offer such program. 2018-19 CEP 54  7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Both the ESL teacher and Special Education teacher have flexible schedules in that they can push-in and pull-out students. All students who are ELL & SWD are scheduled for an ESL or SETTS class daily and are mainstreamed for the remainder of their classes. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. All of our students are mainstreamed into academic classes with our ESL teacher offering support through push in/pull out methods in small groups. She also works with the ESL population for 45 minutes every morning to work on the English proficiency or offer additional support in their academic classes. ELA instruction is provided through an integrated model with co-teaching and in the standalone model. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Figuring out ways to stream line our process and have more PD sessions on offering ELL and all students multiple entry points for students to access content. In addition, reinforcing reading and writing skills across the board so that students are able to pass their assessments at a higher rate. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? None. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. As mentioned earlier we try not to label our students so ELL's are afforded the same opportunities of our student population. Extra-curricular activities include acting and dance classes, art and Global Economics opportunities. Fliers and announcements and opportunities to register are open to all students at the same time. When necessary, a translated permission slip, flier and announcement is provided. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Common Core curriculum in all subject areas as well a Promethean board in all classrooms, laptop carts are available for students to use, most classrooms have laptop desks and access to the Mac lab is available to students by appointment. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? All instruction is delivered in English with our ESL teacher giving support in small groups. Bilingual dictionaries and glossaries are available for use and teachers are encouraged to use buddy systems and differentiated groupings to support English language acquisition in the classroom. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. This is something that is reviewed before they are accepted to the school and can change as they progress through our program. So it varies and depends on the students needs. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Common Core curriculum in all subject areas as well a Promethean board in all classrooms, laptop carts are available for students to use, most classrooms have laptop desks and access to the Mac lab is available to students by appointment. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). 2018-19 CEP 55  All students meet with our intake committee and later our Guidance Counselor to discuss their possible track to graduation and the plan for them to be successful in our program. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Spanish 1 and Spanish 2 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Our ELL personnel go out to workshops within the DOE to be professionally developed in that focal point. Within the school they receive approximately 10-11 hours of PD a month on pedagogical best practices, Danielson strategies, and providing multiple entry points for students through the use of learning targets. Teachers are also providing PD to their colleagues a few times throughout the year. Our ESL teacher, Professional Developer, and occasional outside coach facilitate PD sessions on strategies to support ELL's to all of our pedagogical staff members. PD topics vary such as informing of mandated minutes, breakdown of proficiency level and their impact in the classroom, scaffolding and grouping strategies and literacy building strategies, to name a few. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. We try to ensure that all of our students are provided with the skills necessary for college or career through our courses that break down academic writing and independent research as students are prepared to complete their final assessments which is a Performance Based Assessment Task. We feel that this will help them to transition into life after high school. Our ELL personnel go out to work shops within the DOE to be professionally developed in that focal point. Within the school they receive approximately 10-11 hours of PD a month on pedagogical best practices, Danielson strategies, and providing multiple entry points for students. Teachers are also providing PD to their colleagues a number of times throughout the year. All agendas are retained electronically and are stored by our professional developer. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? The ESL teacher coordinates parent meeting for our ENL population throughout the year with an initial meeting when students are first enrolled and at least one other subsequent meeting in person or over the phone to discuss the goals, results, and any 2018-19 CEP 56  other necessary items. If and whenever necessary, either internal fluent staff provide translation services and/or the Translation and Interpretation Unit is called. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. All parents are welcome to participate in our PTA and SLT committees and are invited to community events such as Holiday celebration, Field days, and College weeks. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. 2018-19 CEP 57 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Marsha Vernon, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 58  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Arturo A. Schomburg Satellite School DBN: 12X446 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Marsha Vernon Title Principal Flora Padro Assistant Principal Kerri Grinage Parent Coordinator Kirsy Duverge ENL/Bilingual Teacher Keisha Clark Parent Irene Kawamura Teacher/Subject Area Catalina M. Colon Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Mery Lawrence School Counselor Kathy Pelles Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 9/30/17 9/30/17 9/30/17 9/30/17 9/30/17 9/30/17 9/30/17 9/30/17 10/30/17 9/30/17 9/30/17 9/30/17 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 2018-19 CEP 59  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: School Name: Superintendent: The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral 2018-19 CEP 60  3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents 2018-19 CEP 61  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? 2018-19 CEP 62 
