2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP-CS) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 08X448 School Name: SOUNDVIEW ACADEMY FOR CULTURE AND SCHOLARSHIP Principal: WILLIAM FRACKELTON 2018-19 CEP-CS 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: Soundview Academy for Culture & Scholarship 320800010448 BEDS Code: School Number (DBN): 08X448 Grades Served: School Address: Phone Number: 6-8 885 Bolton Avenue Bronx, NY 10473 (718)991-4027 (718) 991-4807 Fax: School Contact Person: William Frackelton Email Address: wfrack@schools.nyc.gov Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: William Frackelton Patricia Castillo JulissaPena William Frackelton Yahaira Rodriguez Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): N/A N/A CBO Representative: KaychellEnglish District Information Erika Tobia Geographical District: 08 Superintendent: Superintendent’s Office Address: 1230 Zerega Avenue Bronx, NY 10462 etobia@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: (718) 935-3783 Phone Number: (718) 828-6239 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 CEP 3  FSC: Team 7 Executive Director: Mayra Bernard Executive Director’s Office Address: 1230 Zerega Avenue Bronx, NY 10462 Executive Director’s Email Address: mbernard2@schools.nyc.gov Phone Number: (718-828-7403) Fax: (718-828-2116) 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) William Frackelton Patricia Castillo JulissaPena MarisolHernandez YahairaRodriguez N/A Dorothy Nettey-Addo Dayana Martinez MadonaLiverpool SharonThomas *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CSAElected Rep Member/ UFTMember UFTMember UFTMember 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Martha Altamirano Parent/ IEP Liaison Jennifer Bacon Pauline Woodley Kaychell English Parent Parent Member/ Member/ Lead CBO& SLTChairperson After School CBODirector Member 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Soundview Academy’s Mission & Vision Section 4: CEP Overview Adolescence is both a gift and a challenge and the middle years are ones of extremes: deepening of voices and lengthening of limbs, onset of independence and resistance to adult authority, a growing capacity for complex thought and activity, and increasing hobbies and interests. Soundview Academy responds to the challenge of adolescence through the following mission: 2018-19 CEP 9  1) to provide a college-and-career preparatory curriculum that builds personalization into the core of content-area instruction through performance-based projects and tasks in each content area in alignment with CCLS and 21st century pedagogical practices; 2) to prioritize multicultural awareness, expression and competency through our specialized Arts and Dual Language programs, as well as within our extensive extracurricular academics, athletics and arts offerings; 3) to provide our students the necessary SEL supports in our Scholars Mentoring and PBIS programs, as well as rigorously address their physical and mental health needs as necessary components of academic success; and 4) to infuse digital technology and state-of-the-art multimedia instruction throughout the curriculum as a means of differentiating the learning experience for our students, including a more recent focus on interdisciplinary, STEAM-based initiatives that directly inform instructional planning and impact the student learning experience. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Soundview Academy was founded in 2009 with the mission to turn the conventions of South Bronx district public middle schools on their head. In 2010 we became the first Bronx middle school to join the ambitious iZone360 cohort of schools and by our fourth year, we were the only “A” zoned middle school in District 8 and one of only 8 in the entire borough of the Bronx. In 2012, we launched a Spanish Dual Language Program, which continues to accelerate and enhance student learning. By 2014, we were honored as one of just 113 coveted Apple ConnectEd grant recipients nationwide, bringing unparalleled technological resources including iPads for every student in the 2015-16 school year. This same year, New York State declared us a School in Good Standing, one of only two zoned middle schools in District 8 with this designation. In addition, the Learning Partners Program granted our school the resources to develop the first Bronx-based triad of STEAM schools to innovate and model 21st century learning at the middle grades level. Our success is a direct result of an ambitious vision of 21st century pedagogy and practice that places digital design at the service of our overarching mission: building a rigorous global curriculum including math, humanities, science, arts and languages, and emphasizing holistic education by attending to the mind, body and spirit of our scholars. We chose to accelerate instead of remediate students in a neighborhood whose children historically attended large, failing middle schools. Our strategic partners are multifaceted and correspond to the various domains of our school: academic, extracurricular, college-and-career, facilities and innovation-oriented. As far as academic, we partner with Core Ready and Passport for Social Studies in Humanities, National Teaching Network in math, Urban Advantage and Lab Aids in Science, Shubert Theater and Broadway Junior for our musical theater program, Health Smart and Wellness in the Schools for Health, and PE Works for Physical Education. In addition, we partner with Ramapo for support with classroom environment and student behavior management. In the area of extracurricular, we partner with Play Study Win for our after school program, LitWorld and CEI-PEA for our Saturday Academy, and Aspira as part of our Community Schools Initiative. As far as college-and-career, we were one of the first schools to receive a grant to pilot the Academic and Personal Behavior initiative (on growth mindset) from the Division of Post-Secondary Readiness and we are now five years in. In addition we support growth mindset PBIS via our Boost grant from State Senator Klein's office. With regards to facilities, we have successfully landed many grants to completely upgrade the physical plant, from upgrading electrical, working with solar energy, renovating the library into a state-of-the-art media center, converting a classroom into a dance studio, and the list goes on (we currently have several grants in process including our Vision 20/20 for the Einstein campus to completely renovate the yard, the auditorium and create a botanical garden where our entry is currently located. As far as innovation-oriented partnerships, we have partnered with Apple as one of 113 schools nation-wide to receive the prestigious ConnectEd grant to go 1:1 student-to-iPad in all classrooms. We are leading the way in STEAM (STEM+Arts) in the South Bronx, and were recently recognized by the Bronx Borough President for this work. In addition, we've partnered with Pharrell Williams' organization FOHTA (From One Hand To Another) to pilot STEAM-centered summer academic camp on our campus where student produce, 2018-19 CEP 10  design and present their own apps and products in the spirit of entrepreneurship and solving the challenges currently facing our students and the world in which they live. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. English Language Learners at Soundview Academy make up approximately 10% of population. These students’ first languages consist of Spanish, Bengali French, and African dialects (Mandingo, Twi, etc.). The English proficiency levels of students include Entering, Emerging, Transitioning, Expanding, and Commanding. In order to meet these student needs English as a New Language services must be provided in both Stand-Alone ENL and Integrated ENL. In Stand-Alone ENL students will receive English only instruction at their proficiency level by a certified TESOL teacher. The goal will be to increase proficiency levels and provide students with English instruction in both Basic Interpersonal Communication Skills (BICS) and Cognitive Academic Language Proficiencies (CALP). Integrated ENL will focus on supporting ENL in their content classes. Teachers of Integrated ENL will co-plan, co-teach, co-assess, and co-reflect in order to provide the necessary services during content classes. ENL students need scaffolds and differentiation of content material in order to have equity and access to the curriculum. The ENL teachers will support students, and teachers, with ensuring material is provided that gives access to the curriculum for ENLs. There is also a 50/50 Dual Language program in each grade. This provides ENLs, as well as native English speakers, to become bilingual, biliterate, and bicultural. This program allows ENL students to use their native language to learn content, as well as transfer language skills to English. Students who receive Special Education Services at Soundview Academy make up approximately 25% of the school's population. Included in the services we provide are SETSS, ICT, and SC special education environments. We currently have five Integrated Co-Teaching classes ( 2- 6th grade, 1- 7th grade, and 2-8th grade), 3 Self-Contained classes (1- 6th grade, 1- 7th grade, and 1- 8th grade) and 3 SETSS classes ( 1- 6th grade, 1- 7th grade, and 1- 8th grade). Our SWD population's needs range from deficits in decoding skills, comprehension with grade level material, problem solving skills, and basic knowledge, application, and retention of addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division facts. Academic Intervention Services (Small group iReady Instruction) for 30 minutes 3-4 times a week, will be provided to increase student learning outcomes. All teachers will provide SWDs with scaffolds, tiered questioning, small group instruction, tiered activities, and assessments based on data to support their learning needs. These multiple means of representation will be embedded in all core curricula including the Arts and Physical Education program when needed. In addition, Co-teaching teams work to ensure that multiple points of access to curriculum are utilized across all content areas. In addition, teachers of special education share these strategies with colleagues in an effort to support struggling learners in all classes. The IEP Teacher supports all teachers of SWDs by providing one to one support with understanding the alignment between students' present levels of performance, and IEP goals to developing cohesive instruction that meets the students learning needs. This support ensures that all SWDs are provided with opportunities to access and participate in the general education curriculum. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. During 2017-18, Soundview Academy experienced its greatest progress in the element of Rigorous Instruction as evidenced by significant gains on the state ELA exam, particularly with boys of color, and an increase in Level 3s and reduction of Level 1s overall. Specifically, Soundview Academy experienced an overall decline of 11% of Level 1s on the NYS ELA Exam and a growth of 11% proficiency, reaching our highest mark ever of 32%, with the greatest gains in the 7th and 8th grades. In Math, Soundview Academy continued to make steady progress, where there was a slight reduction in Level 1s to 42% and an increase of proficiency to 20%. Another significant gain was in the element Collaborative Teachers. Supplementing our fifth year of implementing the Advance teacher evaluation system, Soundview Academy entered the second year of our ConnectEd 1:1 iPad initiative funded by a grant through Apple. In order to incorporate such a high level of technological integration, the teaching staff led by a highly dedicated group of PCT Leads and Model Teachers participated in a level of teacher-centered and differentiated professional development that led to the highest level of teacher performance and student proficiency 2018-19 CEP 11  in our history. Significant gains in teachers’ ability to plan rigorous and engaging lessons were evidenced in both Advance and by the most recent QR reviewer. There are a few remaining areas where we feel we must place particular focus, in particular School Leadership and Trust. While Soundview Academy continues to achieve academic distinction, recognition at a national level, strong popularity among the community and it's families, and teacher performance rates that continue to climb, the teaching staff rates leadership less highly, particularly in the areas of trust and collaboration. One of the ways we intend to remedy this is through launching a series of highly structured intervisitations that leverage teacher-teacher development and surface best and promising practices throughout the school. In addition, by continuing to distribute leadership across key teams, particularly in Cabinet, the Core Lead Instructional Team, and in the STEAM ConnectEd Team, we have already begun the process of developing more collective processes for key decisions and expanding school goals to include a shared vision that covers all content areas and the diverse constituencies of our school community, including non-pedagogues and parent-leaders. Additionally, while the quality and rigor of unit and lesson design has increased significantly across all content areas, the necessary assessment-to-pedagogy feedback loop has room for growth. This has been clearly indicated by our 2017-18 mean performance on Danielson Component 3d (32.69% of teachers rated Developing in 2016-17 MOTP scores) and noted by our most recent quality reviewer with respect to the nature or lack of specific formative feedback to students by our teachers (particularly, in the literacy classroom). Our instructional focus in 2018-19, therefore, will focus on Intervisitation. We intend to see the impact of this focus in Advance observations (specifically increases in ratings for component 3d) and resultant gains in student achievement as evidenced in growth measured in in-house standards-based assessments, citywide MOSLs and state ELA and Math scores. We also hypothesize that this focus on Danielson 3d will lead to a boost in 1e, Coherence, which has also suffered (after 3d) from high rates of developing MOTP ratings. As instructional coherence involves the marrying of standards to engagement to assessment, our view is that while the first two components have become quite robust, assessment has been slower to develop and needs more direct attention. Moreover, this year we are incorporating into the CEP our longstanding commitment to SEL development via initiatives in Academic Mindset and PBIS. We've aligned these to the ever increasing resources we've employed to combat the chronic absenteeism and lateness that is pervasive in our district and community. Specifically, this year we make explicit in the CEP the key shifts in academic mindset of our students and teachers we are steadily addressing, as well as the ongoing diversification and strengthening of our PBIS culture throughout the school. While we have historically performed very highly in the tenets pertaining to the framework of Supportive Environment, we have chosen to insert this goal in this framework, as we feel these three key initiatives are central drivers of academic success and should be made explicit in our school-wide goals. 2018-19 CEP 12  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 08X448 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 385 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language YES Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 28 28 2 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 25 23 2 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 79.0% % Attendance Rate 77.7% % Reduced Lunch 9.1% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.5% 62.1% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 1.0% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 9.25 4% 14% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 31.9% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A NO N/A YSH YSH Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A YES N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 41 41 1 91.5% 1.6% 27.8% 33.8% 2.6% 0.5% 4 14% 4.9 21.5% 56% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No YES N/A N/A NO YSH NO N/A N/A NO NO NO N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 13  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Soundview Academy achieved it’s best graduation rate and highest academic performance of any graduating cohort this year, holding our scholars to the highest standards ever as evidenced by significant gains on the state ELA exam, with boys of color in particular, and a significant increase in Level 3s and reduction of Level 1s overall. Specifically, Soundview Academy experienced an overall decline of 11% of Level 1s on the NYS ELA Exam and a growth of 6% in proficiency, reaching our highest mark ever of 21% (with the greatest gains in the 7th and 8th grades). In math, there was a slight reduction in Level 1s to 42% and a slight increase of proficiency to 20%, which would have been much greater were it not for a significant decline in 7th grade math performance. Based on the analysis of MOTP 2017-18 trends in Advance, we strongly feel that greater attention paid to quality and authentic formative assessment across all content areas will yield even better results for our students. This area remains one of the more challenging pedagogical practices for the teaching staff to master, so much professional development time will be dedicated to it over the course of the year. By committing ourselves to the goal of a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning, we intend to bring about a more robust assessment culture that directly informs instruction including adjustments to curriculum maps, units and lessons, as well as the particular teaching strategies and approaches utilized to promote student mastery of standards assessed across all content areas. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we will demonstrate a reduction in level 1s as a result of the use of various tier 1 and tier 2 intervention programs such as but not limited to iReady, IXL, Guided Math Groups, Independent Reading using the Continuum of Literacy Learning to guide conferencing, small group instruction and student goals , and small strategy groups to accelerate learning and instruction in ELA and Mathematics . Increased student outcomes will be evidenced by a 10% reduction in Level 1s on the ELA and Math state exams. 2018-19 CEP 14 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Math Team and their students Sept-May (weekly) AP Math, Model Math Teachers, NTN Teacher Dev & Evaluation Coach, District 8 Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Math  Development of best assessment practices built around high leverage SMPs aligned to KEMS curriculum (NTN Math Partnership)  24 coaching visits focused on developing, embedding, and implementing of Standard Math Practices (ATLAS 2.0) and SOLVE within weekly/unit assessments  Development of excel data tracking system that demonstrates evidence of student progress towards mastery of key concepts as well as standards-based mastery tracking through Jumprope.  Use of content/grade/department planning sessions (2x/wk) to analyze student work and adjust lessons and units (pacing, activities, assessments. etc..)  Use of iReady (Small group Instruction: 8-10 students) for 30 minutes 3-4 times a week  All teachers will provide SWDs with scaffolds, tiered questioning, small group instruction, tiered activities, and assessments based on data to support their learning needs.  Multiple means of representation will be embedded in units and daily lessons to address the needs of SWDs and ELLs.  Use of assessment techniques daily such as turn and talks discussions, teacher/student conferencing, peer feedback, use of error analysis, gallery walks, etc.. to promote highly effective assessment practices as described in Danielson 3d ELA  Implement RTI program for students 2-3 times a week using iReady as well as teachers using blended learning, Lead and Model Teachers; Content Area Teams Sept-Jan (weekly in content team meetings) Humanities: AP of Humanities & PCT Literacy Lead; Math: AP of Math; Science: Principal and AP & Science Lead; Arts: 2018-19 CEP 15   push-ins and pull-outs for students based on weekly informal assessments and formal assessment during instructional periods. Increase the amount of independent reading, conferencing and small group instruction by weekly use of running records, notes from talk, post-its, weekly reading responses, conferencing notes, reading logs, performance assessments, ELA testing, word test, content area responses, student talk, goal setting and reflection to broaden formative and authentic assessment  Use of a variety of literacy processes such as Socratic seminars, debating, on-demand writing, literary analysis, and research-based argumentative writing to engage students and assess student mastery of key literary skills (analysis, critical thinking, evaluating, reflecting, etc..)  Use of content, grade and department planning sessions to analyze student work, share effective practices, adjust lessons and units (pacing, activities, assessments. etc..) to track and monitor student growth. Introduce Academic After school and Saturday Enrichment to support and increase student learning.  All Content Teams All Teachers Oct-June Design and conduct a series of differentiated Monday PLCs and Inter visitations for teachers, oriented around District 8's key action plans, mastery-based assessment and the use of strong formative assessment practices Coordination with Parent Empowerment Team (see Section 5E) to conduct series of Cyber Workshop to train parents to access and interpret data on Live School (mastery-based tracking) to increase trust and confidence with the assessment and monitoring of their children’s performance Parents & Guardians Oct-Jan (bi-weekly beginning in Nov) 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Principal and AP and Arts Lead; District Public will provide data/technical support PD Committee: AP and Lead Teacher; Guidance Counselor; PCT Leads and Model Teacher: LitLife, National Math Institute and Urban Advantage will provide PD support in the content area; District Public will provide data/technical support Parent Engagement Team; PA President; Tech Coordinator How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Increase parent access to and use of iOEducation assessment app and introduce to iO Education portal. Utilize parent/teacher conferences to implement Student-Led Conferences where students evaluate themselves and set 2018-19 CEP 16  future content-specific goals. Continue to strengthen PE Tuesdays to include greater parent and family outreach, and increase townhall meetings and workshops driven to educate parents and involve them in discussions around student performance. We would like to increase parent engagement by 4%. By having at least 3 parent events during PE Tuesday's where the teachers and parents can work together to improve students academics. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human Capital: Administration, PD Committee, PCT Leads, Model Teachers, Departmental Leads, Parent Coordinator, Tech Coordinator, PA President; Instructional Resources: JumpRope, streamlined classroom assessment practices with a focus on quality performance-based tasks, novel resources including literacy-based and online in connection with Apple ConnectEd grant, Advance informal/formal observations and summative MOTP data and trends, itemized analysis data and trends, records of intervisitations and documented best/promising practices; Scheduling: significant use of Professional Development time, Professional Work Time and Parent Engagement time, as well as Cyber Workshop events to promote an increase of parent/family monitoring via online assessment tools Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A X C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Mid-point benchmarks include iReady and Performance Series metrics for both ELA and Math. In addition, a mid-year benchmark mean rating on Danielson Component 3d for returning SVA teachers will be assessed in February of 2019. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) End of year iReady and Performance Series metrics for both ELA and Math. In addition, a mid-year summative mean rating on Danielson Component 3d will be assessed in February of 2019 for returning teachers. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 17  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? 1. Soundview Academy has distinguished itself as one of the Bronx’ premier district middle schools where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. According to the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide, Soundview Academy is above district and citywide average in the areas of Guidance, Personal Attention and Support, and Safety. On the 2017-2018 Principal Performance Observation, QR Indicators 1.4 and 3.4 were Areas of Celebration. The PPO feedback report noted, “The principal has established a school culture that is based on high expectations. A sense of activism was felt as students engaged in discourse across all classrooms. Students were asked to debate, discuss and deduce leading to a high level of cognitive engagement.” An additional practice that was implemented last year are grade level at-risk meetings which are attended by teachers, disciplinary coordinator, counselor, and an administrator. At these meetings we review attendance, academic, and behavior data from ATS, Skedula, Liveschool, and OORs in order to develop intervention and action plans for students. We are also the only District 8 Middle School to offer a Dual Language Spanish program, where students feel supported in both their native and new language and are challenged to improve in both languages. 2. This year we will focus on the two areas that we were slightly below the citywide average on the School Quality Guide which were Preventing Bullying and Peer Support for Academic Work. According to the 2017-2018 Learning Environment Survey, only 45% of students reported that students rarely or never harass, bully, or intimidate each other which is 5 percentage points lower than the citywide average. Additionally, only 74% of students say that other students try hard to get good grades and only 63% of students report that they think others think it is important to come to school everyday. On the 2017-2018 PPO, it was noted in the feedback that a majority of classrooms were void of student work samples and a suggestion for improvement was to create model classrooms highlighting expectations and student work. 3. There are many policies, practices, and structures at Soundview Academy in place to support the whole child. Our Scholar Advisory program provides the structure for students to develop a relationship with at least one adult in the school and create a sense of community with their peers. Lessons that are facilitated through Scholars include social emotional learning targets, bullying prevention, community building, academic mindset, academic behaviors, and others such as High School articulation and College Access. We are piloting the use of restorative practices/circles in an effort to build community, respond to harms through dialogue as opposed to more punitive measures, and decrease suspension rates, not only for our Scholars but for staff and leadership as well. Our PBIS practices include the use of Liveschool, OORs, grade level at-risk meetings, and ABIT meetings. Liveschool is an online application that is used to capture individual student data on positive and negative behaviors. Liveschool and OORs data is reviewed at grade level at-risk meetings and interventions are discussed amongst teachers, disciplinary coordinator, counselor, and an administrator. Interventions include restorative practices, parent meetings, conferences with teachers/staff, behavior plans such as BSP/TCIS/FBA/BIP, and referral to ABIT (Academic and Behavior Intervention Team). 2018-19 CEP 18  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, SVA will further foster its supportive learning environment through Restorative Practices/Circles, Scholars Advisory Program, and PBIS - as evidenced by a 10% increase of positive responses to the “Peer Support for Academic Work” and “Preventing Bullying” questions on the NYC Learning Environment Survey. 2018-19 CEP 19  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Restorative Practices will be implemented school-wide in order to promote and strengthen positive school culture and enhance pro-social relationships within the school community. For the 2018-2019 academic year, Cabinet Restorative Circles will be held once a month during the weekly Cabinet meetings. Lunch group circles will be open to students and held on Tuesday's and Friday's in the Social Work Department. Restorative Circles will also be integrated into the disciplinary curriculum within the school. Scholars Advisory Program will include lessons on academic mindset and behaviors, social emotional learning, and bullying prevention. Lessons are developed through research and our prior participation in the DOE Office of Post Secondary Readiness' Academic and Behaviors Institute, DOE approved cyberbullying curriculum Common Sense, DOE College Access curriculum, and our partnership with College for Every Student. Select staff members will participate in Professional Development sessions with the DOE College Access Team, College for Every Student, Respect for All, and turn key at PD workshops at our building for the rest of staff. Our PBIS practices include the use of Liveschool, OORs, grade level at-risk meetings, and ABIT meetings. All staff will be trained on the use of Liveschool. Students will be informed of the Liveschool program as it is an opportunity for them to receive rewards and interventions. At grade level at risk meetings, teachers, admin, counseling, and deans will come together weekly to review data and discuss student concerns. Jumprope, Liveschool, OORS, and Attendance data will be reviewed. Interventions will be developed. Implementation of at-risk counseling, community referrals, sand bi-weekly ABIT meetings have been put in place to support our students with disabilities. Students will have access to individual, at-risk, counseling should they need extra support. This can consist of one-to-one counseling and/or classroom push-ins with a counselor. In the event the students needs require more in-depth support, counselors will work with the student and their parent/guardian to help get professional support within the community. Bi-weekly ABIT Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Administration, Students September 2018- June 2019 Social Worker, Assistant Principals, Principal Students, Teachers September 2018- June 2019 School Counselor, Assistant Principals, Principal Students, Teachers, Staff September 2018- June 2019 Students September 2018- June 2019 Teachers, School Counselor, Social Workers, Disciplinary Coordinators, Assistant Principals, Principal Teachers, School Counselor, Social Workers, Disciplinary Coordinators, Assistant Principals, Principal 2018-19 CEP 20 (Academic Behavioral Intervention Team) meetings are held to discuss any student who may have an upcoming annual, triennial, or whom it is suggested receive an initial evaluation by the SBST. A Dual Language Program and Culture Club is created to support ELL students with feeling connected to the community. Through the Dual Language Program Spanish Speaking ELLs are able to strengthen their language and cultural skills in both languages. The Culture Club is open to all students in order to celebrate the diversity of our student body. Continue partnership with ASPIRA Community Schools to ensure that all students in temporary housing have access to school supplies, uniform, winter coats, and food. Additionally, attendance accountability for STH will be differentiated on a case-by-case basis. The school, in an effort to therapeutically support students with challenging behaviors, will implement individualized Behavior Intervention Plans (FBA's and BIP's/BSP's/TCIS). Such plans will be used as living documents in order to support administration, teachers, and staff and decrease the rate at which these students as well as decreasing suspension rates. Students September 2018- June 2019 Teachers, Language Coordinator, Assistant Principals, Principal Students September 2018- June 2019 Social Workers, Assistant Principals, Principal Students September 2018- June 2019 Social Workers, Assistant Principals, Principal Students and staff will be trained on Respect For All policies and lessons will take place during Scholars Advisory to promote a safe and supportive learning environment throughout the school. Students, Teachers,Staff September 2018- June 2019 Teachers, School Counselor, Social Workers, Disciplinary Coordinators, Assistant Principals, Principal 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. The Parent Coordinator and the Community School Director will work together to plan bi-monthly Instructional Walk through that will take place until June.In addition host a Principal Breakfast as a debrief for the walk through. At Family Night and Student Led Conferences, families will be introduced to our positive-based incentive system LiveSchool in addition to the academic portal for iOEducation. Morevoer, SVA will conduct a number of events to engage and empower our families, including the Annual Safety Town Hall, 2nd Annual Best Day Ever, Wellness Nights, My Future Expo, Cultural Town Halls, and Parent Award Gala. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human Capital: Administration, Teachers, School Counselor, School Social Worker, Parent Coordinator, Disciplinary Coordinator, Teachers on Scholars Team, Lead Teacher Support, Teacher-Mentors, Attendance & Punctuality Team; 2018-19 CEP 21  Instructional Resources: PBIS and Boost resources, Scholars lessons; Scheduling: Professional Development Time, PLC Afterschool Meetings for Academic and Personal Behaviors Team and PBIS Team Instructional Resources: Common Sense Digital Citizenship, DOE College Access Curriculum, Professional Development from College for Every Student Schedule Adjustments: Common prep time for grade level at-risk meetings Programs to purchase: Liveschool Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. As a part of the midpoint benchmark we will administer a survey to all students with similar questions to the Learning Environment Survey. We will also solicit feedback from students on their ideas for improvement in the area of Peer Support for Academic Work and Bullying Prevention. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Liveschool, OORs, and the Learning Environment Survey Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 22  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Trends revealed by our last Quality Review (2018) and the 2018-19 MOTP median scores demonstrate a pattern where a majority of teachers have reached the plateau of Effective in all key pedagogical indicators (1.2 on Quality Review, and 3b, 3c and 3d in Danielson). And while this bodes well in general, it is not enough to achieve our goal of tripling proficiency in three years. Therefore, in the aim to go from "good to great", we are fully committed to rolling out a structured and rigorous - but essentially teacher-driven - inter-visitation cycle. This cycle will be co-designed by administration, and teacher leads/models, and the PD Committee with the intent to produce three major cycles of professional learning across content areas and in alignment with our district's Theories of Action: Construct meaning and develop problem solving skills by thinking through and grappling with complex concepts; Identifying behaviors that demonstrate thinking and understanding within beyond and about the text; Construct knowledge through experiences; Linking assessments to responsive teaching; Engage in meaningful discourse that promotes learning. In order to fully execute this plan, our action plan below outlines a series of preliminary, short-term and long-term processes that make explicit the collaboration between administration, teacher/leads models, the PD Committee and the teaching staff at large in order to realize this vision of collaborative inter-visitations and professional learning. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all content-area teachers will have participated in no less than three cycles of school inter-visitations, resulting in 5% growth in median MOTP average performance for returning teachers, as measured by individual MOTP-performance versus year prior. 2018-19 CEP 23  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Utilize differentiated and individualized sets of MOTP and MOSL data to develop a personalized inter-visitation plan for all teachers. All Teachers Sept - Nov 2018-19 Design and structure three rounds of inter-visitation aligned to our Instructional Focus on Data & Assessment, our STEAM/Connect-Ed strategic plan, and our Co-Teaching models of teaching. Teachers will engage in the TAR Method (Think, Act, Review) to plan their inter-visitation and collaboration, engage other staff in the process, then reflect and evaluate the process itself based on the district's Theories of Action goals: Engage in meaningful discourse that promotes learning; Linking assessments to responsive teaching; Construct knowledge through experiences; Identify behaviors that demonstrate thinking and understanding within, beyond and about text; and Construct meaning and develop problem solving skills by thinking through and grappling with complex concepts.  PCT Leads, Models and PD committee will design    structures for organizing, completing, and sharing out inter-visitations. Leads/models will engage teachers in thinking about the purpose of the instructional round and provide a structural plan with questions to guide the process. Leads/models will then facilitate conversations and schedule visits focused on moving instruction and student learning outcomes. Leads/models will continue to engage teachers in a continuous cycle of reflection, reviewing and feedback including share-outs at Monday PDs All Teachers Nov-March 2018-19 Admin, PCT leads, Models, and Data Specialists Admin, PCT Leads, Models, and PD Committee All Nov-June PCT Leads, Models, and PD Committee Teachers 2018-19 All Teachers & Paraprofessionals Oct -June PCT Leads, Models & PD Committee 2018-19 All teachers will conduct classroom inter-visitations across disciplines and grade-levels, observing effective practices for differentiating instruction through a variety of assessment practices PCTs and Models will support the PD Committee with the implementation of a consistent and meaningful intervisitation All Teachers & Paras Oct - June 2018-19 PD Committee and School leaders All Teachers Oct-June PCTs and Models 2018-19 CEP 24 schedule by ensuring alignment with individual teacher MOTP ratings, especially with respect to components 1e, 3c, and 3d PCTs, Models and Content Team reps will support PD Committee in ensuring intervisitations result in a series of share-outs and re-engagement with whole staff at Monday PDs 2018-19 All Teachers & Paras Nov-June 2018-19 PCT Leads, Models w/ support of Content Team Reps 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Best inter-visitation practices will be shared out on our social media platforms including our website and Facebook page. In addition, videos of best pedagogical practices will be archived for presentations to families and parents at upcoming Parent Engagement events and open houses. In addition, monthly academic walk-thrus will take place, providing parents access to their children's classroom environments in the various content areas including literacy, math, science, arts, phys ed & health. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human Capital: Administration, PD Committee, PCT Leads, Model Teacher, Content Team Leads; Instructional Resources: Professional Development sessions, support from district office, professional developments that focuses on building coherence across content areas, Advance informal/formal observations with emphasis on Danielson’s Components 1e and 3c; Schedule Adjustments: departmental common planning time adding into regular teacher programs Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Continual monitoring will be performed through cycles of professional learning. Surveys will be conducted based on our annual goal across content. Teachers will be given the opportunity to customize their pedagogy to their needs. These surveys will then help the PD committee to continue to develop professional learning that best suits to our teacher’s needs that address our goals across content areas. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. summative teacher surveys based on inter-visitations, their cycles of learning and personal gains. MOSLs taken in the Spring in order to measure gains with that from the fall. 2018-19 CEP 25  Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 26  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Soundview Academy consistently distributes authority across all levels of the school, and has been one of the first DOE schools to take full advantage of the PCT Lead and Model teacher positions. In addition, our position of one of the premier Apple ConnectEd 1:1 schools in NYC has permitted an unparalleled level of instructional design in a community school context. Our reputation as an innovator in middle grades education is renowned citywide, as we were one of the first Bronx schools in the Innovation Zone and set the pace for STEAM-centered educational design. Our Well Developed rating on our last Quality Review, 2015-16, (all Well Developed indicators except for Proficient in 1.2) is testament to the high level of systems functioning. In addition, we continue to meet all AYPs for ELA and Math state exam gains (increased proficiency in both areas, as well as double-digit reduction of Level 1s in 2017-18) as well as on the NYSESLAT. Nonetheless, on the 2017-18 School Quality Guide only, only 70% of teachers in comparison to 85% of teachers citywide reported that "it is clear how all of the programs offered are connected to their school's instructional vision". Even fewer teachers, 63% in comparison to 84% of teachers citywide agreed that their school curriculum, instruction and learning materials are all well coordinated across the different grade levels." Furthermore, only 67% of teachers in comparison to 82% citywide agree that "the principal and assistant principals function as a cohesive unit." Lastly, only 59% of teachers feel that "teachers in their school trust each other," only 63% of teachers agree that "it is ok in their school to discuss feelings, worries, and frustrations with other teachers," and only 63% of teachers agree that "teachers respect other teachers who take the lead in school improvement efforts." Therefore, despite our school's stellar metrics (one of the few zoned South Bronx middle schools that is a NYS School in Good Standing and consistently meets AYPs), the popularity of the school with children and parents (over 400 students applied for 120 spots in the 6th grade last year), and the accolades that continue to pour in (Soundview recognized by Apple at the Bronx Borough President's ed tech conference this fall), there is a clear gap at the level of teacher appraisal of instructional leadership, instructional coherence and trust in one another. Our action plan in this domain is focused on increasing the level of positive perception by the teaching staff with respect to coherence of curriculum, quality of instructional support and teacher coaching, as well as greater coherence and collaboration between administration, teacher-leaders and the teachers themselves. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 2018-19 CEP 27  By June 2019 SVA administration will distribute leadership more effectively by expanding the Core Lead Instructional Team to include our PCT Leads and our Expanded Lead Instructional Team to include our Models, resulting in an overall 10% improvement in the 2018-19 School Environment Survey with respect to teacher response on specific questions tied to Instructional Core. 2018-19 CEP 28  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? School’s administration and teacher leads will develop a cohesive and comprehensive professional development plan that is differentiated to address the needs of individual staff members, as well as the various content teams. All Teachers & Paras Sept-June 2018-19 PD Committee, Admin and Teacher Leads and Models, Admin Interns Successfully leverage the talents and initiatives of our teacher leads and models to design and implement the professional development plan: including direct fostering of 3 cycles of intervisitation tied to 5 Theories of Action and differentiated intervisitations tied to MOTP-data for individual teachers and new teacher differentiation for new and first-year teachers PCT Leads and Models Sept-June Principal and APs 2018-19 LPP ConnectEd STEAM Team Roll out of "Problem of Practice" inquiry cycle tied to an equity study of racial/gender and other sub-group patterns of acceleration (and vice versa, stagnation) in our Regents-based accleration program. All SVA Scholars Nov-June 2018-19 Unpack key academic press, school culture and trust question responses from the 2018-19 School Environment survey. Using this data launch Restorative Circles in key leadership meetings, and organize a teacher and staff day retreat or overnight retreat that can build team, trust, and communication. Funded by the community school budget. All Staff Dec-May 2018-19 LPP ConnectEd Models Canty & Liverpool; STEAM Team Principal, Chapter Leader and School Counseling Team 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Greater integration of the Parent Coordinator in Monday PDs and other key instructional meetings to better communicate with parents the precise nature of our curricular and instructional foci this year, as well as an improved focus on Student-Led Conferences in order to have students take ownership of their learning and performance. Moreover, we will continue to develop the agendas of our SLT meetings to address higher-level academic discussions and planning to support student achievement. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2018-19 CEP 29  Human Capital: Administration & Cabinet, Community Coordinator, Parent Coordinator, Lead Teacher Support, Teacher-Mentors; Instructional Resources: tools and rubrics for leadership development and family/community engagement; Scheduling: use of Cabinet and SLT meetings to address and revisit on a regular basis Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. MId-year teacher survey utilizing the specific teacher-based academic press questions tied to Instructional Core on the School Environment Survey. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Periodic google-form surveys that baseline and benchmark key indicators derived from School Environment Survey. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 30  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Parents are very satisfied by our school and have historically rated us among the highest of all middle schools in the district as evidenced in the School Environment Survey for several years running and by the fact we now have over 500 families applying annually for 120 spots in the 6th grade, a statistic unrivaled by other zoned middle schools in the South Bronx. Additionally, Soundview Academy has been able to successfully, engage parent with student-led conferences which parent enjoy and we have 85%- 90% of parents attend each marking period. We also utilize our cultural dance teams performances which always fills the auditorium with families to watch and enjoy. We noticed that cultural events tend to bring high parent involvement and we work strategically, to plan for important meetings around these events to ensure parents are aware of everything upcoming. In 2018-2019 we aim to have 95% of our parents on IO education were as in the past we only had 80% of our parents using JumpRope. In alignment with our Apple ConnectEd program and IO education, we will upgrade parent engagement to a more reciprocal, geographically dynamic, and digital (smartphone) friendly communication style. As part of this initiative, we intend to share more robust data and holistic (academic and social-emotional) assessment of children with our families via the tools of the digital age including our mastery-based application of IO Education . Having now recognized that almost 100 percent of our families are now in possession of smartphones and digital devices at ever-increasing levels, we plan to take full advantage of our Google Apps architecture and use of iOEducation, LiveSchool, and Phone messenger systems to foster this communication via multimedia technology. In addition, as recipients of the Apple ConnectEd grant, our students now have access to an unparalleled level of technology (a one device per scholar ratio) – creating the possibility for a whole new matrix for fostering family and community ties aligned to our focus on culture, arts, athletics, and academics. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June of 2019, there will be an overall increase of 5 more parents on PA, by increasing parent empowerment. The PC, with support from FACE, will create more parent involvement during the school day by conducting academic walk-throughs where the PC and principal will guide parents through course work and common core standards and help them understand the work that we be required of students and show parents what is expected. Using the parent survey, and student attendance we will be sure to target students who might need additional support by welcoming the whole family to the school for a restorative meeting with the PC, teachers and social work team to 2018-19 CEP 31  produce a plan that works for the family and school.Also, using parent volunteers who specialize in areas to lead workshops for students & families. As well as student alum. 2018-19 CEP 32  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Provide parent/guardian education and training in iOEducation application (standards-based assessment) in all content areas. Utilize Parent Engagement time on Tuesdays and other Parent Engagement events planned to support this goal. Conduct a series of differentiated workshops (“Cyber Workshop”) for parents, especially those serving SWDs and ELLs, with a focus on strengthening parents’ command of these online tools and therefore tightening the academic bond between the school and the home. Garnering support and feedback from parents to improve and strengthen school-based practices in this domain. Foster increased use by teachers of the IO education app for the purpose of strategic group emailing of students and their parents for the purposes of building trust, confidence and reciprocity between the school and home; encourage similar growth in the use of our phone messenger blasts. Greater development of our soundviewacademy.org website to disseminate regular information and publicity, and allow for greater access and communication between teachers and students/parents around curriculum, assessment criteria, assignments/projects and classroom practices Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All teachers Sept-Nov 2018 Parents Oct-June Saturdays 2018-19 AP, Guidance Counselor, and Teacher Data Leads Parent Coordinator, Tech Coordinator, PA President, Principal and AP Parents & Students Sept-June 2018-19 Parents & Students Oct-June 2018-19 Teachers, Admin, Parent Coordinator, Tech Coordinator, Students, Parents Principal and Digital Consultant, Content Team Liaisons, Tech Coordinator More robust development of our social media platforms including Facebook, Instagram and Twitter, with the aim to disseminate positive information and images of our students and their academic, artistic and athletic successes Teachers, Parents & Students Oct-June 2018-19 Admin Intern, Parent Coordinator, SLT, Community School Director 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Aspira and Play Study Win, NYC DOE Community Schools Initiative Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2018-19 CEP 33  Human Capital: Students, Parents, Parent Coordinator, Community Coordinator, Tech Coordinator, Teacher-Mentors, Administration; Instructional Resources: IOEducation, GoogleApps, Remind, Phone Messenger; Schedule Adjustment: Use of PWT/PE time Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. MId-year parent survey utilizing the specific parent-based questions tied to Instructional Core on the School Environment Survey. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Parent responses on School Environment Survey Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 34  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Performance levels on ELA state exams, MOSLdata, 100 Book Challenge running record data,Teacher observations and class performance data. Performance levels on Math state exams, MOSLassessment data, Teacher observations and class performance data. MOSLs and class performance rates MOSLs and class performance rates Response to Intervention and PBIS Systems Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) After School (Ramp it Up), Saturday Academy, Lit Life, 100 Book Challenge reading program, IREADY NTN,After School (Ramp it Up), Saturday Academy IXL, Accelerated Math, IREADY Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Tiered assignments, small group pull-outs, & push-in, Saturday classes During school day, after school W-Th, Saturdays Tiered assignments, small group pull-outs, & push-in, Saturday classes During school day, after school W-Th, Saturdays Urban Advantage Small group instruction Humanities One-to-one tutoring Scholars Mentoring Program, PBIS, Weekly Individual & Group Counseling Small group and one to-one During school day and in after school program During school day and in after school program During school day (Scholars Mentoring Program) 2018-19 CEP 35  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 39 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. STH receive at-risk counseling support as well as support from the Attendance Team to ensure consistent attendance in school. Students are provided school supplies and uniform as needed. Afterschool and Saturday programming provides students with additional instructional support as well. Parents or Guardians are supported by the Parent Coordinator with communication between teachers and parent as well as for school events. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). NA 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 36  NA 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. $3,900 2018-19 CEP 37  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. As a relatively new and groundbreaking public school serving our historically-under served neighborhood in South Central Bronx, Soundview Academy has developed a specialized focus in the visual and digital arts as well as offering the district’s only middle school Dual Language program. In addition, we participated in Phase One of the city’s Special Education Reform, recognizing the importance of offering our scholars flexible programs that adapted to their special needs. In order to achieve such a program, Soundview Academy has been very aggressive in recruiting teachers that are highly-qualified and, often times, dual or triple certified to serve diverse instructional environments and deliver interdisciplinary curricula. Specifically, over 25% of our teachers our dual-certified in General Education and Special Education, Bilingual Education or English as a Second Language. Our recruitment approach has been robust and multi-layered. Our longstanding relationships with Math for America, NYCDOE’s Teacher Recruitment & Quality Unit, Teach for America (TFA) and Teaching Fellows program (we currently have over 8 current and former Teaching Fellows on staff) have allowed us to recruit some of the best and brightest to a high-needs neighborhood in the Bronx. By posting our vacancies on employment and career websites such as Craig’s List and Idealist, developing internships with various local universities (Teachers College, Fordham, NYU, etc.), and working with key teacher recruitment divisions like TRQ, we have been able to vet top candidates from their teacher training programs. Lastly, our personnel committee regularly attends citywide job fairs and utilizes the full array of New Teacher Finder resources. Incidentally, our teacher retention rate last year was over 95%, a remarkable figure for community middle schools in the South Bronx, and our most recent BEDS survey demonstrates that over 95 percent of our teaching staff is considered highly-qualified by official certification standards. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). For several years, Soundview Academy has put in place as one of its major school-wide initiatives a dynamic and teacher-friendly middle school program with major blocks of common planning time for content-area teams and weekly Monday whole-staff professional development sessions for its ambitious and diverse staff. For teachers, this includes extensive mentoring for new teachers by our Lead and Model teachers, district instructional liaisons and external professional developers. This involves weekly meetings and intervisitations between teachers within content and cohort teams, as well as outside professional development workshops differentiated for individual teachers and their teams. Given our school was developed during the roll-out of CCLS, our teachers are highly adept at 2018-19 CEP 38  implementing the new curricula at high levels of delivery – resulting in our program being one of the strongest in the district. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Our teachers are represented directly by the four chapter-selected constituents of our MOSL committee, and our PD Committee (first formed in 2014-15) has helped solidify a highly collaborative approach to PD planning and execution. Our aim in 2015-16 is to charge this committee with the task of building in much greater differentiation and personalization to match individual teacher needs. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount 2018-19 CEP 39  each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) Section 5B, Part 4B Title I Part A (Basic) Federal $351,521 Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Federal Federal n/a n/a Title III, Immigrant Federal Tax Levy (FSF) Local $12,366 $3,200,477 X n/a n/a X X Section 5C, Part 4B Section 5D, Part 4B Section 5E, Part 4B n/a n/a Section 5A, Part 4B Section 5B, Part 4B Section 5C, Part4B Section 5B, Part 4B Section 5C, Part 4B Section 5D, Part 4B Section 5E, Part 4B 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to 2018-19 CEP 40  combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 41  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. 08X448 Soundview Academy for Culture and Scholarship, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students Soundview Academy will support parents and families of Title I students by:  Utilize Parent Engagement Tuesdays to help parents work with teachers and their children to improve their achievement level in the content area, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology;  Partner with the Parent Association to provide parents with the information and training needed to  effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; Fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress;  Providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments, and  access to online information about their child's grades Sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand;  Providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; 2018-19 CEP 42  Parental Involvement and School Quality SVA's Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and Students with Disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will:  actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact;  engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills;  ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and  strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills;  maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home;   provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report;  host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help    Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by:  holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference  hosting educational family events/activities during Student Led Conferences and throughout the school year 2018-19 CEP 43   encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association and Title I Parent Committee supporting or hosting Family Day events   establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents  encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers  providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress  developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress  providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) Soundview Academy for Culture and Scholarship, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards  using academic learning time efficiently    offering high quality instruction in all content areas  providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships     conducting student-led conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education;  providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact;  2018-19 CEP 44   providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information;  ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff  ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents;  notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff  member; arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities;  planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Student Led Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents    creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents;   ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as  described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities  monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent;  ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games;     promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits;  encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child;   participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education;  communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested;   become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; 2018-19 CEP 45   participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child;   III. Student Responsibilities Student Responsibilities:       attend school regularly and arrive on time; complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; show respect for myself, other people and property; try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 46  Addendum: Community School Partnerships Directions: The Community School (CS) strategy is directly aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. Community Schools bring schools and community partners together and integrate academics, health, youth development, and family engagement to provide students with the tools and opportunities they need to succeed. The Core Services in Community Schools are Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness. Part 1 – Community School Partnerships Goal(s) How is the CS strategy integrated into academic instruction at your school, and what impact has it had on student academic outcomes? In year two of the Einstein Campus CSI, the Community School initiative is being integrated for greater academic and extracurricular support as well as school leadership. ASPIRA will support Soundview Academy by providing a comprehensive afterschool and Saturday program that partners with our content area teachers and extracurricular directors and coaches, and aims to increase targeted students proficiency on the state ELA exam and Math exams. ASPIRA will also offer educational trips and cultural town halls with the help of other CBO and small businesses to create culturally relevant experiences for all students in conjunction with school, district and Chancellor's initiatives. Additionally, ASPIRA hired a full time LMSW to provide restorative services to students, families, and the school community. ASPIRA will also contract Ramapo and other outside partners to provide professional development, classroom management, and in-class observations to specific teachers and teacher teams. Indicate the summative goal(s) of the Community School for the 2018-19 school year. Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. The Community School goals for the 2018-2019 school year are: 1. Provide integrated and quality Mental Health subcontractors and supports by the end of October, early November. Utilizing, Ramapo for teacher training and as coaches to individual teachers. 2. ASPIRA will create a Mental Health Plan that earmarks all mental health funding. 3. ASPIRA Hire a Licensed Clinical Social worker through ASPIRA to assist with the identification and coordination of SWD in conjunction with the school’s protocols. This individual will serve as an additional licensed Social Worker who will lead small group sessions, restorative circles, and one on one sessions based on need. (Person has been hired) 4. ASPIRA will structure family engagement in conjuction with FACE, working with the parent coordinator and PA president that utilizes community-based organizations such as NYC ID, ES programs, Job fairs, and GED programs. ASPIRA will begin these initiatives by October/November. Additionally, by ordering gift cards to assist families in crisis when identified by the school. 5. ASPIRA will support the school by adding to the PBIS program that is already in place by funding PBIS trips and incentives ASPIRA will start this work mid-October. 6. ASPIRA will support the attendance team by providing additional staff (Group leaders, CSD, After School Director) to help plan supports for students who fall between Tier 2 and 3. Also, ASPIRA will sit on the attendance meetings and offer training through the Office of Community Schools for any staff that wishes to act as a success mentor. ASPIRA hopes it's efforts can help the school increase attendance by 3 percent by targeting the chronically absent students and At risk students. ASPIRA will start supporting attendance by Mid October. 7. Overall, ASPIRA will support the school community and contribute to every possible school function event and activity. ASPIRA will also support the school in the day to day school operations such as lunch and hallway support as needed. 8. ASPIRA will support by lead supplemental after school clubs with the YMCA, and Volleyball, Soccer, Basket Ball, and dance, and STEM activities. 9. Lastly, ASPIRA will support school-based initiatives and events that work to empower the school community and the surrounding neighborhoods of Soundview and Castle Hill. 2018-19 CEP 47  Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Community School Annual Goal(s): How will achieving your Community School Goal(s)--in Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness--support your academic goals for students? ASPIRA will support Soundview Academy by providing additional support staff when needed for events, activities, and for a Saturday academy and after school. These extra academic or extra curricula activities will be funded by ASPIRA yet developed with the school to meet the school’s needs. ASPIRA will also, hire a licensed social worker through ASPIRA. That will work to develop students who are falling off track academically, and who are considered at-risk. By working closely with the grade teams, school guidance counselor and DOE social worker. The LMSW clinician will also work with administration and teachers to create more restorative practices in PD’s for teachers, and administration that will help build trust and strengthen our action plan for the school year. ASPIRA is contracting Ramapo to provide intensive training and support to those teachers who need more assistance to be able to elevate the students learning in the classroom.Through partnering with these organization, ASPIRA will be able to support the school by providing support to those students who are slipping to give them the social-emotional skills they need to help students grow academically and personally. Lastly, ASPIRA will be working to provide wellness activities such as, basketball and Volleyball and soft ball to provide students with valuable experience, and team discipline that will prepare them to be great scholars athletically, and personally. Part 2 – Community School Partnerships Core Services Action Plan Part 2a. Identify the Community-based Organization (CBO) partnerships that you will develop in ELT, Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness, their target student population(s), and scope of the services provided. As well as supporting schools’ supportive environment and attendance work, CBOs should be helping to support your school’s instructional focus. CBO Partnership Target Population Scope of Service SY18-19 SMART Goal The New School ESL Classes for Parents 5 - 10 parents Parent empowerment To be able to assist at least 5 parents learn English Ramapo 3-6 Classrooms Professional Development/ Behavior Management ASPIRA LMSW Whole School ; 1:1 Counseling Counseling Attendance Support/ New Visions Hemp Map At risk students, and CA students Attendance Pre and Post Assessments will be provided to teachers. To see growth in their teacher instruction Increase SEL in students considered At-risk by seeing a 2% growth in attendance, and or ELA and Math scores Will support the school by targeting this population to see a 2% growth in attendance 2018-19 CEP 48  Soft ball, basketball, & volleyball Academic Enrichment Part 3 – Budget and Resource Alignment Targeted Students wellness/health Academic Slippables (low 3s) and Pushables (high 2s) Students will increase attendance, and ELA and Math scores by 2% ASPIRA will pay DOE teachers to work with this targeted population to increase state exam scores by 3 points. Part 3a. Indicate resources your Community Partnership will leverage to achieve your summative SMART goal(s) and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ASPIRA will work with CBO agency’s for free to bring adult classes. However, ASPIRA will purchase, food, and metro cards, and pay staff to act as child care to be able to elevate parents of any hardship that might prevent the parent from attending classes ASPIRA will consult with Ramapo to provide intensive training and support to those teachers who need more support to be able improve classroom instruction and student engagement. LMSW Clinician to be hired under ASPIRA to act as the at risk counselor and restorative point person for all families, staff and student mental health concerns, and to develop a rich community culture within the school. Attendance Heap map will be used to support the school in targeting and tracking students attendance to see at least a 2% growth in Chronically absent and at risk students. By printing reports for the weekly attendance Health and wellness after school clubs will be paid through or funded by ASPIRA to provide students with fun, structure, disciplined sports that will work to encourage students to improve their attendance, and grades in order to stay on the team Academic Enrichment will be funded by ASPIRA to pay DOE teachers and Para’s, to work with a targeted population of students for 12-24 weeks of after school academic support or Saturday Academy. Part 3b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 3c. Describe how the school will partner with the Lead CBO to do the following: 2018-19 CEP 49  1. 2. 3. 4. Community Schools are expected to partner with a community-based partner organization (CBO) and together with members of the School Leadership Team, hire a Community School Director. The Director will lead implementation of the asset and needs assessment process, and other critically important coordinating activities. Indicate how you will leverage this aspect of the work. Community Schools are expected to personalize the needs of all students, through strategic programming and services, as determined by the asset and needs assessment, and must also offer Expanded Learning Time (ELT) and mental health programming. In completing this section, ensure that you think about how: (1) the right services are provided to the right students and families at the right time; and (2) how you will seamlessly coordinate services with instructional programming happening throughout and outside of the school day. Indicate how you will implement this work, and describe other programming you anticipate to be in place to strengthen this initiative. Community Schools are expected to emerge as Partnership Schools, which are places where parents and families feel welcome, actively participate in the conversation and decision-making around the renewal of their schools, and have many opportunities to advocate for their children. Monthly meetings and Community School Forums engaging families and community stakeholders will be a critical part of this family engagement strategy. Describe how you will implement this aspect of the work. Community School Principals are expected to meet on a weekly basis with their Community School Director, select Assistant Principals, key staff, and other CBOs, to analyze trends in data and case manage individual students. Data tools – including the New Visions Data Sorter - and training will be available for schools to use. Indicate how you will implement this aspect of the work. 1. Community School Director has been hired and is working closely with Principal to ensure all goals are aligned with the school’s mission. 2. ASPIRA aims to provide as much supplemental support to the teachers as much possible through Ramapo training and teacher coaching, and also through the Professional Development and teacher planning to be utilized during a Saturday Academy and after school academy for up to 60 students for 24 weeks. 3. ASPIRA will partner with the parent coordinator, PA, and FACES to bring a robust parent workshop every Saturday. Parents will be able to meet together as a group, and also set up one on one meeting with the facilitator to address needs that are specific to the family. ASPIRA is also partnering with the parent coordinator to bring in workshops and events that met the parent’s needs with the Common Pantry that will provide a monthly case manager to come on site to support both schools 4. The Community School Director will meet with the principal weekly to compare data from the data sorter and District Public. The data will help guide the workshops we bring into for parents, also the data will help frame the vision for the Community School Director when choosing organizations to partner with for the students educational growth. Part 4 – Community School Partnerships Oversight 2018-19 CEP 50  Part 4a. Key Staff and Partners 1. Name and describe the scope of involvement of all community partners working in the school (include partners supporting ELT, counseling, enrichment, etc.) 2. Name the members of your Community School Team and how meetings will be organized and structured to engage all stakeholders and be focused on results. 3. Explain data strategies including the use of the data sorter, and steps that the school will take to ensure that the appropriate interventions are provided to the right students 1. ASPIRA is the lead Community Based Organization supporting the school in coordinating mental health services via subcontractors. Ramapo will be providing mental health supports in collaboration with Counseling in Schools Mental Health Clinician. Play Study Win provides after-school enrichment offerings to middle school students in the community. 2. Our Community School Team will consist of the same members on the School Leadership Team, parents, teachers, the principal, and Parent Teacher Association president. Our meetings will focus on key community school events, attendance strategies, and key stakeholder partnerships that need to take place. 3. We will use the data sorter, ATS reports, and District Public in our weekly attendance meetings to review and look for patterns related to chronically absent students, and we will assign targeted interventions to each student, and assign Success Mentor to check-in with chronically absent students. Part 4b. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the Community School program. We are working in collaboration with school day to ensure we are all on the same page in regards to Community School programming. All adjustments are made in accordance with school administration. Part 4c. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. Since the Community School Director is starting in October, all programming in the school will officially start November with contractor vendors and Einstein Campus CSI staff. Part 4d. Mental Health Work Plan Separate from this S/CEP, schools will complete a Mental Health Work Plan that will become an addendum to this document. 2018-19 CEP 51  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP 52  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: Rationale: As the city's language expectations increase, simulatenously as the number of ELLs at Soundview Academy increases, it is imperative to create comprehenisve supplemental programs that will increase the English proficiency levels of students. Based on ELLs performance on the 2017 & 2018 NYSESLAT, Soundview Academy, in District 8, needs to focus students growth on the NYSESLAT. To achieve language it would be beneficial for Soundview to target entering/emerging ELLs. Due to the fact that emerging/entering ELLs exsit throughout each grade level it would be appropriate for students from sixth, seventh and eithgth to participate in the supplemental Title III programs. Participation would be based on their 2018 NYSESLAT scores. Furthermore, it is important to analyze any transitioning and expanding ELLs that are not making gains to receive supplemental support through the TItle III program. The ESOL certified teacher, Ms. Gribbins (ESOL Certified), will provide the direct instruction for entering and emerging ELLs. This will be done on Wednesdays, Thursdays and Saturdays. On Wednesdays and Thursdays students will receive Direct Instruction from 2:30-4:30 from the end of October until April. In 2019 the start date will be October 12th and will continue for 26 sessions until April 20th, 2019. Saturday classes will take place for fifteen Saturdays from 9am until 1pm. Saturday classes will start on January 7th and continue until April 15th. There will be three programs during this time. Ms. Gribbins will be teaching ENL for entering/emerging, Ms. Vazquez will be teaching a writing workshop for transitioning and expanding ELLs, and Ms. Colon will be teaching two Math classes, one class for entering/emerging and one class for transitioning & expanding. The teachers will be providing direct instruction through flexible grouping and parallel teaching. During the ENL program with Ms. Gribbins three resources will be strategically used. These materials are supplemental to what is being used during daily instruction and the only cost will for renewal of the Rosetta To begin, the program Milestones Beginner Level will be used to allow for mastery of Basic Interpersonal Communication Skills leading to development of Cognitive Academic Language Proficiency Skills. In March students will use "Getting Ready for the NYSESLAT" to prepare for the state exam, NYSESLAT. Throughout the program students will have access to Rosetta Stone as a supplemental resource to work on independently and allow for individual conferencing to occur between the teacher and student. This program will be taught in English. There will be 15 classes of ENL entering/emerging group from 9-11 am. The Adult program (described in part D) will be taught from 11-1pm by Ms. Gribbins for ten Saturdays. The second program, Writing Workshop for ELLs, available for students not making necessary gains on proficiency levels, will be provided by Ms. Vazquez (Bilingual/ELA Certified), a 2018-19 CEP 53  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information bilingual certified teacher that teaches Humanities and HLA to the Dual Language students. Ms. Vazquez has daily access to majority of the ELLs via her teaching schedule and has built a significant relationship with the ELL students, to recognize their needs, particularly their need with writing. For fifteen Saturdays, from 11am-1pm, Ms. Vazquez will teach a writing workshop for ELLs, targeting students that are not making necessary gains. Materials for this program will be Intermediate & Advanced levels of Milestones, extension of Expeditionary Learning (Common Core Program used during mandated minutes), and "Getting Ready for the NYSESLAT". This program will be taught in English. The third program will be taught by Ms. Colon (Bilingual/Math Certified) from 9am-1pm. Ms. Colon will be teaching Math to the transitioning and expanding students from 9-11 and the entering/emerging group from 11-1pm. She will be utilizing the Math material that will be provided by the Saturday General Program. Ms. Colon is a certified bilingual teacher and will use native language supports during her direct instruction. This program will be heavily differentiated based on grade levels and individual needs of students. All 40 ELLs at Soundview Academy will be invited to the Saturday Academy Program, including any new students that arrive. The leveled groups for direct instruction groups will be determined by levels of the NYSESLAT. There will be 10 students invited from the entering/emerging group. There will be 30 students invited to the tranisitiong & expanding group. Permission slips will be provided in the parents' preferred language. Additionally, attendance expectations will be expressed in permission slip. Students are encouraged not to have more than two absences from the program and attendance will be taken to monitor. Attendance records will be taken from teachers and kept on file with the Language Coordinator, Ms. Gribbins. Copies will be kept on file in the ELL compliance binder. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Rationale: All teachers at Soundview Academy engage and are responsible for the education of English Language Learners at some point, because of this it is important that teachers (as a whole) receive on going Professional Development to understand the needs of the students they teach or encounter. Additionally, there are some teachers that have more daily interactions/instruction with ELLs, specifically newcomers, SIFEs, and beginners. These teachers would also benefit from specific targeted Professional Development that addresses the daily concerns of teaching ELLs. Teachers that have daily interactions and majority of their class make up are ELLs will meet bi-weekly for 45 minutes (Thursdays & Fridays) with the ESL coordinator, Ms. Gribbins, during a common planning prep. These teachers include Ms. Guevara (6th grade Humanities), Mr. Garcia 2018-19 CEP 54  Part C: Professional Development (6th grade Math), Ms. Martinez (6/7th Science), Ms. Ventura (7th grade Math), Ms. Vazquez (7/8th Humanities), and Ms. Castillo (8th grade Science), Ms. Colon (8th grade Math). The ENL coordinator will be responsible for turn-keying ELL related PDs that have been attended. The ENL coordinator will attend PDs offered by the DELLSS that are specifically related to Soundview's need. This may include aligning ENL instruction to CCLS, differentiating instruction for newcomers and long term ELLs, utilizing appropriate assessment tools to build curriculum, using SIOP when lesson planning. After attending these meetings, Ms. Gribbins will turnkey to small groups during weekly meetings. Ms. Gribbins will tentatively attend quarterly PDs in September/October, December/January, April/March and May that will be offered by the DELLSS. In addition to Ms. Gribbins attending PDs, she will organize for other teachers to attend PDs and turn key material upon return. Outline of this is as follows; Humanities teachers and Math/Science teachers servicing ELLS will attend two Professional Development series annually offered by the DELLSS. One will be in the fall and the other in the spring. For whole staff training, Ms. Gribbins will conduct a Professional Development at the beginning of the year, mid year, and end of year. This will address the basics of ELLs, including expectations of ELLs, promotion policy of ELLs, language acquisition of ELLs, social and emotional concerns of ELLs, as well as school wide goals and action plans for ELLs. Ms. Gribbins will include text below to support these Professional Developments: “Not In My Classroom”: Teacher Attitudes Towards English Language Learners in the Mainstream Classroom Anne Walker, Ph. D., Jill Shafer, Ph.D., & Michelle Iiams, Ph.D. University of North Dakota Classroom Instruction that works with English Language Learners. By Jane D. Hill & Kathleen M. Flynn. All attendance sheets from PDs held at the school level will be kept in the ELL compliance binder. Outside PDs that are attended by Ms. Gribbins will be documented through an agenda that the PD provides and kept on record in the ELL compliance binder. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Rationale: Soundview Academy has developed throughout the last six years to encompass a strong ENL and Dual Language Program. Each year parents have requested to have ESL courses for adults, in order to have more English skills when communicating with staff, teachers, and school personnel. The request and need has continued from parents of ELLs after two years of a 2018-19 CEP 55  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities successful Adult ESL program. These classes have and will continue to service our community as a whole and close the gap between school and home. Soundview strives to keep the commitment to parents. Soundview will offer a ten-week ESL Adult class that will give parents the opportunity to learn the English language allowing them to develop as a bilingual individual and be able to support their students with the development of the English language. The TESOL teacher will provide instructions on Saturdays for two hours in English. The program will start in November and run until April. The TESOL teacher will provide additional support to the Guidance Department and Parent Association to provide ELL specific topic workshops. Dr. Roger Ball is the Guidance Counselor at Soundview and provides parent workshops throughout the school year. These will include topics "The ELL and high school", "Testing taking for ELLs" and "ENL 101". Parents will be notified with letters in parents' preferred language and invitations sent to the home. Additionally, parents will have the opportunity to hear about the program at Open House night in the fall and sign up if interested. Parents will be invited to all events with letters in parents' preferred language. Additionally, bilingual translations will be provided at all events as scheduled and coordinated through the Language Access Coordinator. Attendance sheets will be taken at all events and kept in ENL binder with Language Coordinator, Ms. Gribbins. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials. 2018-19 CEP 56  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 2018-19 CEP 57  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 8 School Name Soundview Academy Borough Bronx School Number 448 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal William Frackelton Assistant Principal Tara Joye Coach ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Meaghan Gribbins Teacher/Subject Area Damaris Vazquez/Dual Language Teacher/Subject Area Zulekya Guevara/Dual Language Related-Service Provider Yaser Jaber/ ENL teacher Superintendent Dr. Karen Aimes Coach School Counselor Marissa Bailey Parent Ivelise Rivera Parent Coordinator Diana Rameriz Field Support Center Staff Member Sabrina Cruz Other (Name and Title) Dorothy Nettey C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 4 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 7 0 2 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 2018-19 CEP 58  D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 390 Total number of ELLs 40 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 10.26% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Spanish Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown Program TBE TBE TBE DL Lang. School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 2012-2013 K 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 0 4 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 5 0 0 0 0 0 6 0 0 0 1 1 7 0 0 0 1 1 8 0 0 0 1 1 9 0 0 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 3 0 0 3 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? 1. Students are assessed using a variety of diagnostic, formative, and summative assessments. In addition to the Math, ELA, and NYSESLAT assessments, students’ reading levels are assessed using IRLA (Independent Reading Level Assessment Framework). Students’ math levels are assessed using DYO interim assessments and teacher made unit diagnostic, formative, and summative assessments. Additionally, ELLs are assessed using Milestones and RIGOR. These assessments are used to drive future instruction. ELL students also take the ELL Periodic Assessment in the Fall and the Spring. The data collected is used from grouping students appropriately by proficiency level, as well to provide necessary scaffolds during instruction. Some insights that have been gathered by the data provided is that ELLs struggle most in reading and writing. This has supported the school's instructional plan to provide students with additional support on ELA during after-school and Saturday 2018-19 CEP 59  Academy. The data that is provided from assessments is gathered and put into the school data tracker. The data inquiry team meets weekly to discuss patterns and trends and develop next steps. The ENL teacher is part of the data inquiry to support language acquisition concerns that may arise during analysis of data. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Structures that are put in place to support data analysis would be weekly team meetings that are built into teacher programs. Furthermore, using data support from Data Analysts for District Public. This has allowed teachers to collaborative look at data that has been segregated. From this data next steps are formulated to support growth in struggling areas. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? Summative assessments that are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need are as follows: For ENL students we use the IRLA for a baseline in September, as well as the ELL periodic assessment. In HLA we have created an assessment aligned to the Spanish Language Proficiency Exam and the ELE that includes 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? During weekly meetings, teachers have the opportunity to plan and discuss necessary changes to curriculum to support further development in areas of language needing support. Furthermore, HLA teachers across grade levels analyze summative data to determine curriculum changes that need to be made on different grade levels. Further interventions that are put in place are language supports where content is lacking due to low performance in target language. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Not available due to being a 6-8 middle school. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The NYSESLAT provided insights that ELLs display lower proficiency levels in Reading and Writing. Due to the high demand of reading and writing an ENL curriculum will be developed focusing on writing with support from non-fiction text. There were also some students who had low proficiency levels in Listening and Speaking. Instruction for these students will have time focused on building vocabulary and listening skills. Data from the NYSESLAT also determines the amount of ENL minutes each student will receive. Stand alone or integrated ENL will also be determined by the level students receive on the NYSESLAT. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? NYSESLAT data is usually provided to the ENL coordinator in August. At this time a spread sheet is created of the students receiving ENL services. This spreadsheet includes the class the student will be in, the amount of ENL minutes the student will receive, integrated or stand alone will be identified, and the amount of years the student has received services. From this information adjustments will be made to the services ELL students receive, and programming decisions will be made between the programming committee including the ENL coordinator. The EDAT is also used to determine students that need additional support, particularly for After School and Saturday School. The EDAT provides comprehensive information on all state exams, in relation to the amount of years students have received services. The EDAT provides information to the particular needs of each student and what programs/services the student is receiving. The ENL coordinator provides the data to the teachers that serve ELLs. This information is then discussed during planning times 2018-19 CEP 60  to make decisions on instruction. This data is also referred to when planning Title III programs, such as After School and Saturday Academy. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. The Stand Alone ENL classes are heterogeneous. Four days a week entering, emerging, and some transitioning ELLs receive an ENL class. The Stand Alone ENL class is taught by Meaghan Gribbins (ESL certified/ESL coordinator) and follows an ENL, specific to civics, writing curriculum. There are an additional three 45 minute periods a week that are devoted to high needs areas and follows an intervention curriculum focusing on reading; SIFE and newcomers are typically addressed during this time. There are three cohorts of 6th graders, 7 th and 8 th graders in Dual Language. ELLs who are a part of the Dual Language Program still receive Stand Alone ENL classes if they are at the entering or emerging proficiency level. This class is provided by an ENL certified teacher. Teachers that are teaching ELLs content area have shared planning time to discuss best teaching strategies. Intergrated ENL occurs as well to meet the mandated minutes aligned to Part 154. The ENL coodinator, Ms. Gribbins, and another ENL teacher, Yaser Jaber, divide the mandated minutes required of integrated ENL for entering, emerging, transitioning, expanding, and commanding. The integrated minutes occur during humanities periods. The ENL teacher plans and supports ELL differentiation to the general ed teacher. The Stand-Alone model is implemented by students meeting with ENL teacher (Ms. Gribbins) four times a week, during their humanities classes. During the Stand Alone ENL class the teacher will provide curriculum directly related to building proficiency in English, with alignment to the humanities curriculum. Students receiving this services will be by grade level and that have scored entering or emerging on the NYSESLAT or NYSITELL. Students receiving integrated ENL will receive services during their humanities period from both Ms. Gribbins and Mr. Jaber. There will be mixed levels at the time of integrated ENL. ENL teacher will collaborate with general teacher to provide differentiated instruction to meet the needs of the ELLs in the class. b. TBE program. If applicable. n/a c. DL program. If applicable. In the Dual Language program integrated ENL is incorporated from Ms. Gribbins and another ENL teacher, Yaser Jaber. The ELL students in the Dual Language are heterogeneous in their proficiency levels. The class travels together for all classes and receive instruction in a 50/50 10 day rotation. There are three dual language classes. One in sixth grade, one in seventh, and one in eighth. Students that are at an entering or emerging level will receive Stand-Alone ENL services from Ms. Gribbins during their humanities class 4 times a week. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? 2018-19 CEP 61  ENL minutes are delivered to students during the ELA periods. Students that have scored entering or emerging receive 180 minutes of Stand-Alone ENL from Ms. Gribbins, and 180 minutes of Integrated ENL from an ENL teacher (Ms. Gribbins or Mr. Jaber). Integrated ENL is provided during their ELA instructional minutes. Students that are transitioning or expanding receive Integrated ENL for 180 minutes during their ELA instructional time. Students that are commanding receive integrated ENL for 90 minutes for two year after the test commanding. HLA is provided to all students in the Dual Language program. They receive HLA for 180 minutes a week. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. On each grade level majority of ELLs travel in the same cohort, and have the same grade level content area teachers. Bilingual teachers are strategically placed to service the ELLs. For example, in the sixth grade there is a bilingual math/science teacher and a bilingual humanities teacher servicing the Dual Language class, as well as the students who are not placed in Dual Language but are ELLs; they sit in a different cohort that is still instructed by the same teachers. In the seventh grade the humanities, science, and math teacher are bilingual. In the eighth grade the science teacher, ELA, and math teacher are bilingual. Soundview Academy promotes the use of translanguaging, through using translated worksheets and allowing students to express themselves in their native language. In Math/Science, text books and workbooks are provided in the student’s native language. Students are given exams in both English and their native language. Having the languages side by side allows practice for the state exams, which are provided in both languages. Teachers access the native language when assigning homework and speaking to parents, as to offer appropriate amount of support to the families of native languages other than spanish. The ENL coordinator and testing coordinator work closely together to assist the students where there is not a bilingual teacher who speaks the native language of that student. This may include accessing a translator. For example accessing a French Translator for testing accommodations. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? By having bilinigual teachers on each grade level in the Humanities classes, allows for teachers to evaluate students appropriately in their native language. Additionally, individual goals are set when teachers meet on a weekly basis to discuss individual students, best ELL teaching strategies, and other pertinent information. Teachers administer formal and informal assessments throughout the school year to assess the student's native language proficiency. The dual language classes and HLA class also have a pre-assessment, mid-line assessment, and end assessment. This allows for planning and implementing language strategies in student's home language when necessary. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a. SIFE students receive ENL through writing for 4 periods a week, and have 3 reading intervention periods. Instruction is differentiated by focusing on BICS during reading intervention, as well as phonics through the study of civics. RIGOR program is used during the intervention class to guide instruction and curriculum. b. Newcomer ELLs typically receive 4 periods a week of ENL through writing, and have 3 reading intervention periods. During the ENL through writing students will develop their BICS and CALPs through a specifically designed curriculum that targets the needs of the ELL population at Soundview. Each lesson is designed to meet the needs of all students and provide multiple access points for students to acquire the necessary materials. Multiple access points includes multiple reading levels of text, chunking of text, guided questions to reading, sentence starters, graphic organizers, differentiation of pacing, grouping and 2018-19 CEP 62  pairing, and small group instruction. The ENL curriculum focuses on writing and non fiction reading that will prepare students not only for the NYSESLAT but the ELA as well. If a newcomer tests Expanding on the NYSESLAT sooner than 3 years of being in the US, then the student will follow an Advanced ENL program. c. ELLs receiving service for 4-6 years will typically follow an Expanding ENL program (dependent upon NYSESLAT scores). Dependent upon NYSESLAT levels students will receive integrated ENL during Humanities periods. Students that are at risk of becoming Long Term ELLs will attend Saturday Academy where they will focus on the skills needed to take the NYSESLAT. d. Long term ELLs who have completed 6 years of ENL will follow an Expanding ENL schedule. These ELL students will receive integrated ENL services for 90 minutes a week. Saturday Academy will focus on taking the NYSESLAT and the skills needed to test Commanding. Long Term ELLs will focus on the modality that they show the most struggles with (typically reading and writing as shown by the AMAO scores for Soundview Academy). e. Former ELLs are provided testing accomodations for 2 years after testing proficient. ELLs that test Commanding will receive two periods of integrated ENL. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Instructional strategies are differentiated for ELL-SWDs to meet grade level content and expectations while providing access to the language. This is done through pacing of instruction, use of graphic organizers, materials that are appropriate for age and language proficiency level, and other such effective teaching practices for ELLs. Collaboration between the ENL coordinator and Special Ed Coordinator support differentiation as necessary. Grade-level materials are provided to ELLs with appropriate scaffolds. Reading material can be translated or sheltered to provide access for all students. Graphic organizers are used throughout the writing process. Grade level vocabulary is built through word study. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? The needs of ELLs-SWD are met through differentiated instruction and flexibility of scheduling. ELLs-SWD will remain in the appropriate class setting, as designated by their IEP. They will receive four periods of ENL; as the majority of ELLs-SWD at Soundview happen to have tested transitioning or lower. By receiving the four periods of ENL students will meet the mandated minutes of ENL. Instruction and curriculum will be differentiated to meet the needs, offering multiple access points for students to understand the material. Both the ENL coordinator and the Special Education coordinator will work together to develop educational plans that meet both the language and academic needs of ELLs-SWD. By keeping students in their appropriate classroom setting during daily instruction, with pull-out services of ENL will provide students with the least restrictive environment. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. The intervention programs for ELLs in content areas are to keep the students that are ELLs in the same cohort to provide the appropriate amount of integrated support. Additionally, the teachers that are servicing these cohorts meet weekly with the ENL coordinator to discuss practices of best teaching strategies and develop target plans for individual students. Bilingual content teachers are strategically placed to teach the cohorts that include ELLs. There is also an after school program for ELA and Math support that ELLs are invited to, as well as Saturday Academy which focuses on content support. The ENL coordinator provides support to the teachers who are providing additional support to ELLs during the intervention programming outside of the typical school day. Targeted interventions for ELLs in content areas include collaboration on planning with ENL teacher and content teacher. ENL 2018-19 CEP 63  teacher meets with teachers during content team meetings and provides support with scaffolds and differentiation strategies for specific content areas. This is provided in English. This collaboration is targeted towards struggling ELLs, usually ELL-SWDs, long term ELLs, and newcomers. After school intervention is provided to all ELLs, but focuses on long-term and newcomers. These students are provided support in both English and Spanish. A bilingual Math provides instruction in both English and Spanish to students struggling in Math. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Soundview will continue to analyze and make necessary improvements in our ENL and Dual Language program. Soundview Academy will also continue to develop the ENL Adult class and additional services, including bilingual after school classes. Soundview is also discussing further development of the HLA class. Soundview Academy will continue to develop and modify Title III programs and materials that are currently being used through the different programs. . Soundview Academy is also working towards strenghtening the bilingual education for SWD, a true Bilingual SETTS program. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? Not applicable 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs are afforded equal accress to all school programs by having blending learning. Students are placed in cohorts that have both monolingual and bilingual students. Soundview Academy offers a Scholars group which has both monolinugal and bilingual students. Students participate in a physical education/health class that is shared with multiple cohorts, providing a blending of bilingual and monolingual students. ELLs are offered a bilingual after school math program. Additionally, all ELLs have equal access to after school programs and activities, as information is provided in both languages. Supplemental programs that are offered to ELLs include After School and Saturday Academy. These programs use Milestones and RIGOR as the additional resources to support student growth with English Proficiency. NYSESLAT materials are also used during the supplemental program. Getting Ready for the NYSESLAT and Beyond is another supplemental resource used. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Instructional materials used for ELLs include WRAP, Hot Topics, Discovery Math, Contintential Ready for the NYSESLAT and Beyond, RIGOR and Milestones. Technology resources that are used with ELLs are PBS Kids, Books on CD, DIscovery Streaming, Brain Pop, Rosetta Stone, Imagine Learning, DuoLingo and iLearn. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Home language support is offered in content classes through translanguaging (Spanish/English) and differentiation of humanities content. In the Dual Language Class the home language is supported/taught through content. There is use of scaffolding and when necessary home language will be used as a support with scaffolding. Translanguaging (Spanish/English) is used on the spot with bilingual teachers support, as well with translated directions of assignments, including assignments that are sent home in order for parents to access student expectations. Additionally Dual Language classes are given a Home Language Arts class to support the home language and content development. For students that speak a language other than English or Spanish, the ENL coordinator and testing coordinator secure appropriate translators when necessary. The Translation and Interpretation Policy offers further explanation. During Stand Alone ENL the ENL teacher will provide appropriate English scaffolds to students that are learning English. These scaffolds will include sentence starters, word study to build vocabulary, sheltered English, bilingual dictionaries in the language 2018-19 CEP 64  of the student, small group activities, homogeneous grouping, and other effective teaching practices. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Services support the different ages and grade levels of students, as well as the resources. Classroom libraries provide High Interest Low Level text, as well as bilingual books. Milestones program also offers additional support to the different grade levels. Support services, such as counseling, are provided in home language for newcomers and SIFE students. Outside bilingual speech services are provided to students who are in need. Additionally, IEP meetings are provided with a translator and language support when necessary. In order to effectively support ELLs resources and services provided are appropriate to the students grade and age. This includes using the same reading text grade level peers are using, but scaffolding support in student's home language and/or sheltering English of text. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? We are a co-location school. The ELL teachers from both schools participate in the District ELL Liaison meetings together. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). At the beginning of the school year for newcomers, Soundview Academy offers an orientation night with bilingual staff to support students and family. Students are also provided counseling support with bilingual counselor, to assist with adjustment. Newcomers that test into ENL and are mandated to have ENL services are placed in the ENL through writing class, as well as the intervention ENL class. As students become more comfortable with the use of the English language and the American culture students will be transitioned out of ENL intervention but will remain in the ENL through writing class. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? There are no language electives offered. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? a. Dual Language at Soundview is currently offered in the sixth, seventh, and eighth grade. 50% of the target language is used for EPs and ELLs in this classroom. 50% of the time is taught in English and the other 50% is taught in Spanish. b. The Dual Language class has been created in the 605, 705, and 805 cohort, having all EPs and ELLs intergrated for all content areas. Some ELLs are pulled out for freestanding ENL, as stated in the ENL section of this policy. Students are integrated for all content areas, however, arts and physical education are not taught by bilingual teachers at this time. Students are also integrated with other cohorts for physical education. 2018-19 CEP 65  c. The Math/Science, Humanities, and Home Language Arts Dual Language teachers are bilingual and support the 50/50 model. Dual Language teachers and ENL coordinator work together to provide the appropriate amount of instruction in each target language. A calendar is created in the beginning of the year that allots the appropriate amount of time in each language to ensure each language is used 50% of the time. d. The Dual Language class has three teachers, on each grade level, that follow the language schedule decided by the Dual Language team. This would appear to be a self-contained dual language class, however students travel from classroom to classroom and change teachers according to their content, which resembles a side by side model. The content teachers must be bilingual for this program. An example of this program would be as follows; If Monday is an English day then the humanities teacher, math teacher, science teacher, and students would be speaking in English and material would be provided in English. In the current dual language class there are multiple levels of language proficiency in both English and Spanish. Students are taught at the level of language that they have. Multiple access points of instruction are provided in both languages at the levels that are appropriate for each student. There is differentiation seen on all levels in both languages. Both languages are taught simultaneous at the appropriate level on the appropriate language day. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? All teachers and support staff at Soundview Academy are given a Professional Development day during a week long summer in-service training. At this time the ENL coordinator, Meaghan Gribbins, provides all staff with a peer professional development. Professional development continues with the teachers that work with the ELL population, by having weekly ENL cohort grade meetings. During cohort meetings Ms. Gribbins turn-keys PD on best teaching practices for ELLs. These best teaching practices include sheltering English, vocabulary notebooks, grouping of levels, language objectives, etc. Teachers also collaborate on grading and promotional criteria for ELLs. Additional Professional Development is offered to Dual Language teachers. PD Mondays are also used to create Professional Development for all teachers and supports teacher in becoming language teacher. These PD topics include Language Awareness, Writing Language Objectives, and ELL experiences. The ENL teacher, teachers of ELLs and Dual Language teachers will attend Professional Development outside of school, as offered by the Division of English Language Learners and Student Support. Teachers will collaborate during scheduled prep times to turn key and discuss how Soundview will support ELLs with engagement in Common Core Learning Standards. As PDs are offered, the ENL coordinator will reach out to identified teachers to ensure attendance and participation in these PDs. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. 2018-19 CEP 66  Soundview Academy will provide in house Professional Development during the summer intensive orientation week and during Professional Development Mondays that target bilingual education and ENL topics. To further support the percentage that all teachers need, the ENL coordinator, Ms. Gribbins, will send out content related PDs offered by outside resources, such as the Division of English Language Learners and Student Support. Teachers that attend these PDs will be expected to bring an agenda from the PD and participate in a turn-key Monday Professional Development, that will allow all teachers to benefit from the resources and information provided. Teachers will receive their 15% of ELL-specific professional development through PDs that the ENL coordinator provides through a series of Language PDs. This series of PD will br provided through the turn-key of outside PDs, and through other relevant trainings. Teachers will also be recommended to attend specific outside PDs that relate to their instructional practice. Bilingual/ENL teachers that need 50% ELL-specific development will attend outside PD accompanied by inside PD that is turn-keyed from staff members. ENL coordinator will recommend relevant PD offerings. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Annual meetings are discussed during PWT on Tuesdays. ENL teachers, with a translator when necessary from Language & Interpretation Unit, call individual homes of ELL students. Teachers discuss students language proficiency as based on NYSESLAT, and in class assessments. Teacher describes the goals of the language program and what development needs are in content areas. Notes of the conversation are logged in an excel sheet that includes date, time, and points discussed. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. The Parent Association meets on a monthly basis to provide support, and be given support, at Soundview Academy. The Parent Association provides invitations and information to the ELLs families in their preferred language, as stated at time of enrollment. Additionally, Soundview Academy has created and offered an Adult ENL class on Saturdays. Parents of ELLs are invited with priority and then any additional seats will be offered to other parents in the community. We also host many family nights, including a cultural night. Annually we have a Dual Language celebration that includes a potluck with families bringing in a cultural dish. This family night is hosted in both English and Spanish and has presentations from students and parents. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. 2018-19 CEP 67  2018-19 CEP 68 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, William Frackelton, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 69  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Soundview Academy School DBN: 08x448 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) William Frackelton Title Principal Tara Joye Assistant Principal Diana Rameriz Parent Coordinator Meaghan Gribbins ENL/Bilingual Teacher Ivelise Rivera Parent Damaris Vazquez Teacher/Subject Area Zulekya Guevara Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Marissa Bailey School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Yaser Jaber Other ENL Teacher Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 06/30/17 06/30/17 06/30/17 06/30/17 06/30/17 06/30/17 06/30/17 06/30/17 06/30/17 06/30/17 06/30/17 06/30/17 06/30/17 06/30/17 06/30/17 2018-19 CEP 70  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 08x448 School Name: Soundview Academy Superintendent: Dr. Karen Ames The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Meaghan Gribbins Language Coordinator Damaris Diana Vazquez Ramirez Bilingual Teacher Parent Coordinator Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Scheduled to attend in Nov. 2018 Trained in Previous Years Trained in Previous Years Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Upon registration for the first time into the DOE system the enrollment team (enrollment secretary and ENL coordinator) inquires with parents regarding their language preferences. They are asked to fill out a home language identification survey. Copies of the language surveys are kept in the ENL binder. Additional copies are available in individual student files. This paperwork should remain in the student’s cumulative folder. In addition to this information parents are asked to fill out, and update, the student's Emergency Contact forms, where they must also indicate there home language preference, in written form and oral form. All documents are accessible in the Main Office. All information is submitted into ATS, and remains up to date. 2018-19 CEP 71  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral English (247 students) 247 Spanish (103 students) 103 Bengali (4 students) Chinese (1 student) Jamaican-Creole (1 student) Mandinka (1 student) 4 1 1 1 Papiamento (1 student) 1 Twi (3 students) According to the RHLA the preferred languages are as of September 2018. 3 247 103 4 1 1 1 1 3 247 103 4 1 1 1 1 3 247 103 4 1 1 1 1 3 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to Families Enrollment Documents: HLIS, Parent Choice, Entitlement Letter August - September Throughout the year for first time enrollment Permission Slips to parents As needed How do you plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Materials are translated by the DOE and on the Parent Resource Intranet We have created a google form for teachers to utilize when they need permission slips translated. Our in-2018-19 CEP 72  Continued Entitlement Fall house translator, Ms. Vazquez, will then translate any documents submitted to the googleform, with the understanding that there is a 72 hour turn-over. Any documents needed in a language not spoken/written by staff member, then the Interpretation & Translation Unit will be contacted and used. Materials are translated by the DOE and on the Parent Resource Intranet We have created a google form for staff to utilize when they need documents translated. Our in-house translator, Ms. Vazquez, will then translate any documents submitted to the googleform, with the understanding that there is a 72 hour turn-over. Invitations to school events: Parent Teacher Meetings, Curriculum Night, Open Houses, Award Ceremonies As needed: throughout the year Report Cards, Student progress As needed throughout the year Any documents needed in a language not spoken/written by staff member, then the Interpretation & Translation Unit will be contacted and used. The IOS education grading system allows for parents to choose their preferred language and will receive notifications in the language they chose. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. 2018-19 CEP 73  Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Curriculum night is in the fall. Curriculum Night interpretation service(s)? Translators will be provided by in house trained pedagogues. Since we have a number of staff members that are bilingual (Spanish) we will partner these staff memebers with families requesting Spanish translations. Over-the-phone interpretations will be used for low frequency languages, when in-house translator is not available. Translators will be provided by in house trained pedagogues. Since we have a number of staff members that are bilingual (Spanish) we will partner these staff memebers with families requesting Spanish translations. Open Houses: Prespective 6th graders. Meetings occur throughout the year. IEP Meetings As needed throughout the year Over-the-phone interpretations will be used for low frequency languages, when in-house translator is not available. Phone translators will be used for low frequency languages when needed. Bilingual (Spanish) School Psychologist is present when necessary. Assigned IEP teacher is bilingual (Spanish) and present at IEP meetings. ROBO calls are done for entire community in both Spanish and English inviting families to school events. School events: Any school event As needed throughout the year 2018-19 CEP 74 Over-the-phone interpretations will be used for low frequency languages, when in-house translator is not available.  3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. All school emergencies are communicated to all families in the language preferred by parent at time of enrollment. ROBO calls sent to the entire community are done in both Spanish and English. A list with low frequency numbers will be listed with over-the-phone interpretations numbers. In the time of crisis, the Language Coordiantor will contact these homes using the over-the-phone translations services. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Trained language access coordinators (Ms. Gribbins and Ms. Vazquez) create an engaging PD for all staff members to be aware of the goal. Furthermore, the team trains teachers on the resources available by the DOE, as well as those resources provided by the school. The LAC and parent coordinators will attend the training held by the translation and interpretation unit. They will then turn key this information to the entire staff. The LAC will collaborate with the office staff to ensure proper notifications are given to the parents in the preferred language of choice. This will be made available at the parents' request. The Welcome Poster and Language ID Guide will be posted in the main office and at the security desk in order to inform parents at the time of arrival that translation and interpretation services are available. The LACs will explain the in-house translation protocol. This protocol will also be provided in a one page documents. Teachers and staff will be able to submit documents through an online form, and an in-house translator (Ms. Vazquez) will translate documents within 72 hours. Teachers will also be offered support from Language Coordinator on how to utilize the over-the-phone translations. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) The LAC and parent coodinators will attend the training held by the translation and interpretation unit. They will then turn key this information to the entire staff. The LAC will collaborate with the office staff to ensure that the proper notifications are given to the parents in the preferred language of choice. This will be made available at the parents request. The Welcome Poster and Language ID Guide will be posted in the main office and at the security desk in order to inform parents at the time of arrival that translation and interpretation services are available. 2018-19 CEP 75  Signage throughout the building will be translated for parents and students. Brochures/flyers/letters will be translated as needed. Parent engagement events will have a translator present for parents. We will use the DOE translation and interpretation when available, and if necessary we will use our in-house translator. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? The LTI Parent Survey (from Intranet) will be used annually (when parents complete school survey). This survey will assess language access provided throughout the year. 2018-19 CEP 76 
