2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 12X458 School Name: SAMARA COMMUNITY SCHOOL Principal: DANIELLE DERRIG 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2 Section 1: School Information Page School Information Samara Community School 12X458 School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Phone Number: 321200010458 PK-4 1550 Vyse Avenue 718-860-5332 School Number (DBN): 718-860-5333 Fax: Maria PonsVargas mponsvargas@schools.nyc.gov Email Address: School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Danielle Derrig Janira Gonzalez YadiraimetResto Born Laureano Sharon Rowell n/a Children's Aid District Information Geographical District: 12 Jacqueline Rosado Superintendent: 1970 West Farms Road Bronx, NY 10459 Superintendent’s Office Address: jrosado3@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-328-2310 Phone Number: FSC: Bronx 718-542-7736 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) Nancy Saffer Executive Director: 2018-19 CEP 3  1230 Zerega Avenue, Bronx, NY 10462/One Fordham Plaza, Bronx, NY 10458 Executive Director’s Office Address: nsaffer@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: Phone Number: Fax: 718-828-7776/(718) 741-8895 (718) 828-6280 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Danielle Derrig Janira Gonzalez Sharon Rowell Milagros Vasquez Gloria Aponte Anthonette Plummer Nelcy Sanchez *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Teacher Member/ Parent Member/ Teacher 2018-19 CEP 5  Ester Mejia Johanna Cruz BelkysTorres Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/ Teacher Member/ Parent Member/Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? In collaboration with families and community stakeholders, we will support the positive development of students that are bi-literate, creative, caring, divergent thinkers and life-long learners through student-focused and inquiry-based learning experiences in a dual language setting. 2018-19 CEP 9  2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. The curriculum is rooted in the Claremont Village community, which includes many parks and the Bronx River. We believe that children learn best when they are able to relate to the curriculum; drawing upon prior knowledge and making connections through relevant, real world experiences. Children spend a significant amount of time outdoors learning about their natural environment. In Kindergarten, children learn about trees in a year-long tree study, first grade participates in a year-long study on water, and second grade will be studying about bridges. Our school is a Responsive Classroom school, where we embrace supporting children’s social-emotional needs to support their academic success as well. Our teachers support each child individually and believe that all children want to learn, yet, at times, there are lagging skills, in which the case study team must identify and support in order for that child to be successful. We incorporate visual arts, music, dance, and drama into our daily curriculum and design experiences that allow children to explore their own creativity through a variety of media. With the support of community arts organizations, including New York Botanical Gardens, Bronx Children’s Museum, Central Park Zoo, and American Museum of Natural History, students will have additional opportunities to engage in visual and performing arts. In learning about the maple tree, for example in kindergarten, children might paint what they see, make prints, or collect leaves to make collages to enhance the curriculum. Drama and song bring both languages alive and allow children to feel comfortable in the second language. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Samara Community School currently has 230 students enrolled. 17% of all students are considered English Language Learners. The school population is comprised of 86% Hispanic, 12% Black, 2% White, .5% Asian. 54% of the population is female and 46% male. 19% of students receive Special Education services. Samara Community School is a Spanish-English dual language school for children currently in grades Pre-Kindergarten through fourth grade and will reach fifth grade at the completion of the school in 2020. Our mission is to develop compassionate, bi-literate and bi-cultural individuals who are able to reach high levels of success in our global community. Through hands-on experiences that require communication and collaboration, children learn how language works all the while gaining knowledge in reading, writing, math, the arts, science and social studies. Our students engage in experiences that spark curiosity and allow for the development of: creativity, problem-solving skills and strong academic skills. The English and Spanish language arts program utilizes a balanced literacy curriculum. Children learn to read and write in both languages , sing songs, read poetry, just to name a few. Language comes alive through books, storytelling, dramatic role-play, song, and writing . Children alternate days in English and Spanish. Peer language modeling in both English and Spanish help children learn the second language, foster empathy, friendship and strong collegial bonds. In Kindergarten, a Spanish dominant child might be paired with a dominant English speaker and in Spanish, the English speaker can turn to his or her partner for help. Teachers review vocabulary in both languages and use visual aids and other supports to make language comprehensible. Teachers help children make connections with both languages and find similarities within both language structures. 2018-19 CEP 10  Parent involvement is at the forefront of our school. We value our parents and what they can bring to the classroom and overall school community. Parents and family members are encouraged and invited to share language with students through literature, song, and other mediums. Open lines of communication are maintained between parents, staff and administration at all times to ensure optimal collaboration. Parents and teachers communicate in correspondence notebooks where teachers highlight important information and parents respond and provide further insight into their children. Parents receive a narrative report twice annually detailing the progress their child is making in all subject areas. In addition, parents go on field trips, swim with families, attend monthly family nights, attend monthly breakfasts with the school leader, attend weekly sing-alongs and other workshops and events. Our school community embraces four big ideas: be kind, ask questions, work together and never give up. Continually reinforced in the classroom environment, these four concepts play an integral role in developing confident and empathetic children. Teachers role-play these concepts in the classroom to provide examples to young children about what these big ideas look like. Our school community, including teachers and parents, follow these core values in their daily interactions with one another. These core values are inherent in our school community. The school leader and founder, Danielle Derrig, has an extensive background in second language acquisition and Dual Language programming. She previously founded a Spanish Dual Language program in District 9 with a similar population and was the bilingual coordinator for 7 years. She was a Dual Language teacher in District 6 and has also taught at an international school in the Dominican Republic and founded a not-for-profit organization, Hostos Education Project, to build inclusive dual language schools abroad. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Samara Community School worked in all areas of the Framework for Great Schools, however, where we made the most progress was in the Rigorous Instruction element. All students had inquiry notebooks with observations from their respective inquiry studies. Our key area of focus this year is in math due to our state data from the NYS math exams and the Math performance task for Measures of Student Learning. 2018-19 CEP 11  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 12X458 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 208 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language YES Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient N/A N/A 10 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 6 5 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) 9 School Composition (2017-18) 95.0% % Attendance Rate 91.8% % Reduced Lunch 16.3% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.0% 86.5% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 1.4% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 4.25 0% 0% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 25.7% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 8 8 92.1% 3.4% 15.4% 11.5% 0.5% 0.0% 0 0% 0.5 24.3% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 12  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. Samara Community School uses the Engage NY math curriculum, which is fully aligned to the math standards. The math consultant works with teachers throughout the year to support the pedagogical development around math. The data trends illustrate that students' foundational skills improve over the year, however, not to the level of proficiency for all students. In K, 11.6% were considered proficient in math at the end of the 2018 school year. 8% of students in first grade, 45% of 2nd grade students and 21.6% of 3rd grade students were proficient at the end of the year. 2. Our 3rd grade math scores also indicated a need on supporting students and teachers in math. 24% of our students were rated proficient on the 3rd grade state exam. As a result, the priority need is to support foundational skill development for all students in math during the upcoming school year through rigorous instruction targeted to individual students needs. During the 2018-2019, we plan to differentiate our math instruction to support students' individual needs and target lagging skills that individual students exhibit. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Students will be flexibly grouped based on ongoing data from various sources and receive targeted rigorous instruction in small math groups. By June 2019, there will be a 15% increase in student math proficiency through flexible grouping and receive targeted rigorous instruction, as measured by the 3rd and 4th grade state Math exam in June 2019. 2018-19 CEP 13  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional  programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Teachers will analyze end of the year performance math assessments and identify students strengths and next steps to provide targeted small group instruction. Teachers will plan for six weeks for targeted groups to support individual student needs. These groups will be re-evaluated every six weeks to regroup students based on progress. Teachers will participate in targeted professional development with the Math Consultant every six weeks to support struggling students and a targeted plan for particular students Principal will support teachers through coaching and feedback during small math groups to increase student achievement across grades. Teachers will implement a math fluency targeted software program for students and monitor progress as a station and for homework on a daily basis. A math committee will meet monthly to discuss pedagogical practice and improvement and make modifications to curriculum and instruction on each respective grade. Teachers will read the book, Young Mathematicians at Work: Constructing Number Sense and Arithmetic. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All 1-4 teachers August 2018 Principal All K-4 teachers every six weeks All K-4 teachers every six weeks Principal All K-4 teachers ongoing Principal All K-4 teachers ongoing Principal 1 teacher per grade monthly Principal BFSC will provide support in mathematics through two seminars on language and All teachers, BFSC Support Karyna Tejeda monthly Principal 2018-19 CEP 14 mathematics content: 1. Building a system of tens and 2. Making meaning for operations 2 teachers and principal will attend training from the BFSC regarding the 5 Mathematical Practices and create a mini institute for teachers to improve their practice, including inter-visitations and model lessons. Teachers will utilize exit ticket tracker with power standards on a daily basis throughout the year to monitor student understanding of content and make modifications as necessary to support reteaching and mastery of content. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Meagan Shay, Amy Crehore, Danielle Derrig Principal 5 sessions during October/ November All classroom teachers ongoing Principal How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Samara Community School math committee teachers will hold two math workshops to support upper and lower grade parents in understanding how to support their child in math in the fall and spring. Parents will also receive training in using the purchased software program for their children at home early in the year. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Personnel: - All K-4 teachers Schedule Adjustments: - Release time for teachers to work with staff developers and/or instructional coaches to further their work in developing instructional best practices - Release time across the year for coverages for teacher to inter-visit, collaborate, and plan for individualized instruction to support the needs of students Instructional Resources: - Books to support the curriculum -software licenses for all students 2018-19 CEP 15  -Professional Development for teachers with the school's math consultant with the Math Collective - Materials to support greater visual instructional support, such as document cameras, computers, iPads, and accessories for interactive white boards and other basic supplies. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January of 2019, there will 25% of students will score a 3 or 4 on the state math simulation exam in 3rd and 4th grade. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) state math exam simulation Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 16  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? 1. All teachers have been trained in Responsive Classroom techniques and therefore, the school has built a common language around supporting students' social and emotional well-being on a tier one level. 2. Tier 2 supports are inconsistent and need to be refined and supported across the school. As per the Environment survey, 69% of teachers indicate that students listen carefully when the teacher gives directions and 69% of teachers say that students behave well in class even when the teacher isn't watching. As a result, a social emotional committee will be formed to support tier two interventions and support overall classroom social emotional learning for all students. Furthermore, as part of the district initiative, key personnel on this committee will be trained in Restorative Circles and peer mediation. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be a 20% increase in Supportive Environment as a result of training for staff around social emotional learning and tier two approaches spearheaded by the newly formed social emotional learning committee at the core of this work, as measured by the School Quality Guide Survey. 2018-19 CEP 17  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). A social emotional learning committee will be formed, consisting of a General Education teacher, Special Education teacher, paraprofessional, guidance counselor and administration. All staff Key personnel from the SEL committee will be trained in Restorative Circle and peer mediation. Guidance counselor, selected teacher, Administrator Danielle Derrig, Administrator and Oscar Mejia, Guidance Counselor Danielle Derrig, Administrator August 2018 and will meet bi-weekly for the first two months and monthly thereafter every six weeks at the beginning of the unit Paraprofessionals will meet separately spearheaded by the guidance counselor and committee paraprofessional to learn high leverage strategies to support SEL in their respective classrooms. Paraprofessionals every Monday Oscar Mejia, Guidance Counselor, Lead committee paraprofessional Guidance counselor will meet with teachers every other week to plan restorative circles to take place in lieu of Morning Meeting in support of increasing Social emotional learning for students and support for teachers. All teachers, Guidance counselor September 2018 and every other Monday Danielle Derrig, Administrator and Oscar Mejia, Guidance Counselor Committee will develop social emotional learning professional development to support overall teacher learning during Monday professional development every month. SEL committee monthly Danielle Derrig beginning in October 2018 Committee will hold a parent workshop around social emotional learning to support transfer of skills to home. SEL committee, parents November 2018 Danielle Derrig Committee will send home a monthly letter to parents providing tips and ideas to support the social emotional growth of their child. SEL committee and parents Guidance counselor will create a peer mediation team to positive, support student leadership with upper grade students Guidance counselor monthly beginning October 2018 ongoing Oscar Mejia, Guidance Counselor Danielle Derrig, Oscar Mejia 2018-19 CEP 18  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Teachers will hold a workshop for parents to teach strategies to support social emotional learning at home. Committee will also send a monthly letter with activities to support transfer of Social Emotional learning at home. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. -After-school per session for committee meetings -Professional books for committee -per diem substitutes for teachers to visit other schools and for professional development Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2019, there will be an increase of 10% in Supportive Environment as determined in a mock survey from the school. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. mock school environment survey from the school Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 19  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. During the past three years, we were a part of the Learning Partners Plus program to work with other schools around improving oral language through collaborative conversations in two languages, which supported our improvement in Danielson indicator 3.2: Discussion and Questioning Techniques. During the past year, we worked in inquiry teams after school and presented our work during Professional Development Mondays around building whole class and partner conversations in math. We worked with our math staff developer to build the idea of a math community and learning from one another. As a result, all teachers were rated effective in indicator 3.2: Discussion and Questioning Techniques. Participating teachers in the LPP team and administration have evaluated the effectiveness of the work to determine next steps. As a result, the focus for next year is to deepen the work around translating the oral academic language as a result of structured conversations into more robust language in written tasks. Teachers will continue to work in LPP to think about how to deepen this work and furthermore, this work will be the instructional focus as a school and on Professional Development Mondays. As the school graduates out of the Learning Partners, the priority need is to continue the collaborative inquiry process at our school through committees. As a result, various committees will be formed around teachers' interests and/or needs to support teacher collaboration and professional growth. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. As a result of all teachers participating in at least one committee to support professional growth and collaboration, there will be a 15% increase in student proficiency on the 2019 NYS math and ELA exams. 2018-19 CEP 20  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Committees will be formed by teachers in the following areas: WITsi, Math, Integrated Studies, and SEL. Observation cycles by the school leader with the lens of questioning and discussion techniques as well as the use of inquiry notebooks and writing prompts based on oral conversation prompts. All teachers and school leader All teachers and school leader Meet bi-weekly on committees with an inquiry lens into a problem of practice as determined by the committee in six week cycles using data as the focus. committees and school leader Committees plan workshops for PD Mondays around the work that has been studied to turn-key information to all staff All staff Inter-visitations with other schools to observe instructional focus of respective committee LPP team and school leader Inter-visitations within the school with focus on respective committee lens. ENL and SETSS teachers will participate in inquiry study and choose two students to follow using the rubric and implementing strategies suggested during PD Mondays All teachers and school leader ENL and SETSS teacher All year starting in August 2018 Danielle Derrig, School Leader All year starting in October 2018 Bi-weekly starting in September 2018 Monthly starting in October 2018 Bi-weekly starting in October 2018 February-June 2019 Danielle Derrig, School Leader Danielle Derrig, School Leader Danielle Derrig, School Leader Danielle Derrig, School Leader Danielle Derrig, School Leader All year Danielle Derrig, School Leader Committee teachers will hold a workshop for parents to support their ability to work with their children around committee focus. LPP teachers, parents January 2019 Danielle Derrig, School Leader Committee members will hold a committee planning day where teachers who are not part of the program can plan alongside committee teachers to implement respective change strategies. All teachers March- May Danielle Derrig 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement 2018-19 CEP 21  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Committees will hold a workshop for parents to support their ability to work with their children around building better conversational skills and how to translate conversation to writing in the fall and spring. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. -per session for professional development -books for book study -per diem for teachers for inter-visitation to other schools -schedule adjustments for common planning to have teachers meet bi-weekly with administration for professional development. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. At the end of January 2019, 100% of teachers will be an active part of a committee. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. notes from committees Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 22  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths: As a small school, during the past two years we have had the opportunity to conduct professional development around the needs of the school as per the PPO, QR, CEP action plan, Advance data and teacher conferences, which informed the professional development plan. In particular, teachers participated in professional learning communities based on their interests and needs, which was successful among teachers. Needs: During the end of the year conferences, 80% of the teachers felt that they needed to get better at Danielson Component 3C: Engaging Students in Learning. After reflecting, teachers felt that this component would support rigorous instruction and differentiation in their classrooms. As a result, teachers felt that clinics and professional development time set up to support this process would be supportive to their needs as teachers to grow professionally. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the school leader leads by example and nurtures the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement and as a result, there will be a 15% increase in proficiency as measured the ELA state exam in 3rd and 4th grades. 2018-19 CEP 23  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Administration meets with all staff individually to determine areas of growth and collaboratively decide on best next steps and necessary professional development for each teacher Professional development is designed to support teachers in improving student engagement during Monday PDs, common planning and individual feedback sessions. Teachers meet during common planning and Monday PD sessions to create grade-wide and vertical language assessment systems. 2 mentors will work at least two periods a week with their assigned new teacher (one teacher per mentor) using tools from Learning Zone from the New Teacher Center to guide their work. Mentors and AP will receive professional development with the New Teacher Center to learn strategies to work with new teachers to further support assessment. The AP will support the mentors by following up once a month to ensure that all mentors are providing adequate mentoring using Learning Zone tools. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All Staff August 2018 Danielle Derrig, Teachers ongoing Teachers ongoing Principal Danielle Derrig, Principal Danielle Derrig, Principal Mariana Swick, new teachers, NTC NTC Mentor, new teachers, AP 2 periods a week Danielle Derrig, Principal, Zoraida Hernandez, AP Danielle Derrig, Principal, Zoraida Hernandez, AP Training during the year through NTC, follow up from AP once a month Teachers will incorporate new learning from ESL and Special Education teacher into the assessment structures and systems ESL and SETTSS teacher November, 2018 Danielle Derrig, Principal Select teachers will hold a parent workshop to share strategies to understand student engagement and how to support their child at home. All teachers, parents Danielle Derrig, Principal March 2019 Right after progress report in January 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. 2018-19 CEP 24  Select teachers will hold a parent workshop to share strategies to understand engagement and how to support their child at home right after parent progress reports in January. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. -Per session for teacher professional development Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. In January 2019, 25% of all students in 3rd and 4th grade will score a 3 or higher on the state ELA exam simulation Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. state ELA exam simulation Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 25  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths: During our last parent event for Family Tennis Night, we had over half of our families in attendance. Parents noted that the evening time right before a long weekend coupled with pleasant weather and a sporting activity for the entire family enticed many to attend. Families also responded well to parent communication notebooks and continue to strive for high ratings on the parent report card. Needs: While parent involvement increased by 20% as per the PCAR reports, we are still only interacting with 50% of all families on average. Our goal is to use to data through surveys and outreach to determine how to best engage families. With the addition of a parent coordinator next year, our goal is to increase the number of parents attending school events and finding new and innovative ways to bring parents to the table. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Through innovative and data-driven strategies, parent involvement will increase gradually over the course of the year by 20% as per the Parent Coordinator Activity Report by June 2019. 2018-19 CEP 26  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Parent report card will be revamped and a checklist of ideas on how to achieve a level four on the parent report card will be developed to support parents on how to receive the best possible grade on the report card. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All parents August 2018 Danielle Derrig, At the beginning of the year, the expectation will be set for parents during Kindergarten and Pre-Kindergarten Parent Orientation. Parents will be provided a list of ideas around how to achieve a level four in each of the components of the parent report card. All parents and teachers Teachers reiterate the information from the orientation during Back to School Night and provide further information around how to achieve a level four on the report card All parents Teachers complete the parent report cards for November, March and June student report card dates. All parents Certificates and small gift are distributed for parents who achieve a level 3 and above at each conference. Qualified Parents, PA Principal; Sharon Rowell, PA President; Parent Coordinator August 2018 Danielle Derrig, Principal; Sharon Rowell, PA President; Parent Coordinator Danielle Derrig, Principal Danielle Derrig, Principal Danielle Derrig, Principal; Sharon Rowell, PA President; Elmer Maldonado, Parent Coordinator Back to School night 2018 November 2018 March 2019 June 2019 November 2018 March 2019 June 2019 Attendance team will support families who are not achieving a 3 or above to mentor families to support them in achieving a 3 by June through individualized attention to address their specific needs Attendance team ongoing Danielle Derrig, Principal School holds a ceremony in June for all parents with a 3 as the final grade. Qualified Parents, PA June 2019 Danielle Derrig, Principal; Sharon Rowell, PA President; Elmer Maldonado, Parent Coordinator Teachers distribute a weekly parent communication notebook which provides a picture and a caption of something highlighting something the child has done during the week. In the front of Teachers, parents Weekly on Fridays Danielle Derrig, Principal 2018-19 CEP 27 the notebook is a list of ways a parent can respond and parents are expected to respond weekly. School holds events to bolster parent engagement area on the parent report card, including workshops and family nights throughout the year. Teachers, PA, parents Ongoing Attendance team will meet weekly to address the needs of attendance and support parents with chronic absence Parent coordinator and attendance team will work with families to educate those with chronic absences to ensure that they receive all resources needed to feel successful. Mondays Ongoing Attendance team Parent Coordinator, Attendance team Danielle Derrig, Principal; Sharon Rowell, PA President; Elmer Maldonado, Parent Coordinator Danielle Derrig, Principal Danielle Derrig, Principal The class parent system will be implemented to encourage more family participation on the class level through class events and activities. Class parents ongoing Danielle Derrig, Principal Parent Coordinator and Campus CAS parent coordinator will ensure that the system to track parent engagement data to better track progress of parents for parent report cards is accurately recorded to ensure that parents receive adequate grades and continue to monitor progress. New technologies to increase parent engagement will be researched and implemented through a parent inquiry group ongoing Danielle Derrig ongoing Parent coordinator CAS Parent coordinator and parent coordinator Parent coordinator, parents, Principal, guidance counselor, CBO 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Chidlren's Aid Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. -Per session for teachers to participate in family engagement evenings outside of UFT contract -Funds for resources, including supplies and food for family engagement evenings -Certificates and school branding gifts for parents for ceremonies 2018-19 CEP 28  -No schedule adjustment needed as teachers will utilize Parent Engagement Tuesdays to support any additional work needed to support this goal. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. In January/February of 2019, there will be a 10% increase in parent involvement as per the PCAR Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Parent Coordinator Activity Report Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 29  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Below benchmark Fountas and Pinell levels Mathematics Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Below benchmark levels in Math Performance data Not meeting standards in Science inquiry Not meeting standards in Social Studies investigations unit Patterns of repeated off-culture behavior as discussed during child study meetings Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Phonemic Awareness, Letters and Sounds, Leveled Literacy Intervention Guided Reading Program Counting, one-to-one number correspondence, pattern, geometry Hands-on and guided inquiry work around tree and animal units Hands-on and guided inquiry work around integrated studies Individual counseling and social group behavior Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Small group and one-to-one During the school day Small group and one-to-one instruction During the school day Small group instruction Small group instruction During the school day During the school day Individual and small group instruction During the school day 2018-19 CEP 30  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 23 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. We meet with all STH families to complete a needs analysis. Based on this determination, counseling, emergency supplies, parent engagement activities, parent support is provided to support each family’s need. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). n/a 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 31  n/a 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. n/a 2018-19 CEP 32  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. In order to ensure staff is highly qualified, teachers participate in-house study groups, action research, leader-teacher learning cycles, and on and off-site professional development workshops/conferences as well as participate in opportunities for further studies including bilingual licensing, etc. Teachers meet on an on-going basis with administration to ensure that their needs are met and are able to support students fully with all necessary resources. Recruitment is done as a school team and interviews are conducted to ensure highly qualified individuals before taking the position. New teachers work with a mentor who is trained by the NTC Mentoring program for D12. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Staff, including Principal, participate in in-house professional development workshops and are working in professional learning communities based on individualized professional need. The school partners with Beyond the Square for reggio-inspired professional development to support student-centered instruction within all classrooms, Kate Abell for work in building a math community and Learning Partners Program to increase student achievement around oral language through collaborative conversations in two languages. These consultants along with bi-weekly common planning around specific PD topics and PD Mondays support staff to plan and implement instruction across subject areas to meet the Common Core State Standards. Two mentors have been trained through the New Teacher Center as part of a District 12 initiative to work with new teachers in a structured environment using tools from Learning Zone. Mentors officially meet with mentees twice a week using various tools to support lesson planning, instruction and other aspects of teaching. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 2018-19 CEP 33  3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). During the last week of August, we hold a Kindergarten orientation to support parents and students in the transition from preschool to kindergarten. Students spend an hour with their new teacher while the parents participate in an orientation to learn more about the expectations of the school and how to support the kindergarten transition. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. All school-wide decisions are made as a collective during our teacher common planning professional development sessions. Teachers are actively involved in the brainstorming process with the school leader and together make decisions regarding assessment, instruction and professional development. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) X Column B Section Reference(s) 5a, 5b, 5c, 5d, 5e Title I Part A (Basic) Federal 173764 2018-19 CEP 34 na na na X na na na 5a, 5b, 5c, 5d, 5e Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Local na na na 1272595 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-2018-19 CEP 35  quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 36  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Samara Community School , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Samara Community School will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 2018-19 CEP 37  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 2018-19 CEP 38  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act. ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) Samara Community School in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for 2018-19 CEP 39  improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. , I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by ESSA; I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; 2018-19 CEP 40  ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the ESSA Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities 2018-19 CEP 41  ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; 2018-19 CEP 42  ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 43  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP 44  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: 30 students in grades K through 4th will be provided with further supplemental services to support the transition from learning to read to reading to learn through small group literacy instruction after school for 16 weeks (October 2018 to May 2019) three days a week (Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday), 1 hour a day from 2:30-3:30 for 16 weeks taught by four certified ESL/Bilingual teachers using many resources such as Leveled Literacy Intervention, Anastasio NYESLAT Prep books, and educational videos in order to ensure that students are reading on grade level and prepared for the NYSESLAT. There will be four groups. Groups will be heterogeneously grouped by grade level. Parents will be aware of what they are doing in the after school program so they can further assist at home. Each group will keep a student to teacher ratio of no more than 6:1. Students will work on their English reading skills and will have access to bilingual picture dictionaries for language support. Student attendance and assessment data will be kept on file. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: ESL teachers as well as interested teachers interested in improving literacy practices for ENL students will be invited to attend a two-hour monthly study group where a mentor text will be provided to ground the conversation around the move from learning to read to reading to learn and will be supervised by Danielle Derrig, Principal. This professional development will impact the after school programming of Title 3 students especially through the development of units of lesson to be used in the program. All records, including agendas, fliers and sign-in sheets will be kept in the Title 3 binder in the Principal's office. This activity will be at no cost to Title 3. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered 2018-19 CEP 45 Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Begin description here: Parents will be invited to attend two family events that will provide different activities for parents to do with their children to improve literacy skills taught by ENL certified teachers who will provide training in both English and Spanish or work with a translator who will translate to Spanish. One family evening will be around teaching children to read and the second family event will be around how to build oral language with their children as a way to increase literacy and build language. All family evening records will include a flyer, agenda, sign-in and pictures and will be maintained in the Title 3 binder in the Principal's office. These activities are in addition to other family events provided by the school throughout the year. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. 4 teachers, 16 weeks, 3 days a week, 1 hour per session at $60.65 (per-session rate including fringes) = $11,645.00 n/a Cost of books for study group and student books for guided reading groups including supplies and refreshments for Parent Activities. School will supplement the cost of expenses if necessary, using other funding sources. n/a n/a n/a Total cost of the Title III LEP program. School will supplement the cost of expenses if necessary, using other funding sources. Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 0 721 0 0 0 12366 2018-19 CEP 46  2018-19 CEP 47  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 12 School Name Samara Community School Borough Bronx School Number 458 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Danielle Derrig Coach n/a ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Kristina Bermudez Teacher/Subject Area Janira Gonzalez/ DL 1 st En, Teacher/Subject Area Monica Melendez/ SE 1 st Bi Related-Service Provider Leanne East Superintendent Rafaela Espinal Assistant Principal Zoraida Hernandez Coach n/a School Counselor Oscar Meija Parent Sharon Rowell Parent Coordinator Elmer Maldonado Field Support Center Staff Member n/a Other (Name and Title) n/a C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 4 1 D. Student Demographics 2018-19 CEP 48  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 167 Total number of ELLs 34 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 20.36% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Spanish Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 2 3 4 0 1 1 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 1 1 1 1 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 3 0 0 3 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? To assess early literacy skills, we use Fountas and Pinnell and we also conduct a school-developed narrative baseline and end line writing sample in both languages. This data is used to differentiate lessons for all learners and create small group lessons during independent work time. It also informs any modification to curriculum plans as necessary. After examination and analysis of data, the school has found that ENL students are stronger in oral language and need more support in grammar and structure in writing. Furthermore, in analyzing running records, semantic mistakes are often made due to limited language understanding. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Structures in place for assessment include periodical reading assessments and in-classroom formative assessments. 2018-19 CEP 49  3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? The school monitors progress of all students using the NYC Math performance task, the Fountas and Pinnell Running records for reading, the TCRWP writing baseline, midline, and endline for writing and an in-house oral communication assessment to determine how to better support students in math, reading, writing and listening and speaking. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Data is gathered in reading four times a year to determine flexible grouping within the classroom, with the ENL specialist and with the RTI coordinator to provide potentially further support and ensure that the child is working at their zone of proximal development. The writing analysis is also used to determine flexible grouping within writing and inform instruction for the ENL specialist to focus her efforts. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] The school uses the tier one recommendations in the RTI framework to support overall classroom best practices. This includes: using visual representation throughout all lessons both for the whole class and individual students. Teachers explicitly include language objectives in all lessons and utilize dual language strategies, including preview-review, among others. Teachers develop lessons that reach different learning modalities and include various types of lessons, including inquiry, direct instruction and discussions. The school uses tier two intervention for students who are struggling in literacy and math skills, in both English and Spanish, and using language assessments as an informant on how to support the child in acquiring the skills necessary to meet standards. Most of our entering and emerging students are currently in tier two interventions four days a week for one period in which they meet with an ELL specialist to support language and literacy skill development. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. We serve PK-2 students this year. Data has revealed that students who attended pre-kindergarten tend to have more early literacy skills than those who did not attend a pre-kindergarten. Our data revealed that we have a large population of Emerging students (11), followed by Transitioning students (8), Entering (4) and three (3) Expanding students. We have two newcomers. Examining the NYSITELL modalities, the majority of our students need further support with reading, writing, and listening skills. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Grade teams meet to disseminate data and inform flexible grouping with the ENL specialist and RTI coordinator every six weeks. Data is monitored and any small changes are made in the moment. After six weeks, the teams meet again to make any changes to provide further support and target students' needs through differentiated small group instruction. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Instruction in our Freestanding ENL Program is delivered in heterogeneous blocks based on how many minutes they receive. The ENL teacher assesses students to determine where students are using F&P data, the writing assessments, NYSITELL and NYSESLAT data and classroom observations to provide more targeted groups that potentially span 2018-19 CEP 50  different grades. The teacher meets with the grade teacher to determine where support would be best and provides both push-in and pull-out support depending on the group. b. TBE program. If applicable. NA c. DL program. If applicable. We have a side-by-side Dual Language program where the children alternate one day in Spanish and one day in English. The class is heterogeneously grouped and travel as a class between the two classes in English and Spanish. The ENL specialist creates a schedule with the grade team to support students with required minutes of ENL instruction and provides both push-in and pull-out services depending on the lesson and subject. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? a. Children receive 300 minutes of home language support over the course of the week and 300 minutes of ELA over the course of the week. Children receive 360 minutes every other day of native language support and 360 minutes a day of ELA every other day throughout the week. All children are in the dual language program and therefore, support all proficiency levels. ENL instruction is embedded in ELA through the use of TWIOP methods. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Children receive content area in the language of the day, either Spanish or English in the Dual Language program, which is the only program offered currently. Teachers use Fountas and Pinnell reading program for reading, the Teachers College Reading and Writing Project curriculum for writing, TERC Investigations for Math, FOSS in Science and school-created curriculum for Social Studies. Teachers use the SIOP model in all lessons to make sure that the second language is comprehensible for all learners. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? ELL students are evaluated in both languages through the F&P assessments in English and Spanish along with a narrative writing assessment in both languages. The home language is used to determine proficiency while the second language is monitored throughout the year during data meetings with the ENL teacher, English and Spanish teachers. Teachers meet to examine and evaluate student work at the end of each writing unit and evaluate conferring notes from literacy. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. a. N/A b. Newcomer ELL students in the Dual Language program, (the only program in the school currently) receive instruction in the second language which is explicitly connected to their native language. They receive specific supports to learn the basics of the second language through small group instruction, depending on what they individually need as per diagnostic assessments. Children also use Raz-Kids, which provides instruction on their level as a way to build vocabulary and early reading skills in the second language. Newcomer ELLs receive time and a half on all exams. Beginner students receive 360 minutes of ENL (180 Standalone, 180 Push In) c. N/A d. N/A 2018-19 CEP 51  e. Former ELLs will receive 90 minutes a week of English as a new language as well as small group instruction as necessary to reinforce any skills that are still in need of improvement. Former ELLs receive time and a half on all exams. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? The school uses visual representation throughout all lessons both for the whole class and individual students. Teachers explicitly include language objectives in all lessons and utilize dual language strategies, including preview-review, among others. Teachers develop lessons that reach different learning modalities and include various types of lessons, including inquiry, direct instruction and discussions. The school uses tier two intervention for students who are struggling in literacy and math skills, in both English and Spanish, and using language assessments as an informant on how to support the child in acquiring the skills necessary to meet standards. Most of our beginner and intermediate students are currently in tier two interventions four days a week for one period in which they meet with an academic intervention specialist to support language and literacy skill development. This tier-two intervention supports accelerated language acquisition due to teacher-student ratio of 1 to 3 or 4 students using Leveled Literacy Instruction Program, which is research-based and has supports for second language development. Students also use morestarfall.com during reading instruction when they are not working in intervention groups and at home work with raz kids to support language acceleration through vocabulary building, reading and speaking. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? We have two classes in each grade. One of the classes is considered an ICT classroom and the second Special Education teacher supports the ELLs and SWDs through small group instruction in the same classroom based on students' individual needs. Children are placed in the ICT class based on their IEP recommendations. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. ELL students who are in need of targeted intervention as per F&P levels, the math performance assessment, writing baseline, speaking/listening assessment and other assessments/notes/observations, are first discussed during grade meetings and a plan of action is created to support those students in small group instruction in the subject area. Teachers discuss what will be done during the small group instruction intervention time and then reassess the students after six weeks to determine growth. If sufficient progress is not seen, a new plan of action is created for said students. About 90% of our ELL students in our emerging, transitioning, and expanding subgroups also receive Reading Intervention by a reading recovery specialist. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? We are working to streamline our phonics approach between English and Spanish to ensure effectiveness. We are also working on improving our guided reading instruction to support more critical thinking. In the upcoming year, we strive to include and implement integrated Inquiry Based learning to ensure optimal use of scientific thinking in English and Spanish. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? The Dual Language program continues to operate and will open in grade 3 for the following school year. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All children in the school receive the same programming, including swimming, and cultural institution connections through field trip studies where bilingual teachers address real life inquiry questions and investigations. Special programming, includes the after-school program and is provided by the Children's Aid Society where they are able to receive homework help and extracurricular activities by bilingual staff. Currently, ELLs participate in the after-school programming. Emphasis is provided to encourage ELL parents to include children in the after school program. All school programming notices and newsletters are sent home in both languages to ensure equal access. 2018-19 CEP 52  12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Teachers use the Fountas and Pinnell reading program for English and Spanish literacy, the TCRWP units of study for writing, the Kindergarten Literature Program in English and Spanish for emergent story telling and language acquisition, Fundations and Estrellita for Phonics in both languages and Investigations for Math in both languages. FOSS is used for Science in both English and Spanish. All teachers have a Smartboard in their classroom to augment classroom instruction in all subject areas. Teachers are also focused on a year-long study on supporting the increase of speaking and listening skills to support oral language in both languages across content areas. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Children receive home language support in Dual Language through Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, writing in Spanish through the TCRWP units of study, Cancionero and Investigations in Spanish. All children are assessed in two languages in reading and writing as they are part of the dual language program. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. All required services support are developed based on ELLs ages and grade levels. In the early grades, many of the resources revolve around singing to provide children with an easy way to access the second language and feel successful. Our art program is bilingual. Smart boards and computer technology, partnerships with cultural institutions (such as the Botanical Gardens and the Bronx Zoo), Cancionero, and Estrellita also enhance the dual language program to provide language-rich experiences. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? ENL teachers have shared resources among one another to support the two programs. Furthermore, families who request a bilingual program in the co-located school are transferred to our school to support their needs. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Students meet the teachers and pair with students in the class that will help make the transition smoother. All pairs are created by language ability to support them in both languages and getting settled with the routines. When the ENL teacher receives a new student, she works to ensure comfortability in his/her grouping. Newly enrolled ELLs have a conversation with the ELL teacher and they also are introduced to text. Once the ENL teacher assesses them and their linguistic compatibility, they are placed accordingly. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? None 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? a. 50% Spanish and 50% English b. EPs and ELLs are integrated 100% of the day. All content areas are taught in the language of the day. c. Language is separated by the day and teacher. For example, if the class was in the English class, then the elective courses are taught in the language of the day for that class. 2018-19 CEP 53  d. Side-by-side e. Simultaneous literacy approach Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? All teachers and paraprofessionals participated in sessions around TWIOP. Last year, as we plan for math instruction and guided reading, ELL strategies have been embedded as we think as a team to support dual language. Each teacher takes part in a six-week cycle that integrates TWIOP and common core-aligned content areas. Each teacher cycle takes place at various times throughout the year. All personnel, including office staff, are trained on CR Part 154 at the beginning of the year. Our school wide focus this year is on collaborative oral conversations across languages. We are working with other Learning Partners schools with dual language programs to provide professional development through study groups, book clubs, mini institutes and inter-visitations. This year, our ENL teacher attended workshops and PD on how to align content based instruction to ELLs of all proficiency levels. In addition, she attended curriculum writing workshops on how to integrate ELL strategies into all classroom instruction. This upcoming year, professional development will have a focus on Inquiry Based Learning to enhance oral language and its transfer to writing. All staff, including paraprofessionals are in attendance. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Samara Community School currently offers instruction for students in grades PK-2. Teachers completed an ELL training on TWIOP during the summer and also completed another training on Dual Language best practices. Throughout the year during Common Planning and Monday PD periods, teachers will revisit the collaborative conversation model throughout the year and on June 4 th to plan for the following year and reflect on the process from the current year. All professional development is documented through agendas, sign-in sheets, any handouts that were created, any materials provided and all of this is kept in a professional development binder in the main office. ELL- specific professional development is logged through NTC and our ENL teacher currently has a mentor who meets and records her PD hours. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? The school provides a meeting time for each individual family to discuss the dual language program, the goals of the school, and the goals of the parents in order to ensure we work collaboratively. Parents are also invited to be interviewed by the students during a cultural family study in kindergarten. All meetings are translated in English and Spanish for parents. All information is maintained in a binder in the Principal's office. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. 1. We provide a two-hour weekly English class for parents in partnership with the Children's Aid Society. We also translate all meetings and correspondence in both languages. All activities are done in both languages. We hold family nights that are conducted in both languages. We encourage parents to come read aloud to students in both languages and complete a family 2018-19 CEP 54  investigation in which the students interview the families in the native language. 2. Parents also will be able to participate in a teacher-led lesson in their second language to understand how the dual language program supports children in the second language during instruction. Translation services are provided for parents other than Spanish or English speakers, as needed. 3. We also provide workshops that are to streamline Common Core practices. We invite all parents to come to these workshops to ensure that they feel comfortable/confident with the material their child brings home. All information is maintained in a binder in the Principal's office. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. n/a 2018-19 CEP 55 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, DANIELLE DERRIG, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 56  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Samara Community School School DBN: 12X458 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Danielle Derrig Title Principal Zoraida Hernandez Assistant Principal Elmer Maldonado Parent Coordinator Kristina Bermudez ENL/Bilingual Teacher Sharon Rowell Parent Monica Melendez/Sped 1 DL Teacher/Subject Area Janira Gonzalez/DL English Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Oscar Meija School Counselor Rafaela Espinal Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 9/11/15 9/11/15 9/11/15 9/11/15 9/11/15 9/11/15 9/11/15 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 9/11/15 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 2018-19 CEP 57  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 12X458 School Name: Samara Community School Superintendent: Rafaela Espinal The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Zoraida Hernandez Assistant Principal yes yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. During enrollment, the AP or Principal interviews the parent to determine home language of the student and also to determine the best language to communicate with the parent, noting it on the Home Language Questionnaire. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Spanish English 64 106 37.65 62.35 67 103 39.41 60.59 2018-19 CEP 58  na na na na na na na na na na 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. na Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to Families parent handbook September 2017 How do you plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. All communication is translated to Spanish and parents are asked if they need further translation, which is then sought out. school calendar school memos general orientation information school weekly newsletter na na na na na na na na na 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Parent Teacher conference September 2017 monthly family nights parent association meetings na na na na interpretation service(s)? All communication is translated to Spanish and parents are asked if they need further translation, which is then sought out. na na 2018-19 CEP 59  na na na 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. All communication is sent out in Spanish and English through School Messenger Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. The Chancellor's Regulation A-663 is provided to all staff members at opening day conference. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Translated signage indicating what language an individual speaks is available in all languages in the office to better support their communication needs. Furthermore, in the language survey, parents indicate what language they speak and the school supports the parent accordingly where possible. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? In conjunction with the Parent Association, the school sends out a beginning and end of the year survey to gather feedback on the quality of language services, among other traits. 2018-19 CEP 60 
