2018-19 RISE SCHOOL COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (R-CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 12X463 School Name: URBAN SCHOLARS COMMUNITY SCHOOL Principal: DEBRA CLARKE-JONES 2018-19 CEP-RISE 1  Rise School Comprehensive Educational Plan (R-CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: Executive Summary and Organizing Principles Section 3: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 4: Rise School Narrative Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) Section 7: Community School Partnerships Section 8: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 9: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 10: Title I Program Information Section 11: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP-RISE 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Urban Scholars Community School 12X463 321200010463 PreK-5 School Number (DBN): 1180 Tinton Avenue Bronx, NY 10456 718-842-8133 718-842-8442 Phone Number: Debra Jones Fax: DJones51@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Community School CBO: Principal: Community School Director: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): Langston Masingale Email Address: Debra Jones Gary Gonzalez Phyllis Rosario Debra Jones n/a n/a District Information Geographical District: 12 Jacqueline Rosado Superintendent: 1970 West Farms Road Bronx, NY 10460 Superintendent’s Office Address: JRosado3@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-328-2310 Phone Number: 718-542-7736 Fax: FSC: Bronx Field Support Center (FSC) Executive Director: Nancy Saffer 2018-19 CEP-RISE 3  Executive Director’s Office Address: 1230 Zerega Avenue Bronx, NY 10462/One Fordham Plaza Bronx, NY 10458 NSaffer@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: Phone Number: Fax: 718-828-7776/718-741-8895 718-828-6280 2018-19 CEP-RISE 4  Section 2: Executive Summary and Organizing Principles The Objective To guide, support and accelerate the early progress demonstrated by the schools graduating out of the Renewal program, as Rising Schools of Excellence (Rise), with a compelling theory of action, clear strategy for sustainment, targeted individualized supports, continued accountability, gradual release of responsibility, such that they independently accelerate their growth trajectory. Background Rise Schools have demonstrated: ● ● they have the will and conditions in place to accelerate student growth and meet school improvement benchmarks. they have the capacity to lead/implement a school improvement strategy. Rise Schools have seen some gains1 across multiple measures including graduation rates, college readiness, state test scores and attendance. As a result, these schools will fully transition out of the Renewal Schools program at the end of the 2017-2018 SY and continue under the guidance of the Office of Field Support, in partnership with the Office of School Support and Supervision. 1All Rise Schools met at least 67% of their benchmarks, are not on the State’s Priority list, and have demonstrated a sustainable school improvement structure that will allow them to build on their progress. Six Rise Keys for Continued Improvement 1. Strengthen the Instructional Core 2. Strengthen Instructional Leadership Capacity 3. 4. Apply a tiered approach to student intervention 5. Promote a positive, inclusive school environment for students, staff, parents and Improve Data Driven Practices community partners Increase monitoring and accountability 6. Theory of Action If the NYC Department of Education provides customized supports to Rise schools and principals designed around the “Six Rise School Keys for continued improvement” then, Rise principals and their teams will have the tools and resources to accelerate outcomes for ALL students and increase students’ access to an excellent and equitable education. Structure of the Rise School Comprehensive Educational Plan (R-CEP) The Rise School Comprehensive Educational Plan (R-CEP) will serve as the organizing and overarching document for each Rise school and will be directly aligned and developed around the elements of the Framework for Great Schools, New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, and Strong Schools, Strong Communities, including the following: ● Rise Benchmarks: please refer to the 2018-19 Rise benchmarks provided to your school. ● Establishing an overarching summative vision aligned with elements of the Framework for Great Schools and documenting key areas of celebration and Rise through analysis of assessments and by envisioning what the desired outcome for each school will be at the end of the School Rise process. ● Setting mid-year point benchmarks that create the path for improvement by focusing on desired outcomes and goals. In this way, the plan will be mapped to the overarching summative vision. In addition to the five discrete goals formed around the elements of the Framework for Great Schools, each school will create an action plan. ● Transformation into a community school in order to increase student and family access to physical and mental health services and other social-emotional supports made available in or near the school. ● Expanded learning opportunities for all students, including additional instruction provided during afterschool and/or summer programming provided in collaboration with community partners. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 5  ● Intensive professional development for all staff to ensure effective implementation of curriculum and instruction aligned to the Next Generation Learning Standards (NGLS) and to support staff in effectively responding to the differentiated academic and social-emotional needs of all students. ● Additional, focused strategies to increase parent and family engagement. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Information on the Framework for Great Schools and the DTSDE Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department has established programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students supports to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and the R-CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Rise School Comprehensive Educational Plan (R-CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint for continuous improvement that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to increase student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five (5) goals and action plans that align with the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 6  The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. Accountability Tools and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is informed by the New York State Education Department’s (NYSED) Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) Tenets, the American Institute of Research (AIR) Needs Assessment, the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYSED’s Six DTSDE Tenets To strengthen the existing system, the NYSED has developed a tool that captures the best practices from each of the current tools – they call it a Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness. This new tool encompasses multiple instruments such as interviews, classroom observations and surveys. The protocol will begin with a clear and cogent statement of the optimal conditions of an effective school and the instruments comprising the protocol will measure how close or far away a particular school is to the optimal conditions identified. Once reviewed, the school and district will create a strategic plan to address the areas in need of improvement. All Priority and Focus Schools and Focus 2018-19 CEP-RISE 7  Districts must use the new tool; and districts that are required to submit District Comprehensive Improvement Plans and Comprehensive Education Plans also will use the tool. The DTSDE protocol includes a rubric, which identifies clear and coherent expectations of the optimal conditions of an effective school and school district across the following six tenets:  Tenet 1: District Leadership and Capacity  Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions  Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support  Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions  Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health, and  Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 2017-18 Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Structures for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:  a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; 2018-19 CEP-RISE 8 a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC)  It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the R-CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the R-CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. Next Steps for R-CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists in every Rise school and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the American Institute of Research (AIR) needs assessment, the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: In Part 1A of the Section 5: Needs Assessment indicate the Rise Key and the corresponding statement of Practice (SOP) from the DTSDE Tenets that will be addressed in the action plan. Schools that received an Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) School Review should use the recommendations from the review to select their SOPs. Schools that did not undergo an IIT review should select SOPs informed by the major findings/recommendations from your most recent Quality Review (QR) or Central-led Review (CLR), and other qualitative and quantitative data.  Step 4: Discuss and respond to the guiding questions under each Framework element.  Step 5: Revisit your school’s current goals, and strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you have identified, and will let your school community know when you have reached your goal.  Step 6: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 7: Update your school’s AIS section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 8: Complete the Expanded Learning Time (ELT) and the Community School sections.  Step 9: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether strategies and activities outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust practices along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Rise Program Priorities Our Rise Theory of Action (page 4) is drawn from research1 on turnaround schools, the DOE Framework for Great Schools, DTSDE Tenets, and the Quality Review, which suggest that these key priorities have the greatest impact on student achievement. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 9  RISE Keys Priorities 1. Strengthen the Instructional Core 2. Strengthen Instructional Leadership Capacity 3. Improve Data Driven Practices 4. Apply a tiered approach to school support and intervention 5. Promote a positive, inclusive school environment for students, staff, parents and community partners 6. Increase monitoring and accountability  A clear focus aligned to students’ instructional needs, including college and career readiness  Access to common, standards-based curricula for all students, including ELLs and SWDs  Explicit and intentional embedding of culturally responsive Instruction in all content areas  Formative and summative assessments for all students in all grades that are aligned to curricula and produce clear evidence of learning  Tiered approach to teacher professional learning opportunities.  Partnership with families to increase engagement in students’ academic success  Implementation of a coherent vision for school improvement - a vision for leading learning, leading people, leading schools and leading change  Development of a system to support distributive leadership and build the capacity and sustainability of teacher leaders through continuous improvement  Developing leadership competencies, specific to turnaround efforts, including leveraging multiple stakeholders, a commitment to student learning and a sustained pursuit of measurable progress. Strategic allocation of resources to support instructional and professional learning plans and family engagement in leadership opportunities Integrative use of formative and summative assessment tools and practices to target resources and support throughout the year to achieve academic priorities    Ongoing analyses of school-wide and student-level data and adjustments to curricular resources and instructional moves  Prioritization of the use of standards and data to inform teaching and learning    Implementation of a tiered intervention system that engages teacher teams in frequent cycles of progress monitoring and adjustments to address diverse student needs School establishes coherent system, adopted by all to ensure that interventions are effective, differentiated and timely Increased use of teacher teams’ data-driven practices to accelerate student achievement  Clear strategy that establishes social norms within the school community and promotes a culture for learning with clear and high expectations for all students, in partnership with CBOs.  The sustainability of an environment where students feel safe, connected and engaged through practices that are culturally relevant and build their scholarly identity  The development of a whole school approach, in partnership with families, with   specific attention to social, physical and behavioral environments Social emotional learning practices embedded in teaching and learning as aligned to the Collaborative for Academic, Social and Emotional learning (CASEL) competencies and supported by CBOs. School leaders implement effective monitoring systems to ensure that instructional practices and interventions are monitored closely at the classroom, team, and school wide level  Establish effective teacher team practices that ensure teachers are accountable for data findings and set timely and appropriate interventions  Data analysis results in adjustments to the programs and priorities to better service   students Foster positive systems for accountability driven by reflection and action planning Support from district leaders to focus efforts toward results and problem solving actions that lead to turnaround success. 1. Darden/Curry PLE – Turnaround Leadership Competencies and Turnaround Action Shown to Influence Student Achievement 2018-19 CEP-RISE 10  Achievement Network – SY 18-19 Foundations Rubric COSEBOC Standards and Promising Practices for Schools Educating Boys of Color Harvard Graduate School of Education and Harvard Business School: Certificate in School Management and Leadership Learner-Centered Initiatives Multidimensional Principal Performance Rubric Monitoring and Accountability ● Rise schools will be monitored for implementation of the Rise Comprehensive Educational Plan (R+CEP) by Superintendents and Office of Field Support. ● Rise schools will be held accountable for making progress according to annual targets set by the Department of Education, as evidenced by their attainment of named benchmark scores for each annualized key metric. Schools not achieving annual targets by June 2019 are subject to additional oversight and consequences, to be determined at a later date. ● OFS will bring increased oversight and accountability by monitoring FSC supports to schools and ensure that these are aligned with the school’s instructional focus, student and teacher needs, and moving the school toward achieving interim goals. ● OSSS will monitor DSR oversight of all supports to Rise Schools. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 11  Section 3: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Directions: All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Rise School Comprehensive Educational Plan (R-CEP). SLT members’ signatures indicates that they have been consulted with and given the opportunity to provide feedback on the plan and the plan’s alignment with the school-based budget to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Expanded Learning Time, Community School initiative, Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. On the chart below: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the second column. 2. 3. In the first column, indicate using an “X” if the person is an SLT member. In the third column, record the position and constituent group represented such as staff, parent, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), or other contributor. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 4. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the R-CEP, not approval. 5. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Signature (Blue Ink) Check if SLT X X X X X Name Position and Constituent Group Debra Jones Gary Gonzalez Phyllis Rosario Alice Lorenzo Langston Masingale Represented *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Community School Director (staff) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) 2018-19 CEP-RISE 12  Check if SLT X X X X X X Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Twana Rose Sabrina Serio-Pasquale IvonneTorres AppoloniaRankin-Steele ShakinaThomas KattyFigueroa Parent UFT CSA Parent Parent Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP-RISE 13  Section 4: Rise School Narrative In a brief narrative, describe the current state of the Rise school addressing the following and please use existing data, where applicable: 1. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including your school’s mission statement and a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Identify any special student populations that the school has and what their specific needs are. 2. 3. Describe your school’s approach to family engagement and progress made with establishing families as partners in furthering student achievement 4. Describe how your school is leveraging community school partnerships to support progress in elements of the Framework for Great Schools and your Rise Benchmarks and indicate where this has been a challenge. 5. Summarize the Expanded Learning Time (ELT) opportunities that have been offered to your students this year. Contextual Information About Our School and the Community: PS 463X Urban Scholars Community School, is an elementary school located in the Morrisania section of the South Bronx, with a student population of 281 students in Pre-Kindergarten through Grade Five. Ninety-nine percent of our families are Economically Disadvantaged. 54% percent of our students are Hispanic and 45% are African-American. 19% are English Language Learners and 25% are identified as students with special needs. Our school is located in the Morrisania section of the South Bronx, which has a population of over 87,000. The majority of residents in the area are of African American and Puerto Rican descent. Morrisania is among the lowest income neighborhoods in America with families having an income lower that 95% of U.S. neighborhoods. Over 50% of children here are below the federal poverty line. The area has been plagued with many social problems associated with poverty that affect children’s development such as lack of adequate housing, and limited access to quality health and social services. Many households in the area are headed by a single parent, with median household incomes significantly below city and state averages. Identify any special student populations that the school has and what their specific needs are: Over one-third of our student population is living in temporary housing and a growing number of them come to school with a variety of health issues such as chronic asthma. In addition to health concerns, a significant number of students in temporary housing have patterns of chronic absenteeism and may have repeated a grade prior to their enrollment at Urban Scholars Community School. Students in temporary housing may display one or more of the following characteristics: poor health and nutrition, lack access to proper health care, malnutrition, anxiety, poor social interactions, developmental delays, depression, and low self-esteem. As a school community, we work extremely hard to meet our students needs for warm clothing, food and school supplies. PS 463 Urban Scholars Community School Mission Statement: Urban Scholars Community School is committed to providing an education of excellence that meets the needs of a diverse community of learners. All students will be supported and challenged to achieve their potential through hard work, collaboration and determination. Our teachers are encouraged to have high expectations of all students and break down all misconceptions and biases, we believe all students can learn and succeed. We are dedicated to advocating for our students, and collaborating with their parents/guardians and outside agencies to reduce barriers to school attendance and academic success. Our curriculum emphasizes interdisciplinary thematic studies with an emphasis on the development of strong literacy skills and world knowledge needed as students and citizens of a global society. We are also committed to teaching our students how to support their communities by providing opportunities for active participation in service learning initiatives. Strategic collaborations and special initiatives: 2018-19 CEP-RISE 14   Professional Development Consultants for Literacy, Mathematics and English Language Learner support: Generation Ready and Southern Cross have provided teachers with individual (e.g., first year teacher or teacher(s) who need additional support) and grade level support to ensure teachers are planning and executing Common Core aligned lessons with components such as cognitively engaging tasks with appropriate scaffolds for English Language Learners and student with special needs.  Early Literacy Intervention Program : Reading Recovery (Grade 1) and Reading Rescue for Grade 2 students.  To support and advance our school wellness goals: Cook Shop for Classrooms and Families, Recipient of grants such as School Wellness Grant and Action for Healthy Kids Breakfast Grant.  School wide Enrichment Model (SEM) Clubs: Students in 2nd through 5 th grades participate in weekly clubs such as Jewelry Making, Soccer, School Spirit Art Club and Yoga based on their interests.  Be Responsible, Be Respectful and Be Safe: Our school-wide social and emotional development plan that promotes a supportive environment to ensure students feel safe, supported, and challenged.  Honor Roll Scholars Program: Following marking periods, scholars that have earned Levels 3 and 4 in academic areas are identified for the Gold, Silver or Bronze levels. Honor Roll Scholars receive medals and certificates and are acknowledge during an assembly. Following the assembly, Honor Roll Scholars and their parent/guardian attend a special bruncheon.  Service Learning Events: March of Dimes October Walk-a-thon, American Cancer Society Pennies for Patients and City Harvest Food Donation Drive. What are the school’s beliefs about student learning? Our staff believes that our students have the power within them to become great scholars who can master and develop a love for learning. We believe our teachers can become masters of teaching reading and math, to change our students’ lives, to affect generations. When we teach our students to love reading and to read well, they in turn can help their parents and siblings—and, eventually, their own children—learn to read. We believe that if we forge links to literacy with our students, we can empower them to become all that they can be, to contribute to society, to become good citizens. Our teachers believe they can be the catalyst to release and nurture their students’ natural power to learn, and they believe that all of their students can learn to read well and love reading. This love for reading and desire to process and soak up information like a sponge will build our student’s meta-cognition in reference to our student’s awareness of his or her level of understanding of a topic. Our staff believes that the following are the MOST important ingredients for successful learning: 1. Develop student intention and desire to learn. 2. Activating prior knowledge and helping students make connections to the material they are taught. 3. Effective teaching that anticipates and responds to differences in learning styles matches through multiple entry points. 4. Optimizing the time you spend studying. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 15  5. Helping students identify purpose and pay close attention to their thinking while they are engaged in learning activities. Description of the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which the school made the most progress over the past year: Supportive Environment: This past year we have made progress in supporting our students’ social-emotional well-being by providing our students in grades 3-5 with the opportunities to receive enrichment after school. Students were able to participate in dance, chorus, drama and hip-hop poetry. In previous school years, we were only able to provide our students in grades 3-5 with academic intervention after school, but since all of our students participated in Expanded Learning Time, they received intervention in ELA and Mathematics for an additional 5 hours per week. Raising student achievement is our number one goal, but we acknowledge that our students’ social and emotional well-being is just as important-they go hand in hand. So in order to tap into their talents and have them express themselves beyond the curriculum, we have School Wide Enrichment Clubs every Tuesday where students are engaged in an extra-curricular activity based on their interest. Some examples of the clubs are yoga, jewel making, modern dance, basketball and soccer. The clubs are facilitated by our teachers and it also allows them to bond with students from other classes and grades as well. According to feedback from our AIR Assessment, one respondent stated “The SEM Clubs bring up our students spirit and confidence and enhances students’ well-being both socially and emotionally.” Another respondent stated that “The SEM Clubs feeds self-esteem for the students.” Collaborative Teachers: This school year teachers were provided with provided multiple opportunities to plan together as grade level teams and also vertically. Every day teachers on every grade have common preparation periods and every Friday they have mandatory planning sessions during their lunch period. Our vertical teacher teams meet every other Monday and this year we had four teacher teams, opposed to three last year. This year we added the dual language teacher team based on requests from our staff. According to one of the findings from our 2014-15 Quality Review, “This model of collaboration has contributed to teachers taking on leadership roles and influencing key school-wide instructional decisions. Additionally, on-going inquiry has supported teachers understanding and strengthened professional capacity in implementation of the Common Core Learning Standards. Our teachers are afforded many opportunities to attend professional development outside of the school. Teachers also research professional development opportunities on their own to improve their own pedagogical practice and they are always allowed to attend. Inter-visitations having become an integral part of our school culture. In order for teachers to improve, they must be able to see best practices being executed. Teachers are assigned by the administration and mentors to visit classes to observe best practices, but our teachers also visit classes on their own. This school year we had two Model Teachers and their classrooms were used a models for excellence. Teachers were able to visit their classrooms and observe exemplary teaching practices as well as the systems and structures that they had in place to support their students. For the 2018-19 school year, we will continue to grow and share best practices as a team. Strong Family and Community Ties: This school year we continued to have our Teamwork Tuesday workshops with the goal of improving parental engagement and involvement. Every other Tuesday parent workshops are facilitated by the teachers, parent coordinator or an outside agency, such as New York Cares. The topics ranged from “How to Help your Child with Homework” to “How to Create a Pillow out of a T-shirt.” Workshops were also facilitated by Learning Leaders and Planned Parenthood. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 16  Every month, the principal has a monthly breakfast with the parents (Coffee and Conversation) where they voice their concerns about the school and offer suggestions for improvement. After the breakfast, parents take part in Cook Shop for families where they prepare healthy meals and learn about nutrition. Our efforts have led to an increase in parental participation, and the perception of the school is a welcoming environment. Parents volunteer, there are parent leaders and the tone has allowed them to come into the building more and participate in various learning environments within the school community. (AIR Assessment Data). Strengths: Rigorous Instruction: This school year we are implementing Ready Gen for reading, Teacher's College Reading and Writing Project Writing Units of Study, Fundations (K-2) for phonics, Engage NY (A Story of Units) for Mathematics, Harcourt for Social Studies, Text Talk for vocabulary development and FOSS for Science. In addition, every year we focus on building up our classroom libraries to ensure that students have the opportunities to read fiction and non-fiction books in English and Spanish. This year we will be focusing on purchasing Spanish guided reading books for our dual language classes. One of the challenges has been in ensuring that our students are receiving rigorous instruction in Social Studies and Science, so this school year we integrated Social Studies and Science into our literacy program. Students were given the opportunity to do more project based learning and teachers provided them with multiple entry points to ensure that the lessons were accessible for all learners including our English language learners and SWDs. Teachers participated in professional development sessions and received on-going support in refining their curriculum maps and lesson plans. For the 2018-19 school year, our teachers will focus on providing their students with written actionable feedback in order to raise academic achievement and deepen student understanding. Accomplishments: Strong partnerships that currently exist with CBO’s and/or indicate whether this has been a challenge: PS 463X is one of the 94 new community schools working with the Attendance Improvement and Dropout Prevention initiative. PS 463X/Urban Scholars Community School selected East Side House Settlement as its CBO partner for this endeavor. Our community director has been instrumental in providing references for families to community agencies and services; encouraging, planning and executing immersion experiences for families in our school community. Last school year our CBO coordinated and sponsored a huge Family Engagement celebration called “Community Day” in June, in which needs assessments and focus groups were conducted with our families, with a carnival style backdrop and atmosphere set up outside in the school yard for our students. “Community Day” featured various Community Partners as vendors who were invited to set-up tables and a display-area for sales, to promote health care services, wellness, college and career services, and expose our families to the resources available in the community . This school year, we will have Family Wellness Day in June and our school community will be afforded the opportunities to learn about wellness from over 15 vendors. In addition to our community director, we hired an additional social worker and 2 family advocates. Our family advocates work specifically with the AIDP (Attendance Intervention/Dropout Prevention) Initiative to raise student attendance for our chronically and severely absent student population with home visits, and mentoring of students who appear to be in crisis when they come to school. Our Family Advocates have been working to build strong relationships with staff, students and families based on trust. As incentives for attendance improvement, our CBO awards students with gift cards each quarter if their attendance improves and they also award the classes each month 2018-19 CEP-RISE 17  that have the highest attendance percentage. The social workers primary focus was to assist with providing schools based crisis intervention to students. Challenges: Currently, one third of our students live in temporary housing and are either on our at-risk or chronically absent attendance list. PS 463X has continued to expand its systems and structures to monitor and increase the attendance rate of its students. At monthly assemblies we acknowledge students with 100% attendance during the previous month and also highlight students that have continued to show improvement in attendance. Success Mentors provide chronically absent students with individualized monitoring and support. We have shown the most growth in the development of literacy curriculum maps. Our curriculum maps are aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards for grades Pre-Kindergarten through 5 th grade. Key areas of focus for the upcoming school year will continue to move, and strengthen our teaching practices, embedding explicit vocabulary instruction into our literacy block via “Text Talk”, aligning the Social Studies and Science Scope and Sequence to our literacy curriculum, refining our Mathematics curriculum maps and differentiating instruction to meet the needs of our diverse learners. Expanded Learning Time (ELT) opportunities that have been offered to our students this year: For the 2018-2019 school year, we will offer after school through an organization called Renaissance and our CBO. Students in grades 3-5 will participate in a range of program offerings including dance, drama, chorus, sports and hip-hop poetry three times a week from 3:35-5:15pm. Our school also has a program called the “Eagle Boys Club,” which our guidance counselor has developed with the local branch of his fraternity Alpha Phi Alpha. Twice a month on Saturday from 9am to 1:00pm, our young boys from our 3-5 th grade classes are engaged in enrichment activities and service learning projects. In this program our students play Basketball, receive life skills training, learn interviewing skills, brotherhood, being responsible as young men, and learn how to tie a tie. They have gone on trips to the movies, the Botanical Gardens, NBA All Star Week activities for children, and Yankee games at Yankee Stadium. This program also engages parents in family immersion activities such as picnics, and having a chance to chaperon on trips. This is the second year, the Eagle Boys participated in a Community Service project in which they prepared food packages for needy families and gave out 100 turkeys around the Thanksgiving holiday. As a Renewal School, we will continue to implement the following school improvement strategies during this school year:  Expanded learning opportunities for all students, including additional instruction provided during after-school and/or summer programming provided in collaboration with community partners  Growing as a community school in order to improve student and family access to physical and mental health services and other social-emotional supports made available in or near the school.  Intensive professional development for all staff to ensure effective implementation of curriculum and instruction aligned to the Common Core State Standards (CCSS) and to support staff in effectively responding to the differentiated academic and social-emotional needs of all students. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 18   Additional, focused strategies to increase parent and family engagement, through conducting needs assessments through interviews, focus groups and surveys with parents and students. We will also undergo a comprehensive needs assessment across all six elements of the Capacity Framework (rigorous instruction, collaborative teachers, supportive environment, effective school leadership, strong family-community ties, and trust) to inform the development of our Rise School Plans for the 2018-19 school year. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 19  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 12X463 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 263 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language YES Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 46 46 21 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 4 4 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 96.0% % Attendance Rate 95.1% % Reduced Lunch 12.9% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.8% 53.6% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 0.4% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 9.25 4% 21% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 38.3% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 48% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No No Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups Hispanic Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES N/A N/A YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YSH N/A N/A YSH Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A NO High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 16 10 92.6% 0.8% 23.2% 44.5% 0.8% 0.8% 2 14% 7.5 29.9% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No Yes YES N/A N/A N/A YSH NO N/A N/A N/A YSH N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP-RISE 20  2018-19 CEP-RISE 21  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 3 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 3.2 The school leader ensures and supports the quality implementation of a systematic plan of rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of students. (aligned to Rise Keys 2 and 6) Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction (DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and address student achievement needs. (aligned to Rise Key 3) The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. (aligned to Rise Keys 1 and 4) Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. (aligned to Rise Key 1) 3.3 3.4 3.5 SOP(s) Addressed X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? Our school’s strengths in the area of rigorous instruction are the following: ● Curriculum is aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards with the instructional shifts embedded. ● All curricula maps include essential questions, enduring understandings, objectives, goals, key ideas, vocabulary development and differentiated instruction for English Language Learners and Students with Disabilities. ● Academic tasks allow students to develop rigorous habits and higher-order thinking and discourse skills. One of the areas found to be in need of improvement as per our Quality Review in May 2017 was that "most" classrooms create a variety of tasks to ensure that all students practice rigorous habits and higher order skills. Based on Report Card Data for 2017-18 English Language Learners there is progress in moving students from level 1 to level 2; however, students are not making progress into levels 3 and 4. Therefore, we must be intentional in our focus to provide differentiated rigorous tasks that give access to all learners especially our ENL students. Data Source-NYS ELA & Math Assessments ● Finding: ELL students are not progressing to levels 3 & 4-Currently, all of our ENL students are level 1's. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 22  In addition, we found science to be an area in need of improvement. For the 2018-2019 school year we will be implementing a new science curriculum, Amplify Science Curriculum, in grades K-5. Teachers need professional development to build their capacity in implementing Amplify Science with fidelity. Based on our comparison of the NYS Grade 4 Science Test results in 2015-2016 in which the proficiency rate of students was 54.6% compared to 2016-2017 proficiency rate of students was 44.2% shows a -10.4 decrease. It is for reason we have made the shift to a new curriculum with Amplify Science which has a strong alignment to the Common Core Learning Standards in ELA and Math, and incorporates differentiated tasks that are hands on to meet the needs of all learners. Part 2 – Summative Vision for Rigorous Instruction What is your school’s instructional focus? What is your vision for promoting the instructional focus consistently across classrooms? Our instructional focus is to improve student engagement, build oral language development and increase vocabulary. In addition, we want to improve reading comprehension and encourage rich discourse around literature. Teachers will engage students in daily shared reading activities in grades Kindergarten through grade 5. Students will lead the shared reading activities with teacher support and use tools to support their thinking and make it visible. How will you implement a standards-aligned curricula that meets the needs of your diverse learners, including ELLs and SWDs? The implementation of the Next Generation Standards-aligned curricula that meets the needs of all learners will be integral to our school's success. Literacy instruction will include ReadyGen, the Next Generation Standards-aligned program designed to engage students in multiple reads of complex texts through more structured whole-group and small-group activities. Each module includes “enduring understandings” and “essential questions” to guide teachers to the critical skills and knowledge students need to meet the demands of the Next Generation standards. By knowing the goals of each module, teachers can make decisions and balance lessons to include a variety of scaffolds and to support development of reading, writing, and discussion skills. Our students are exposed to multiple text types to practice their foundational skills and comprehension is supported through multiple opportunities for guided student discussions. Students will also read independently everyday (English/Spanish) and have the opportunities to participate in book clubs. The English language arts curriculum provides students with opportunities to engage with complex, grade-level texts every day through theme-based units designed around texts sets. It emphasizes writing from sources, supports critical thinking, and requires students provide evidence from text to support their thinking. Students' academic needs are identified through the collection and analysis of performance based assessments that monitor student's learning and progress towards meeting benchmarks. The Teachers College Reading and Writing Project's Writing Units of Study are completely aligned to the Next Generation Standards and they highlight the three types of text the standards call for, the quality of writing standards expected and emphasis on the writing process across the disciplines. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 23  What is your vision for ensuring that all student have access to rigorous coursework that moves them towards career and college readiness? How will you support the personal and academic skills, habits, and behaviors needed for students to be career and college ready? In order to ensure that each of our students develops the behaviors and preparedness for college and careers, we offer diverse programs that promote teamwork. Our students will need to understand how to communicate and contribute to collaborative projects and assignments such as group presentations. We also provide our students with multiple opportunities and contexts for decision-making and problem solving to develop our students' innovative thinking, creativity and ability to look at tasks and engage in thinking about the different ways to reach different outcomes across the academic areas. We are also expanding our arts curriculum to encourage our students creativity in visual arts, dance and music in School wide Enrichment clubs and after school program offerings. Science, Technology and Math curriculum engages our students in learning and gaining deeper insights into math and science themes, skills and concepts. We are also committed to developing our students communication skills through guided discussions, rich and rigorous conversations that are connected to text where students develop habits for making arguments both in conversation and writing. Students develop skills through written arguments that respond to the ideas, events, facts, and arguments presented in the texts they read through writing units of study. Programs such as Text Talk promotes the development of students' academic vocabulary to access grade level complex texts. By focusing strategically on comprehension of pivotal words, teachers will guide students to constantly build their ability to access more complex texts across the content areas. Instructional shifts are embedded in program offerings by engaging students in academic and extra-curricular activities that have prompted required changes in curricular material and instructional practices. Students at PS 463 read a balance of informational and literary texts and have more access to support areas such science, social studies, the arts and literature through text. At least 50% of what students read is informational. Across classrooms at PS 463, students are engaged in rich conversations which are dependent on a common text. Teachers guide classroom discussions to ensure students refer to and stay connected to the text and that students develop habits for making arguments both in conversation, as well as in writing to assess comprehension of a text. The shift for complex text and its academic vocabulary is evident with the strategic focus on building students comprehension of text-specific and commonly found words with the implementation of programs such as Text Talk and ReadyGen. How do you envision embedding the elements of culturally responsive instruction and how will you know that implementation is successful? Delivery of instruction will reflect the shared understanding and implementation of the effective teaching practices that will increase students' engagement with and connection to the curricula to secure that all of our students are set up for success. We will provide the guidance and support for students to build their academic readiness through learning tasks and activities that will develop their ability to monitor their own learning. Delivery of instruction will include a mini lesson where teachers states the explicit teaching point, models the specific skill or strategy, provides student with guided practice and independent and/or group task that will engage students developing strong work habits, persistence, and organizational skills. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 24  What is your vision for the use of a comprehensive assessment strategy (diagnostic, formative, benchmark, and summative) to drive curricular, instructional, and organizational decisions that impact student outcomes? Teachers will develop curriculum and plan instruction that will provide every child with flexible learning strategies and conditions that will ensure the success of every child at PS 463. Teacher's plan and practice will reflect their acknowledgement and preparedness to respond to their students' learning styles by creating opportunities for meaningful and rigorous learning tasks. During mini lessons, small group instruction, and conferences, teachers will include visual and/or auditory supports such as video clips, Internet links, and access to definitions and illustrations to increase student engagement and make prior knowledge with the skill/content more visible. Teachers will increase student engagement by exploring students' interests and augmenting students' learning with multimedia presentations, hands on and project based learning opportunities. students and offer students flexibility in methods of demonstrating their learning to increase accessibility. Teacher's plans will include flexible ways of presenting lesson content, practitioners point to multiple entry points as a means to help students learn. How do you envision differentiating teacher professional learning opportunities to support instructional foci, meet students’ unique needs and advance culturally responsive education in your school? Professional development will be tailored to meet our teacher's needs. Topics will be chosen based on noticings during formal and informal observations and also by looking at student data. Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Rise Benchmarks. By June 2019, all grade level teams will utilize Amplify Science curriculum resources, approaches and differentiation strategies which will result in a 5% increase in the proficiency in levels 3 and 4 students as evident on the NYS Science Assessment. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Rigorous Instruction Annual Goal: Which school benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Rigorous Instruction Annual Goal? List of Renewal Benchmarks expected to improve Average ELA Proficiency Rating Rigorous Instruction Performance Index on State ELA Exam & Average Math Proficiency Rating 2018-19 CEP-RISE 25  Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Rigorous instruction Supportive Environment Average ELA proficiency Supportive Environment September 2018, December 2018 September 2018-February 2019 Southern Cross Consultant, lead teachers, Administrators, BFSC Science Instructional Coach Teachers grades K-5, administrators, Science cluster teacher, Southern Cross Consultant, BFSC Science Instructional Coach Teachers K-5 Average ELA proficiency Performance Index on State ELA Exam Teachers K-5 Rigorous instruction Teachers K-5 September 2018-May 2019 Principal, Asst. Principal September 2018-June 2019 Staff will participate in professional development that will focus unpacking the Amplify curriculum Teachers K-5 and administrators Teachers K-5 and administrators Teacher teams will meet weekly to create Science curriculum maps and align the content to our Reading and Writing curriculum Administration of Ready Pencil/Paper, NYC Benchmark and MOSL assessments will be analyzed using the ELA/Math Tracker to determine if the content in curriculum maps is helping students meet the CCLS. Administrators will conduct weekly observations to monitor teacher practice and student performance and provide feedback to improve instructional outcomes. How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) Observing lessons being taught and reviewing lesson plans Meeting with teachers during weekly planning sessions and reviewing the content of the Science maps Small group instruction during ELT to re-teach standards Teachers showing growth in components 1A and 1E as measured by the Danielson Framework 2018-19 CEP-RISE 26  Teachers will participate in the CS4all Initiative-embedding Computer Science into our Science block Teachers K-5 Rigorous instruction October 2018-June 2019 Instructional leads-grades 3-5, principal, assistant principal Observing lessons (plugged and unplugged), giving feedback to teachers and administrators planning lessons with the teachers 4b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. In September 2018 we will have our Curriculum Night where families will learn about our new Science curriculum (Amplify) and how it will be implemented. Every month during our "Morning drop-off" our families will be able to see Science lessons being taught and also participate in the lessons with their child. In May 2019, we will have our annual Science Fair where parents/guardians will be able to see projects that were created by their students that are aligned to the Science Scope and Sequence. Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, lead CBO’s community school budget, FSC Supports, etc. Resources needed: BFSC Science Instructional Coach to support with professional development and teacher coaching. Funding for literacy consultant, laptops, Macbooks and desktop computers for students, iReady software, Ready paper and pencil, CS4all curriculum and consultant, per diem for teachers to attend Amplify and CS4all professional development/inter-visitations and teacher per session for planning Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By March 2019 65% of our students will have demonstrated measurable growth on the CCLSELA Benchmark Assessment. In addition, 40 percent of our students will show measurable growth on the spring Ready paper and pencil assessment. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 27  CCLSELA Benchmark Assessments and Fountas and Pinnell Running Records. Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 28  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 5 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 5.2 The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. (aligned to Rise Key 4) 5.3 The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students. (aligned to Rise Key 4) 5.4 All school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health supports tied to the school’s vision. (aligned to Rise Key 5) 5.5 The school leader and student support staff work together with teachers to establish structures to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental health needs. (aligned to Rise Key 5) X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: SOP(s) Addressed 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? 5. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? This school year we faced many challenges in regards to improving our students attendance. One third of our population resides in temporary housing and their families face many obstacles that prevent them from coming to school. All of our students are assigned a success mentor, and matched to interventions. In the beginning of the school year the mentors identified some of the key factors as to why our students were not coming to school: lack of clothing, asthma related illnesses, and also lack of food. We used this information to supply our students with uniforms and also warm clothing for the winter months. All of our students received coats from Operation Warm. We also were able to give families gift cards to Western Beef so that they could buy groceries and we also had our parent coordinator accompany parents to their appointments with social services. In addition, asthma workshops were held to inform parents about various treatments and we also encouraged parents to have a 504 form filled out so that their child could receive their asthma medicine at school. Our Success Mentors have been working diligently this year to educate our parents about the importance of their child coming to school and they also have provided our students with a consistent person that they can speak to about any issues they are having. The mentors are charged with calling the homes of their students in the respective grades they monitor and track by 10:00 am each morning.They encourage the parents to send or bring them to school late, ensuring them that breakfast will be available. They also let parents know that if they have an appointment that may run overtime, their child can remain in school with our family worker until they arrive. In addition, a home visit is conducted after the second consecutive absence. This is done so that we can confirm that the child is ill, and also offer any 2018-19 CEP-RISE 29  assistance needed. Our attendance team meets every Friday to discuss our students and brainstorm what we can do to assist the family. Our attendance teacher from the Borough Field Office has also been very helpful in assisting us in finding students and identifying ways to help the family. Our attendance data from the Heat Map shows that 20% of our students are chronically absent. In utilizing the systems that we have put in place this school year, we are hoping to decrease that percentage. Data Source: Heat Map and New Visions Data Sorter Finding: The percentage of our students who are chronically absent is 21% Part 2 – Summative Vision for Supportive Environment What is your vision for a supportive school environment? How will you, in partnership with each CBO and families, enact your vision? How do we want school stakeholders to describe our school? We strive to have our stakeholders view PS463X as an effective school where students can feel safe, physically and emotionally. We want to be viewed as a school with a supportive environment, which fosters a community where our students and teachers of diverse backgrounds can focus on learning and divining purpose. We want to be viewed as a school that creates a climate of safety, in the halls and in the classrooms, which is free of behavior like fighting, bullying, and harassment. We want to achieve a safe environment where our scholars are free to reach their potential academically, by focusing on preventing misbehavior by implementing school-wide “positive behavior interventions.” These interventions will stress socialization skills and emotional learning, to teach students conflict resolution and cultural understanding. Our teachers, parents, administrators and other mentors will need to encourage the creation of a holistic learning environment in which our scholars treat our school and their classrooms as “sacred places.” How society values school as a whole culture has everything to do with how students will engage with their own education. Our hope is that our students will regard our school as an institution with higher respect, so they will enter the school with attitudes more conducive to learning. We want our stakeholders to believe that our teachers genuinely believe that every child has the raw materials to be a successful student. This means that our teachers will make a conscious effort to give equal opportunity for all students to respond during class, provide thoughtful feedback to every student, and are willing to re-teach concepts that students have not mastered. What do the CBO partnerships look like? How do they sustain and support the social and emotional growth and health of your students and indicate how your attendance and chronic absenteeism rates will improve? Our CBO Partnership with East Side House Settlement has been working to help raise student attendance by utilizing the CBO staff to assist with the creation of Peer Mediation, and school wide restorative justice initiative to help students grow from their mistakes and work on identifying triggers and reducing incidents in which poor decisions lead to punishments without a rehabilitative component in which students become more aware of the benefits of having a choice to choose right from wrong. Our CBO also set up partnerships with local mental health agencies as well as the School Based Support Team in our school to provide references for community agencies and services. They work with 2018-19 CEP-RISE 30  the staff to provide insight on childhood trauma and the effect it has on academic performance with many of our students who are in crisis or at risk. The CBO in conjunction with the staff has created and implemented the goals of the “Student Success Summit Team,” whose goal is to raise student attendance and break down barriers to regular school attendance for our students and our families. This team consists of the following team members/mentors. ▪ Principal ▪ Attendance Teacher ▪ Community School Coordinator (CBO Staff) ▪ Guidance Counselor ▪ Parent Coordinator ▪ Family Advocate (CBO Staff) ▪ Family Workers Psychiatric Social Worker (Visiting Nurse Service) Mentors meet every Friday to review student attendance. Mentors are assigned to a grade level to monitor student attendance. Mentors conduct outreach efforts to parents/guardians to discuss student attendance, identify and break down barriers to regular school attendance and serve as a resource to assist the family. Mentors notify state agencies of Educational Neglect when instructed by the Principal. The CBO supports and participates in the analysis of our school’s attendance patterns to ensure that prevention and intervention activities are data driven. Mentors meet with parents of students who have missed 5 or more days of school to collect additional data surrounding their absenteeism. How is student voice and leadership supported? Student voice and leadership is supported by the creation of our peer mediation program in which students are trained to support and mediate conflicts between peers and help create trust and foster a supportive learning environment for their peers. Students are able to have opportunities to lead the morning announcements to build their public speaking skills, and lead the whole school morning meeting with the pledge of allegiance at the beginning of the school day. We also have added a Student Leadership Council that meets with the principal monthly to discuss concerns and ways to improve our school. What social-emotional learning framework will your school adopt (RULER, PBIS, etc.)? Our school has adopted the 4R's program from Morningside Alliance. This system has been implemented school wide and we have added a parent component. This literacy based social/emotional program teachers students how to resolve conflict and cope with stress. How should the school be more proactive in promoting improved students social-emotional skills ? How should counseling happen? Our school can become more proactive in promoting improvements in our students’ social-emotional needs by identifying early on, students that are in crisis. These students will then receive at-risk counseling from our school based guidance counselor. Children usually look for someone they can trust, who will give them honest replies to big questions and solutions to problems they are facing. Children need to be able to talk about serious things such as death, depression and despair, and they will need a safe place where they can talk. Finding safe spaces to talk, and staff they 2018-19 CEP-RISE 31  can trust can foster an environment of attitudinal healing. Counseling and day to day interactions with students and staff will be driven by the following tenets: • The principles of this type of healing introduce the dynamic of CHOICE into a psychological process. Each principle offers an opportunity to step through the fear, conflict or separation students may be feeling, and often recycling, and to make a choice to experience peace of mind instead, even in extreme situations. Attitudinal Healing defines health as inner peace and healing as letting go of fear. • We have to allow space for self-healing. • We need to allow our students to release their past traumas. • We are the HELP our students seek. • We need to become the Peaceful Presence and Preference for our students. • We can respond to our students with love and compassion even when they are in crisis. • We can teach them that other realities await them, they have to open their minds to the choices right in front of them. We can offer a new perspective, and lend an ear. • Happiness is a choice. Forgiveness is a choice. Patience is a choice. • Our Goal is Peace in the Classroom for all students to support a safe and nurturing learning environment. • If there is peace, we can teach and our students can learn and teach us. • Read your students faces. Don't ignore the angry or sad child. They need the most love. • Provide children with choices. • Discuss “Vacant Self-Esteem,” help students become aware of this within themselves. • Tailor instruction by choosing fiction and non-fiction books, & newspaper articles that help students make real world connections to learning experiences. • Make learning fun. If your classroom is a fun & safe space for a child to learn, your classroom can become a child's safe haven. It could become the place a child can't wait to be. • Learning can become an escape from their pain. • The classroom can become a place to rewire themselves out of the exaggerated fight or flight responses associated with trauma and heal. How will your school team measure social-emotional development and use data to respond to students social and emotional needs? Our school team will measure social-emotional development by looking at attendance rates, classroom environment, functional behavioral assessments, behavior intervention plan effectiveness, counseling notes, a decrease in classroom disruptions, a decrease in the number of OORR’s reports and suspensions per school year, an increase in student engagement, an overall increase in academic performance as evidenced by the progression of student reading levels, class work, student portfolio’s and a marked decrease in time spent mediating disputes and conflicts during the school 2018-19 CEP-RISE 32  day. We will conduct needs assessments to determine which types of interventions would work best for our students because not every approach is “one size fits all.” We will determine the root of our students’ individual needs in clusters to determine which counseling models fit their specific counseling needs to plan appropriate interventions on a case by case basis. How would teachers, community partners and school leaders use data to respond to student social and emotional needs? Students that are referred to our mental health provider or guidance counselor will be assessed and teachers, administrators and community based staff will use that data to provide the student with targeted intervention. Students will be taught specific skills and strategies to help them manage the behaviors that are being exhibited. For example, if a student is having difficulty resolving conflicts, they will become a member of our Peer Mediation Group in order to learn various ways to handle conflict and to eventually become a peer mediator. Indicate how your attendance and chronic absenteeism will improve. Our attendance will improve by 2% and our number of chronically absent students will decrease by 5% as well. Describe your plan to implement a culture of trust and high expectations for teachers, students, families and community partners. All of our scholars will have a success mentor that will be charged with monitoring their attendance and providing any supports that are needed. Success mentors will be assigned by grade and will get to know the families of their students by having attendance workshops each month. Our CBO, Eastside House Settlement will also host monthly workshops (Teamwork Tuesdays)where parents will be afforded the opportunity to learn about what resources they have to offer. In addition, parents will have the opportunity to attend two Family trips on the weekend via the Urban Advantage initiative. Who are your CBO partners? How will each CBO sustain and support the social-emotional and academic growth of your students? CBO Partner CBO Focus East Side House Settlement Family advocate will continue to be success mentors to chronically absent students and they will also facilitate different groups to address the social and emotional needs of our students. There will be a social worker on site and she will be responsible for taking referrals, meeting with care-givers and setting up services to support the students social and emotional well-being. Services will be offered at school and off-site. Visiting Nurse Service How will you, in partnership with your CBO, create a supportive and engaging environment for your students’ families? We will work together to continue to improve parental involvement and engagement. Our families will be afforded the opportunities to attend a minimum of 25 workshops during the school year and also earn certificates of completion when they have completed a cycle of workshops. Parents/guardians will be surveyed to determine how they feel they 2018-19 CEP-RISE 33  can help us to improve our school and also to make suggestions about programs or classes that would like to participate in during the school year. What essential questions, or key themes, will be explored by all staff and students that acknowledge and celebrate the culture and heritage of the student body? Our key school wide themes will be aligned to our social/emotional curriculum: Building Community, Feelings, Listening, Assertiveness, Problem solving, Diversity and Making a Difference. The themes will be taught throughout the school year and for every theme, each class will recognize students that have done an exemplary job demonstrating that trait. Students will be recognized at our monthly Student of the Month Assemblies. What evidence will you use to gauge the impact of your plan to create a positive school environment? We will keep track of our incidents via the OORS system and we we also use Heatmap to monitor our daily attendance rate. Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Supportive Environment. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Rise Benchmarks. By June 2019, the number of chronically absent students will decrease by 15% due to our students having a Success Mentor and receiving targeted attendance intervention based on need. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Supportive Environment Annual Goal: Which school benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Supportive Environment Annual Goal? List of Renewal Benchmarks expected to improve Student Attendance Supportive Environment N/A 2018-19 CEP-RISE 34 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Student attendance Students Grades Pre K-5 September 2018-June 2019 Family workers (2), parent advocates (2), guidance counselor, parent coordinator Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. Chronically absent students will be assigned a success mentor and also be a part of one of the groups that address social/emotional well being. Success mentors will provide supports to families and also mentor students who are chronically absent. They will meet with students on a weekly basis to discuss what is hindering them from attending school and also they will reward their improvements in attendance. Parents of students grades Pre-K-5 Students grades Pre-K-5 Families of chronically absent students will be invited to an attendance orientation in August 2018 School-wide attendance policy will be distributed and reviewed with parents at the beginning of the school year. Student attendance August 2018 Family workers, social Student Attendance September 2018 worker, guidance counselor, parent coordinator, administrators, teachers Family workers, social worker, guidance counselor,, parent advocates, parent coordinator and administrators How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) Attendance team members will use the Heat Map to match students to mentors and identify interventions Decrease in the number of chronically absent students. Decrease in the number of chronically absent students 2018-19 CEP-RISE 35 Student attendance Students Grades Pre-K-5 September 2018-June 2019 Teachers, Attendance Team, Family workers, social worker, guidance counselor September 2018-June 2019 Students grades Pre-K-5 Student attendance Attendance team and administrators Decrease in the number of chronically absent students and increase in overall school wide attendance percentage each month. Decrease in the number of chronically absent students and and increase in overall school wide attendance percentage each month. Monthly attendance assemblies will be held to recognize students with 100% and improved attendance. Good citizenship (Student of the Month) will also be celebrated. Parents will be invited to he assemblies and also receive recognition for the efforts. Attendance team will meet every Friday to discuss cases. Attendance team will carry out daily attendance protocols for all students. Attendance team will use the Heat map to review students' attendance and look at trends and patterns 2018-19 CEP-RISE 36 Teachers, school aides, guidance counselor and parents Students, teachers Playworks Professional Developmet Classes from each grade with highest attendance percentage will receive a pizza party and teachers will receive two movie tickets beginning September 2018 4b – Parent and Family Engagement Student attendance/social emotional September 2018-June 2019 Administrators and Parent Coordinator Student Attendance September 2018-June 2019 Attendance Team, Administration Decrease in the number of chronically absent students Decrease in chronically absent students and increase in overall school-wide percentage How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. For the 2018-2019 school year we will ask for parents to volunteer to be class parents. Class parents will help to plan classroom activities, accompany students on trips and also do parent outreach. We will also have a minimum of two workshops a month (Teamwork Tuesday) and the topics will be based on our parents/guardians survey responses. Workshops will begin September 2018 and end June 2019. Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, lead CBO’s community school budget, FSC Supports, etc. The resources needed for this goal will be funded by East Side House Settlement and a few of our funding sources. In addition, we will have a mental health provider on-site(Visiting Nurse Service) and they will provide our students and families with the services and supports needed. Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By February 2019, our percentage of students absent 10 or more days will have decreased by 2% as evidenced by the RCUA ATS report and the Heatmap. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 37  The RCUA report from ATS and the Heat Map. Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 38  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 4 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 4.2 School and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. (aligned to Rise Key 2) 4.3 Teachers provide coherent, and appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. (aligned to Rise Key 1) 4.4 Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences and tailored to the strengths and needs of all students. (aligned to Rise Key 4) 4.5 Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, and progress monitoring). (aligned to Rise Key 3) Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: SOP(s) Addressed X 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? Strengths: During the 2017-18 school year our teachers embedded the content of our Social Studies and Science units into their writing curriculum maps. Students had the opportunities to do more projects to demonstrate their learning of various concepts and they also were able to make their thinking visible through those projects. Teachers planned Social Studies activities with our literacy consultant and began to align them to our literacy maps. Based on feedback from my Principal's Performance Review our teachers need to ensure that students have more opportunities to engage in challenging tasks and the content should be accessible to all learners. Data source-Principal's Performance Review ● Finding: "Principal Jones should continue with a focus on providing multiple entry points into the curricula so that all learners are engaged in appropriately challenging tasks and demonstrate higher order thinking." Part 2 – Summative Vision for Collaborative Teachers What is your vision for collaborative teaching? 2018-19 CEP-RISE 39  Our school is organized to promote teacher collaboration with structures such as scheduling dally common prep periods at each grade level, in addition to our SBO elected mandatory Friday lunch meetings, where grade teams gather and plan lessons collaboratively for the following week. Our school also has established Professional Learning Committees (PLCs) for Reading, Writing, Math, and Dual Language. These committees meet twice a month to share best practices and analyze student work to collect data and conduct a needs assessment in areas in which instructional practices, and students’ academic needs can be determined. What do teaching and learning look like? What underlying principles would influence the creation of units and lesson plans? All of the teachers and members of our school community are committed to the mission that all students can and will learn, and take responsibility for their impact on delivering the curriculum to meet all of the academic needs of our students and create stimulating learning environments. Our curriculum mapping, unit creation and lesson planning is designed with the mission in mind, it becomes easier to identify gaps in students’ education and address the deficiencies. Our school strives to operate as one effective organism instead of a loose network of individuals with their own agendas. The mission that all students can learn and achieve academic progress and success is an ideal that guides every one's efforts on a daily basis. What data should teachers review regularly to ensure they plan for individual student needs? Students are regularly assessed for understanding in guided reading groups, with daily conferencing on their academic progress, and frequent check-ins to determine understanding. Frequent teacher-written conference notes, and progress notes on student goal sheets, give teachers the information they need to make changes if some or all students aren’t mastering class material. Our teachers assess the students’ learning more holistically and less formally than standardized exams relying less on multiple-choice tests and giving more attention to portfolios and presentations. Students are encouraged to monitor themselves by keeping progress charts and revisiting graded assignments. Our students also conduct student-led parent teacher conferences in which they have the opportunity to share some of their best work with parents and guardians, and have the opportunity to openly share what skills they were struggling with in all academic subjects. How are teachers providing opportunities for to deepen learning for higher achieving students? Higher achieving students tend to learn the things they spend the most time on. Our teachers are aware of limited instruction time and create lesson plans with that in mind. Keeping the mission at the forefront, teachers must create a lesson that allows for not just all material to be covered, but also for it to be mastered, within the time constraints of the class. The lessons are be flexible enough to allow re-teaching when the students are having trouble with certain key concepts, and have differentiated activities following the lesson to meet the needs of the struggling students, while providing challenging activities for the higher achieving students. Higher achieving students will also have access to more difficult books that challenge their thinking on the school wide “MyON” software platform, in which book choices and learning opportunities can be individualized and tailored to the reading level and skill level of the student. At times our teachers must practice “organized abandonment” when approaching their lesson plans. If students aren’t mastering fundamental skills like reading, then our teachers may have to abandon lower-priority learning experiences until students are caught up to the appropriate standards. While organized abandonment is essential for true learning in limited time frames, the higher achieving students are still given opportunities to explore these topics and skills, their peers may not be ready to grasp in differentiated center activities. What system do teachers use to ensure that every child is safe in their class? Many of our teachers work to ensure that every child is safe in their class by fostering partnerships with parents. Our teachers foster a climate of regular communication with parents. At the most basic level, our teachers and staff must be able to rely on parents to get their children to school on time and regularly, and parents must be assured that their 2018-19 CEP-RISE 40  children are entering a safe and caring place. A true home and school partnership at PS463 goes much further. Teachers want to work together with parents to help children get the most out of their assignments. We believe many of our parents try to devote time to tutor their children, and our teachers are working on providing clear directions for how parents can help their children academically in a productive way. This strategy is most effective in our school when teachers and parents have an open line of communication and can share notes on the student’s progress. How do you intend to use community educators / partners to support a collaborative teaching approach? Our school staff attempts to go beyond purely academic matters when it comes to bridging home and school. In the relationship between home and school, parents and other community agencies can work together to address problems that are not uniquely school-based. Childhood trauma, hunger, homelessness, depression, and grief “are all serious problems where the school can contribute to the solution, but the school can’t solve them alone.” In an ideal situation, the community as a whole works as a team to tackle these issues and creates a better environment for learning, and a better society. Our partnerships with our CBO, Visiting Nurse Service, Morningside Alliance and the resources we now have in place in our school will assist in helping teachers to be more effective in working together to maximize the effectiveness of collaboration for all stakeholders in our school. How are teachers providing opportunities to deepen learning for higher achieving students? Higher achieving students are assigned projects to demonstrate their understanding of the content. In addition, instruction is differentiated for the assigned tasks where students are required to perform at a level where they are exceeding the standards. How do you envision enhancing collaboration amongst your Instructional Leadership Team to improve teacher practices and student learning? Collaboration amongst the School Instructional Cabinet is integral to improving teacher practices and student learning. We have instructional leads on each grade and they are charged with supporting the teachers on their grade in the areas of planning and curriculum mapping. The leads meet with the principal twice a month to discuss ways to improve pedagogical practice and also raise student achievement. This school year, we also had three model teachers and they were responsible for modeling best practices and also mentoring two of our new teachers. We will have the same model for the 2018-19 school year. How do you envision collaboration within teacher teams to improve teacher practices and student learning? We will have four teacher teams next year and their goal will be to identify problems of practice and research solutions to the problem via the inquiry process. Teachers will meet twice a month to analyze student work and share best practices. All teacher teams will utilize a professional text that will be aligned with the practice that they are studying. Teams are required to share their best practices with the entire school community. How do you envision collaboration across teacher teams to improve data driven teacher practices that result in improvement in student achievement? What data will teachers and the Instructional Leadership Team regularly review to ensure that they are reflecting upon needed adjustments to teaching practices and meeting individual student learning needs? 2018-19 CEP-RISE 41 Data Reviewed Intent Fountas and Pinnell Reading levels To analyze how students reading and comprehension levels are progressing and also identify what intervention is needed. On demand Writing pieces To analyze how students are moving along the writing continuum and to also adjust lessons to meet their needs engageNY Math assessments To analyze what standards students are mastering and where they need intervention Describe the screening process you use to identify students who need extra help? How do you use this process to determine which intervention to provide? In order to determine which students need intervention, teachers analyze the Fountas and Pinnell Running Record Assessments, MOSL data and Math module assessments. Students who are identified as not meeting the standards receive Tier I intervention from their teacher and those students who are in the bottom third will receive Tier II and Tier III intervention from a reading specialists or paraprofessional. Students in grades 2-5 who are identified to be at-risk will also be invited to attend our Kiwi After school Program which will begin in October. We have two reading recovery teachers and all of our paraprofessionals are trained in Reading Rescue. Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Rise Benchmarks. By June 2019, all grade level teams will utilize a system to teach shared reading strategies in order to improve reading comprehension, fluency and vocabulary development. Success will be measured by comparing the results of the Beginning and End of Year MOSL exams with 100% of our students increasing two Fountas and Pinnell Levels. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Collaborative Teachers Annual Goal: Which school benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Collaborative Teachers Annual Goal? List of Renewal Benchmarks expected to improve Average ELA Proficiency Rating Performance Index on State ELA Exam Supportive Environment 2018-19 CEP-RISE 42 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Teachers K-5 and ENL teachers Average ELA Proficiency Rating June 2018-November 2018 Literacy consultant, literacy coach, administrator and instructional leads How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) Teachers will teach students how to code short stories during shared reading using various symbols Students will use specific symbols to code selected text during shared reading Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. Literacy consultant, literacy coach, model teachers and principal will facilitate professional development sessions on how to code text using various symbols. Model teachers, consultants and administrators will analyze student work to monitor for accuracy Kiwi Afterschool Program Students Grades 2-5 4b – Parent and Family Engagement Performance Index on State ELA Exam Students Grades K-5 Average ELA Proficiency Rating Performance Index on State ELA Exam Rigorous instruction September 2018-June 2019 Literacy consultant, all teachers, literacy coach, administrators and instructional leads December 2018-April 2019 Select teachers-grades 2-5 Analyze formative and summative assessments that are administered during the program. How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Our lead/model teachers and literacy coach will conduct make and take workshops and workshops on how parents can support the child's learning at home. We will have a minimum of three family nights where parents will engage in 2018-19 CEP-RISE 43  fun learning activities in the areas of literacy and Mathematics. Workshops will be conducted every month beginning October 2018 and ending June 2019. Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, lead CBO’s community school budget, FSC Supports, etc. Per session for planning, funds to pay for literacy consultant, per-diem for substitutes Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By February 2019, teachers will have taught students how to use symbols to code stories during shared reading. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Analyzing Fountas and Pinnell Reading levels and NYC Periodic assessments Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 44  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 2 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 2.2 The school leader ensures that the school community shares the Specific, Measurable, Ambitious, Results-oriented, and Timely (SMART) goals/mission and long-term vision inclusive of core values that address the priorities outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP). (aligned with Rise Key 2) Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital resources. (aligned with Rise Key 6) 2.3 2.4 The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district's Annual Professional Performance Review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. (aligned with Rise Key 1) X 2.5 Leaders effectively use evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve critical individual and school-wide practices as defined in the SCEP (student achievement, curriculum and teacher practices; leadership development; community/family engagement; and student social and emotional developmental health). (aligned with Rise Keys 4 and 5) Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: SOP(s) Addressed 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? As a school community we believe that when children truly understand the concepts that they are taught, they will be able to speak about the subject matter and apply what they know when given a task. Our teachers have been working diligently to promote discourse in the classrooms and our students are having discussions, but we need to go beyond the "turn and talk." Strengths: This year, administrators have been very diligent in monitoring their growth (via the Advance dashboard) in regards to their identifying what component of the Danielson Framework that they need more support with, providing them with timely feedback and next steps. Administrators, consultants and the literacy coach will facilitate professional development sessions that are needed to assist staff in their practice of using questions to deepen student understanding. They will also be taught how to facilitate discussions where all students are engaged and learn to build on each others responses without being called on. Data Source-Principal Performance Observation ● Finding: In reference to Quality Indicator 4.1 on the Principal Performance Review, "The assistant principal should also be included on support visits to ensure coherence in observation practices and targets." 2018-19 CEP-RISE 45  ● Administrators will meet weekly to review Advance data, set observation targets, identify trends and plan differentiated professional development. Part 2 – Summative Vision for Effective School Leadership What is your vision for effective school leadership at your school? School leaders will articulate and advance a shared vision and mission to the entire school community by leading by example and maintaining a culture of trust and positive attitudes that fosters the academic and personal growth of students and adults at PS 463X/ Urban Scholars Community School. School leaders will gather low-inference data from classroom observations and analyze student learning data and related data (e.g., attendance) to establish a clear instructional vision of school improvement and articulate the data-based goals that will be monitored. The principal will ensure that our partnership with East Side House Settlement is strong by securing the active participation of the Community School Coordinator in weekly cabinet meetings, bi-monthly School Based Leadership meetings, and staff conferences. School leadership and CBO partnership staff will meet to articulate academic, social-emotional, behavior and attendance goals and develop data-based goals, a detailed plan of action that identify key staff members, related tasks and time frames. School leaders will establish an assessment calendar and related reporting time lines. School leaders will schedule monthly grade team meetings to review student learning data and bimonthly sessions with individual teachers to guide and support teachers in meeting student learning needs and elevate instructional practices. Supports such as coaching, inter-visitations, reading professional text, support with planning whole class and small group instruction, professional development for conferring, miscue analysis, use of technology in instruction will be provided by school leaders, coach, or consultants. Student and teacher programs will be directly aligned to the school’s instructional, social-emotional, behavior and attendance goals. School leader will delegate the supervision of select grades to the assistant principal. Assistant principal will be responsible for planning and facilitating professional development that is aligned with instructional goals and continues to move teacher practice to meet student learning. The assistant principal will observe teachers using Danielson Framework for Teaching and monitor learning outcomes to ensure effective instructional practices and strategies are implemented. The Community School Coordinator will work alongside school leaders to ensure programs and activities that seamlessly integrate social services and expanded learning time opportunities into the school to better serve the needs of students. These programs will stand as centers of opportunities where families can get the supports they need to make sure students come to school ready and able to learn. Following observations, school leaders will provide teacher accurate and actionable feedback that will promote professional growth and reflection to develop the teacher’s pedagogy. Evidence based systems to ensure school and individuals continue to improve will be established. To ensure students’ needs are met, school leaders will establish cycles of one-on-one conversations with teachers to articulate goals and next steps to monitor progress every two months. Student learning data and student work products, Danielson’s Framework for Teaching feedback and curricula will all be referenced to ensure that teachers are making strides in the shifts in pedagogy required by the Common Core. By establishing a consistent process to monitor progress throughout 2018-19 CEP-RISE 46 the school year, PS 463X/ Urban Scholars Community School will assess the effectiveness of strategies in improving student performance. What are your core belief(s) for school improvement and how they inform your vision for developing instructional leadership at your school? Next year I will be working on my monitoring systems. I will create monthly schedules of the systems and structures that I need to monitor in order to further move teacher practice and accelerate student learning. What is your vision for developing differentiated leadership throughout your school? How will you utilize teacher leaders to build broad capacity within your school? For the past 5 years we have had instructional leads on every grade. This model will continue for the 2018-19 school year. Teachers leaders are responsible for leading professional development sessions, facilitating meetings and leading planning sessions. They work hand in hand with the administration and the other members of the school community trust them and value their input. In addition, we have one mentor and an assistant principal that will continue to receive training via the New Teacher Mentoring Center. This will be their second year receiving this training. How will the leader foster collaborative school governance processes, and ensure full family participation together with other stakeholders? We will work together with our CBO and mental health provider to provide our families with resources that are beneficial to their well-being. Families will be surveyed twice a year in order for us to offer them workshops that they are interested in and to also see if they are learning from what we are offering. Our families are aware that their ideas and support are welcome in our school community. How will you use evidence-based systems to ensure school and teacher leaders are led by a cycle of continuous learning and use this to inform their teams’ priorities? Evidence-Based System Support(s) Collaborator(s) Running Records Writer's Notebooks and folders Math assessments and student work Conferring notes Literacy coach will facilitate professional development sessions to ensure that running records are administered and scored accurately Teachers will provide written feedback to students in their notebooks and folders. Assessments will be reviewed to determine where intervention is needed. Teachers will confer with students to provide them with feedback and next steps in order to raise academic achievement Teachers and administrators Teachers and administrators Teachers and administrators Teachers and administrators 2018-19 CEP-RISE 47 IEP's Part 3 – Annual Goal Teachers will review the goals on the IEP's to make adjustments to lesson plans and curriculum maps. Teachers and administrators Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Rise Benchmarks. By June 2019, 70% of our teachers will have demonstrated improved pedagogical practice as measured by component 3D (Using assessment in instruction) of the Danielson Framework for Teaching resulting in a 25% decrease in level 1's in ELA and Mathematics. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Effective School Leadership Annual Goal: Which school benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Effective School Leadership Annual Goal? List of Renewal Benchmarks expected to improve Average ELA Proficiency Rating and Performance Index on State ELA Exam Rigorous Instruction Supportive Environment 2018-19 CEP-RISE 48  Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. Teachers will receive training on how to utilize the Danielson Framework to improve their practice. Administrators will meet weekly to analyze Advance data and discuss teacher performance and the components that teachers need to improve. Supports and professional development sessions will be put in place for teachers and administrators will follow up in a timely matter. Teachers will receive training on how to conduct Socratic seminars in the classrooms Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) All teachers Framework:Rigorous instruction Administrators September 2018-November 2019 All teachers Framework:Rigorous Instruction September 2018-June 2019 Administrators, literacy coach, math and literacy consultants Grade 4 and 5 teachers Average ELA proficiency rating November and December 2018 Administrators, literacy coach, literacy consultant Performance Index on State ELA Exam Our mentor, trained by the New Teacher Center will also work with teachers in the New teachers Framework:Rigourous Instruction NTC Mentor September 2018-May 2019 How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) Formal and Informal observations conducted by administrators Analyzing teacher's ratings and providing them support in ineffective and developing areas. Observing classroom teachers and students and giving feedback to improve the Socratic Seminar process Discussions with teachers and mentor, 2018-19 CEP-RISE 49  area of questioning and discussion Teachers will receive professional development on how to effectively embed assessments into their daily lessons All teachers Average ELA and Math proficiency Sept. 2018-May 2019 Performance Index on State ELA Exam Literacy and Math consultants, Anet consultant, administrators teacher observations analyzing lesson plans and observing lessons specifically looking for the assessment piece. 4b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will receive progress reports in September, October, December, January, February, April and May. The will have the opportunity to meet with their child's teachers every month to look at their data and discuss their progress and areas of need. Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, lead CBO’s community school budget, FSC Supports, etc. Per diem to hire substitutes to cover classes for inter visitations, funds to pay for literacy and math consultants, per session-professional development after school Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By February 2019, 40% of our teachers will have demonstrated improved pedagogical practice as measured by component 3D(Using Assessment in Instruction of the Danielson Framework for Teaching. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Danielson Framework for Teaching Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 50  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 6 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 6.2 The school leader ensures that regular communication with students and families fosters their high expectations for student academic achievement. (aligned with Rise Key 2) 6.3 The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders so that student strength and needs are identified and used to augment learning. (aligned with Rise Key 4 and 6) 6.4 The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to support student success. (aligned with Rise Key 5) 6.5 The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school community members centered on student learning and success and encourages and empowers families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their children. (aligned with Rise Key 3) X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: SOP(s) Addressed 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? During the 2017-18 school year, an average of twenty (20) parents attended parent workshops as evidenced by our attendance sheets. We continued our Teamwork Tuesdays each month where two Tuesdays of the month are dedicated to parent workshops, which are facilitated by the teachers, LEAP consultants and the parent coordinator. We also have morning drop-off once a month where parents accompany their children to school and spend first period with them. This gives them a chance to observe the beginning of our literacy block and to also interact with the child and the teacher during instructional time. In addition, we offer various activities every month (Cook Shop, Coffee and Conversation, Student of the Month/Perfect Attendance Assemblies, etc..) for our parents to participate in. For the 2017-18 school year our team from East Side House Settlement engaged our families in workshops to meet their needs outside of school, as well as in school. They also referred our parents to other community based organizations to get needed resources and support when we were not able to provide it on the school level. Parents were supported in getting health care insurance, obtaining social security cards and also given lists of the food pantries in the community. Our parent coordinator also accompanied parents to their appointments as a support. This level of support will continue for the 2018-19 school year. Data Source-Quality Review ● Findings: “Parents reported that Teamwork Tuesday Workshops that are led by teachers and the parent coordinator provide parents with information about Common Core Learning Standards, curricula expectations and strategies that help them support their children at home." 2018-19 CEP-RISE 51  Part 2 – Summative Vision for Strong Family and Community Ties What is your vision for strong family and community ties at your school? What opportunities exist for the school staff to know the students and their families in order to better communicate and partner with families and communities in the vision for the school? As a Community School, we immediately began to work with our community partner, East Side House Settlement, to establish and refine systems to ensure that all families are welcomed and made a part of the school community. We have displayed welcome banners at the main entrance that include our vision of working together to improve student achievement. Our school safety officer receives our monthly calendar and is kept informed of home-school events that are scheduled throughout each month to remind and direct parents/guardians when they drop off their child(ren). Urban Scholars Community School provides support to families by offering a range of forums for parental involvement. Every month we offer Coffee and Conversation with the Principal where parents/guardians are invited to come in to have breakfast and hear about ongoing and planned home-school events. Following brief announcements and updates, parents/guardians are invited to share feedback, concerns, or comments. During Coffee with the Principal, information regarding programs such Learning Leaders, district and city family events are shared and parents/guardians are recruited. Following Coffee with Principal, we schedule Cook Shop for Families and Parent Association monthly meetings. PS 463 Urban Scholars Community School has designated Tuesdays as “Teamwork Tuesdays” at PS 463 and offer a range of events/activities to keep parents actively engaged and informed about what their child is learning. Two “Teamwork Tuesdays” of the month are dedicated to parent workshops, which are facilitated by the teachers, CBO members, Learning Leaders, Visiting Nurse Service and the parent coordinator. We also have monthly “Morning Drop Off” classroom visits where parents accompany their children to school and spend the first period of the instructional day with them in their classrooms. Classroom visits affords families an opportunity to observe and experience how our literacy block is conducted and to also interact with their child and the teacher during instructional time. In addition to “Morning Drop Off” we have conducted school-wide writing publication and reading events throughout the school year to celebrate our students’ literacy development. We have established a dedicated space for families to come in for small group sessions, to meet with the Parent Coordinator, CBO staff, or to have access to computers to enroll in initiatives and programs that will support our students’ success. To support student success the CBO will continue working towards improving student attendance by increasing parental awareness about the importance of school attendance, arriving on-time, and the resources/supports available. Urban Scholars Community School will host an Open House/Orientation in September and offer quarterly workshops to parents and families to provide the following information: risk factors associated with chronic absenteeism; describe the risks associated with attendance; highlight the importance and benefits of students attending school on a regular basis; and note the resources available at PS 463 Urban Scholars Community School to improve student attendance. Within the Community School model, how will families be welcomed into the school and made a part of the school community? What support will administrators, teachers, school staff and school safety officers be given to help create a welcoming environment? Will there be a dedicated space for families in the school? In the beginning of the school year, we have an ice cream social where parents and their children come in to meet the teacher and to learn specifics about our school (uniform policy, attendance policy, etc...). Parents have the opportunity to ask questions and also offer ways that they will be able to support us during the school year. Parents are also surveyed in the beginning of the year-advising us on the types of workshops that they would like to have. We let our 2018-19 CEP-RISE 52  parents know that we are here to meet their needs as well as the needs of their children. When parents enter our school building they are welcomed by our school safety officer and office staff. It is our goal to make sure that they feel comfortable enough to address all members of the staff. We have a Parent Center, a space where parents can come to use the computer and also meet with members of our staff. Parent workshops are also held in the parent center. How will the school identify and develop families to take leadership roles in school decision making/school governance structures? Our parent association executive board members, SLT, CBO director and parent coordinator will do the initial outreach of asking parents to take on leadership roles. They will hold forums to explain how parents can be true decision makers in our school. How will the school engage the community and families? How will they ensure that teachers are able to learn from families about the children being taught? We will engage our families by offering them opportunities through out the school year to participate in school-wide events and activities. Parent-Teacher conferences will be held four times a year and during the months when conferences are not scheduled, parents will receive a progress report and be afforded the opportunity to come in and discuss their child's progress. One of our motto's is "Know the child and not the class." We work extremely hard to get to know our students and parents so that we can meet their needs and accelerate student learning. How do families partner with the school and CBO to support student success? Will there be dedicated space for families? Family partnerships with school: Parents participate in school-wide events and activities and also attend workshops that are formulated based on their interests. Family partnerships with CBO: CBO conducts workshops and also works with parents to assist them in areas that require assistance from outside agencies. Is there dedicated space for these partnerships? Yes, we have a Parent Center-room 109 What data and student progress feedback loops will be present at the school to ensure that families knowledgeable of their children’s scholastic success, in addition to report cards? Parents are notified monthly of their child's success via a formal report card (November, March and June) or a progress report. When they receive these reports, they are invited in to meet with the teacher to discuss next steps. Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Rise Benchmarks. By June 2019, the school will conduct a minimum of 25 workshops/events and as a result, at least 65% of our parents will indicate through survey feedback that the workshops we offer meet their needs. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 53  Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Strong Family and Community Ties Annual Goal: Which school benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Strong Family and Community Ties Annual Goal? List of Renewal Benchmarks expected to improve Student Attendance Supportive Environment N/A 2018-19 CEP-RISE 54  Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Parents/Guardians Student attendance Supportive Environment August 2018-September 2019 Administration, CBO Team, teachers, parent coordinator is responsible for setting up planning sessions with other members. How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) At least 30% of our parents will complete the survey in September The administration, teachers, parent coordinator, SLT, family, worker, CBO Team and PA will meet to discuss ways to improve parental engagement. Parent/Guardians will be surveyed at the beginning of the year to assess their needs and how we can support them and their children. Meaningful activities and workshops based on the survey results, will be built into the monthly calendar and facilitated by various members of the school community. Parent workshops will be facilitated by staff members, CBO staff and Learning Leaders. Visiting Nurse Service, Morning side Alliance and Planned Parenthood. Parents/Guardians Student Attendance Supportive Environment September 2018-June 2019 At least 15 parents will attend workshops. Parent coordinator is responsible for creating and distributing the monthly calendar. She is also responsible for maintaining attendance records and agendas for the workshops. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 55  Parent Coordinator Community Coordinator will survey parents/guardians to determine if workshops are meeting their needs. Care giver workshops will be held to address the needs of English Language Learners and Students with Disabilities. Parents/Guardians Student Attendance Supportive Environment February 2019 Parent Coordinator and Community coordinator Surveys will indicate that at least 40% of parents surveyed will say that workshops meet their needs Parents/Guardians Student Attendance Supportive Environment November 2018-May 2019 Community coordinator, ENL teachers, Leap, consultant, IEP Teacher and SBST At least 15 parents will attend workshops. Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, lead CBO’s community school budget, FSC Supports, etc. Instructional supplies (paper, pens, notebooks), funds to pay LEAP-workshops, per diem for teacher coverages Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) X Title III Title I TA X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By February, 2019, 40% of parents who complete survey will indicate that the workshops being offered are meeting their needs. A community forum will be held to solicit responses from parents who did not fill out the survey. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Parent Survey Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 56  Section 6: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) Program Description Directions: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) activities are directly aligned to the elements of the Framework for Great Schools, Rigorous Instruction, Supportive Environments, and Strong Family and Community Ties. ELT provides enriching educational experiences that happen outside of the traditional school day and blend skill acquisition, relationship-building and fun to foster academic and social-emotional growth. Summer learning, afterschool programming, and extended-day ELT models, when well-implemented, play a critical role in supporting students in all grades and ensuring that they graduate from high school, college and career ready. SED requires that Priority schools offer a minimum of 200 additional student contact hours as Expanded Learning Time in addition to the current mandated length of 900 hours of instruction per year (25 hours per week) in grades K-6 and 990 hours of instruction per year (27.5 hours per week) in grades 7-12. Effective ELT models will blend school staff with community partners, and will provide a balanced curriculum that can include ELA, math, STEM, arts, physical activity, and leadership development. Complete the sections on this page to demonstrate how the school will meet these requirements. Part 1 – ELT Program Goal(s) Describe the summative goal(s) of the ELT program for the 2018-19 school year. Goals for ELT should aligned to the Rise Benchmarks. How will the school will ensure that all students’ individual needs are served during the Rise ELT and how the school’s vision for ELT will impact both academic achievement and social emotional growth? Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. The Expanded Learning Time Program at PS 463 Urban Scholars Community School will provide students with educational experiences that will lead to higher student achievement in core academic areas, improve student attendance and promote students’ social-emotional growth and well-being. Our goal for the 2018-2019 school year is to increase the level of vocabulary acquisition and improve reading comprehension. Student success will be measured by the Fountas and Pinnell Assessment System. By June 2019, 80% of our students will have advanced a minimum of two reading levels as measured by the Fountas and Pinnell Running Record Assessment.Teachers will continue to use Text Talk during ELT to provide instruction and students will also use iReady for ELA and Math intervention. Part 2 – ELT Program Type Is the ELT program voluntary or compulsory? Voluntary X Compulsory Rise ELT – Describe what accountability structures the school will employ to ensure participation of all students, including special populations, will participate fully in Rise ELT. Additional ELT - If there is a voluntary ELT program in addition to the compulsory Rise ELT, indicate how you will actively encourage the participation of all students, with the goal of serving at least 50% of students. N/A Part 3 – ELT Program Description Target Population: The ELT program for a Rise School will be offered to all students in the school. Describe how the school will meet the following SED requirements for an ELT program: How will the school integrate academics, enrichment, and skill development through hands-on experiences that make learning relevant and engaging? How will CBO staff and the school’s teachers be integrated to provide a seamless learning day?  Offer a range of activities that capture student interest and strengthen student engagement in learning so as to promote higher attendance, reduces risk for retention or drop out, and increases the likelihood of graduation.  Actively address the unique learning needs and interests of all types of students, especially those who may benefit from approaches and experiences not offered in the traditional classroom setting.  What new content areas and opportunities will be offered to students? How will the school ensure all IEP and language mandates are met during ELT? 2018-19 CEP-RISE 57   Contain components designed to improve student academic, social, and emotional outcomes, including opportunities for enrichment programs such as in music and art.  Ensure instruction in any core academic subject offered in the program will be delivered under the supervision of a teacher who is NYS certified in that particular content area.  How will community educators receive professional development? Are there plans to provide joint PD to school faculty and community partner staff?  What content will be led by pedagogical staff and what content will be led by CBO partners?  How will the school best utilize CBO partners to impact student achievement?  How will effective outreach be conducted to families?  How will programming be made easily accessible to students and families in order to encourage participation? PS 463 will integrate academics, enrichment and skills development to plan and implement a rigorous program of instruction that will lead to higher student achievement. The CBO staff, in close coordination with school leaders and staff, will develop the plan to offer a range of activities and programs that will engage PS 463X/ Urban Scholars Community School students in learning tasks that will meet their needs such as additional support in core academic areas or small group re-teaching. New programs and opportunities will be offered to students in the areas of dance, movement, science and technology and the visual arts. Instruction in core academic subjects will be delivered by pedagogues. Community educators will participate in professional development to support their planning and implementation of engaging learning activities that will directly impact on student learning outcomes. Professional development sessions will be facilitated by Literacy Coach and/or school leaders. Community partner staff and school faculty will be scheduled to have monthly articulation and professional development sessions. During these sessions, community and school staff will participate in professional development to support them in planning and implementing curricula. Every student will receive instruction from a NYS certified, licensed teacher. Special education students will receive instruction from their teacher and also be provided supports from a paraprofessional if they are assigned one for the regular school day. Part 4 – ELT Program Implementation and Oversight Part 4a. Who will implement the ELT program? Who will oversee the program? 1. Indicate the key personnel that will be responsible for implementing and overseeing the ELT program, including school-based staff and any high-quality community partners that will be involved. If applicable, describe the scope of involvement of all community partners and how the joint ELT program is structured. How will the school assess the impact of ELT on individual student achievement and social emotional development? 2. 3. The Expanded Learning Time will be implemented in conjunction with our community partner, East Side House Settlement. The program will be overseen by school leaders and a committee of teachers, school and CBO staff. Our community partner, East Side House Settlement, will be an integral part in securing and coordinating supplemental academic enrichment activities. Scholars who are identified to be at-risk will receive intervention during ELT and the other students will participate in enrichment activities provided by our CBO staff members. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 58  Student achievement will be measured using Fountas and Pinnell for literacy and teacher created assessments for Mathematics. Part 4b. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. September 5, 2018 to June 26, 2019 Part 5 – ELT Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the ELT program. Pro Rata for teachers (Pro rata is calculated as 1/1,375 of a teachers annual salary) iReady, and additional laptops for our students to access MyOn and iReady. Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support the ELT Program. Note: If the program is funded by 21st Century Community Center Learning Funds, it must be offered in conjunction with a high quality, high capacity community partner. 21st Century Title I 1003(a) Tax Levy X Title III Title I SWP PTA Funded Title I TA X P/F Set-aside C4E SIG Grant School Achievement X Other Funding Part 6 – ELT Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By February 2019, 80% of our students will have advanced 2 reading levels as evidenced by Fountas and Pinnell Running Record Assessment. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Fountas and Pinnell Running Record System Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 59  Section 7: Community School Description Directions: The Community School strategy is directly aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. Community Schools bring schools and community partners together and integrate academics, health, youth development, and family engagement to provide students with the tools and opportunities they need to succeed. The Core Services in Community Schools are Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness. Part 1 – The Community School Program Goal(s) How is the Community School strategy integrated into academic instruction at your school, and what impact has it had on student academic outcomes? Our family advocate supports our ENL students in grades K-2 by pushing in and working with a small group of students during the literacy block. The students that received support from the family advocate advanced two or more reading levels this past school year. We will continue to utilize this model for the 2018-19 school year. Indicate the summative goal(s) of the Community School program for the 2018-19 school year. Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the percentage of students who are absent 10 or more days will decrease by 4%. Please answer the following question as it relates to meeting your Community School Program Annual Goal(s): How will achieving your Community School Goal(s)--in ELT, Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness--support your academic goals for students? If we achieve our attendance goal, those students who are attending school more frequently show advance academically. In addition, if our families are attending workshops and volunteering at our school, their child's absenteeism rate should be above 95%. Part 2 – Community School Program Description Part 2a. Identify the CBO partnerships that you will develop in ELT, Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness, their target student population(s), and scope of the services provided. As well as supporting schools’ supportive environment and attendance work, CBOs should be helping to support your school’s instructional focus. CBO Partnership Target Population Scope of Service East Side House Settlement Chronically Absent students Visiting Nurse Service Students who need social/emotional support Morningside Center for Social Responsibility All students Mentoring, Parent outreach and workshops Counseling, partnering with parents(working in students' homes), workshops, after school programs, partnering with teachers Workshops for teachers, in-class support for teachers and students(coaching)peer mediation and parent workshops N/A N/A N/A Part 2b. Describe how the school will partner with the Lead CBO to do the following: 2018-19 CEP-RISE 60  1. 2. 3. 4. Community Schools are expected to partner with a community-based partner organization (CBO) and together with members of the School Leadership Team, hire a Community School Director. The Director will lead implementation of the asset and needs assessment process, and other critically important coordinating activities. Indicate how you will leverage this aspect of the work. Community Schools are expected to personalize the needs of all students, through strategic programming and services, as determined by the asset and needs assessment, and must also offer Expanded Learning Time (ELT) and mental health programming. In completing this section, ensure that you think about how: (1) the right services are provided to the right students and families at the right time; and (2) how you will seamlessly coordinate services with instructional programming happening throughout and outside of the school day. Indicate how you will implement this work, and describe other programming you anticipate to be in place to strengthen this initiative. Community Schools are expected to emerge as Partnership Schools, which are places where parents and families feel welcome, actively participate in the conversation and decision-making around the renewal of their schools, and have many opportunities to advocate for their children. Monthly meetings and Community School Forums engaging families and community stakeholders will be a critical part of this family engagement strategy. Describe how you will implement this aspect of the work. Community School Principals are expected to meet on a weekly basis with their Community School Director, select Assistant Principals, key staff, and other CBOs, to analyze trends in data and case manage individual students. Data tools – including the New Visions Data Sorter - and training will be available for schools to use. Indicate how you will implement this aspect of the work. PS 463 Urban Scholars Community School has selected East Side House Settlement to partner with our school as our community-based partner organization (CBO). This will be our second year working together. To date, Our CBO coordinated and sponsored a huge Family Engagement celebration called “Community Day” last April and this year they are sponsoring Community Wellness Day where the members of our school community will be afforded the opportunity to learn about wellness and also participate in various fitness activities. Our Community Wellness Day will be held during the last week of school in order to encourage our students to come to school during a time when our attendance is extremely low. In addition to our Community Director, we hired an additional social worker to provide school based crisis intervention services to our students. We also hired two family advocates to work specifically with our students who were identified as being chronically absent. They were mentors to students, conducted home visits and provided parents with needed resources. For the 2016-17 school year we will continue to plan to personalize the needs of all students, through strategic programming and services, as determined by the needs and asset assessments conducted by the CBO Social Worker and supported by the School Based Support Team, School Based Social Worker, Guidance Counselor, and the Attendance Team. Visiting Nurse Services will be offering mental health programming and services, after garnering consent for the student’s mental health care from their parents/guardians. Our parents advocates will have various groups where students will be taught how to manage stress and anger and also learn how to become peer mediators. Our Expanded Learning Time (ELT) will be implemented using option #5 of the ELT models. An SBO vote was held and the staff unanimously voted on the following option: Option 3: Under this option, the 155 minutes for Professional Development, Parent Engagement and other Professional Work remains as scheduled for Mondays and Tuesdays with the Parent Engagement and Other Professional Work integrated into the ELT time on Tuesdays. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 61  Day Student School Day*/ELT ELT Teacher Work Day (including Teacher (non-ELT) Work Day MON 8:00 a.m.-2:20 p.m. 8:00-a.m. - 2:20 p.m. (PD 2:20 – 3:40 p.m.) 8:00 a.m. - 2:20 p.m. (PD 2:20 – 3:40 p.m.) 8:00 a.m.- 2:20 p.m. (PE/OPW: 2:20 - 3:35) TUES WED THUR 8:00 a.m.-2:20 p.m./2:20-3:35 8:00 a.m.-2:20 p.m./2:20-3:35 8:00 a.m.-2:20 p.m./2:20-3:35 8:00 a.m.-2:20 p.m./2:20-3:35 FRI 8:00 a.m.- 2:20 p.m./2:20 – 3:35 (ELT with integrated PE/OPW) 8:00 a.m.- 2:20 p.m./2:20 – 3:35 (ELT) 8:00 a.m.-2:20 p.m. 8:00 a.m.- 2:20 p.m./2:20 – 3:35 (ELT) 8:00 a.m.-2:20 p.m. 8:00 a.m.- 2:20 p.m./2:20 – 3:35 (ELT) 8:00 a.m.-2:20 p.m. During our ELT, we will continue to offer programming congruent with our plans for rigorous and relevant instruction that will help build those skills our students need to master to demonstrate a thorough in-depth mastery of challenging tasks to develop cognitive skills through reflective thought, analysis, problem solving, evaluation or creativity. Teachers will be able to craft and execute learning opportunities, in which students apply core knowledge, concepts, or skills, to solve real-world problems during our ELT time. During this time, our teachers will have the opportunity to shift their instructional practices to encompass relevant learning experiences for our students. Our teachers need to design instruction and create lesson plans through authentic problems or tasks, simulations, or service learning projects, connecting concepts to current issues and allow students the opportunity of teaching others during this additional hour and 15 minutes of instruction. As a “Partnership School,” we will continue to work hard to make sure staff creates an atmosphere in which our parents and families feel welcome and are approached without judgement or bias. Our staff operates under the guise that we are here to meet the needs of our students and their families. The best way to determine if we are doing a good job is to determine if our students and families grow as people by feeling supported and being connected to a school that serves the best interests of our families and our community. We want to work to have more and more parents attend parent-teacher conferences, participate in focus groups, attend workshops, and have a voice in the decision-making process around the renewal of their children’s school. We want them to benefit from their children attending our renewal/community school and have many opportunities to advocate for their children. We will continue to hold monthly forums run by the CBO Director, the administrative and teaching staff, engaging families in immersion activities to encourage families to participate in their child’s education, while building relationships based on trust. Our hope is that parents will begin to see our school and our staff as their extended family because they entrust us with their children 5 days per week. We should be able to work together to foster the academic and social growth and development of our students in a partnership that is built on trust. Our parents and community stakeholders will be a critical part of this parent engagement strategy, because once we create the platform for change in our school, the energy can be siphoned into the community and inject a ripple of positivity and hope that might weave itself into the fabric of their lives. Our Principal will meet on a weekly basis with the Community School Director, the Assistant Principal, UFT Chapter Leader, the Literacy Coach, the Parent Coordinator, and PA President to analyze trends in data for attendance, reading levels, and social-emotional functioning for at-risk individual students. The data tools that we will be using will come from the research and data derived from New Visions Data Sorter, ATS Reports, SESIS, STARS, Datacation, MyON, iReady, Baseline Assessments in writing and math, and MOSL assessment data. The data will drive instruction and the development of interventions that will raise student achievement, deepen critical thinking skills of our students, boost the mental health of our at risk students, raise student attendance, and engage parents in the process of helping their children outside of the school building. In summary, as a Renewal School, we will begin (or expand) implementation of the following school improvement strategies during this school year: 2018-19 CEP-RISE 62   Expanded learning opportunities for all students, including additional instruction provided during after school and summer programming provided in collaboration with community partners  Transformation into a community school in order to increase student and family access to physical and mental health services and other social-emotional supports made available in or near the school.  Intensive professional development for all staff to ensure effective implementation of curriculum and instruction aligned to the Common Core State Standards (CCSS) and to support staff in effectively responding to the differentiated academic and social-emotional needs of all students.  Additional, focused strategies to increase parent and family engagement, through conducting needs assessments through interviews, focus groups and surveys with parents and students. We will also undergo a comprehensive needs assessment across all six elements of the Capacity Framework (rigorous instruction, collaborative teachers, supportive environment, effective school leadership, strong family-community ties, and trust) to inform the development of our School Renewal Plans for the 2016-17 school year. Part 3 – Community School Partnerships Oversight Part 3a. Key Staff and Partners 1. Name and describe the scope of involvement of all community partners working in the school (include partners supporting ELT, counseling, enrichment, etc.) 2. Name the members of your Community School Team and how meetings will be organized and structured to engage all stakeholders and be focused on results. 3. Explain data strategies including the use of the data sorter, and steps that the school will take to ensure that the appropriate interventions are provided to the right students The program will be implemented and overseen by the principal and community director The key personnel will be the community director and 1 family advocate. The community director and family advocate will work with groups of students in various capacities. Students will participate in sports activities, book clubs, dance and visual arts activities. Student achievement will be assessed using attendance data. All stakeholders will have access to the Heat Map and be trained on how to access its information. Every Friday the attendance team will meet and access the Heat Map to discuss student attendance and interventions. Part 3b. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the Community School program. Laptops, per session for teachers to work after school, schedule adjustments for student group sessions with the family advocates. Part 3c. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. September 5, 2018-June 26, 2019 Part 3d. Mental Health Work Plan Separate from this R-CEP, schools will complete a Mental Health Work Plan that will become an addendum to this document. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 63  Section 8: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) ELA academic intervention services are provided one-to-one and during small group instruction such as guided reading and writing groups. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) ELA Academic Intervention Services are provided during small group instruction with guided reading programs: Literacy by Design (Grades K-5) and Leveled Literacy Intervention Grades K-5 Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Student assessments such as running records, miscue analysis, on-demand writing and results of periodic assessments are reviewed and analyzed to determine ELA intervention services required to ensure students who are not performing at proficiency levels receive AIS in a timely and effective manner. Mathematics Criteria for identifying students to receive academic intervention services in Mathematics is determined by reviewing end of modules assessment results, exit slips, etc Students receive intervention during Guided Math instruction delivered by classroom teacher. Students are also scheduled for a period of Math Enrichment every Mathematics intervention services are provided one-to-one and in small groups when teachers provide differentiated instruction during Mathematics instructional block. When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) The Literacy Block includes an AIS period (45 minutes) scheduled Monday-Friday when a specialist teacher pushes-in and provides additional guided instruction to small groups. In addition, specialists have scheduled intervention periods to provide literacy instruction with the program Leveled Literacy Intervention to small groups in Grades Kindergarten-Grade 4. Academic intervention services are also provided to student in Grade 1-5 during after school on Wednesdays and Thursdays. Intervention services are provided during one-to-one conferences and small group instruction. Academic intervention services are also provided to student in Grade 1-5 during after school 2018-19 CEP-RISE 64 week with Math Specialist. Science academic intervention services are provided to students during small group instruction guided by classroom teacher using materials and resources provided by FOSS and Delta instructional resources. Social Studies academic intervention services are provided to students during small group instruction guided by classroom teacher using instructional materials and resources (e.g., multi-media, web-sites, text, etc.) that support concept and/or themes One-to-one and small group guidance and counseling sessions Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Criteria for identifying students to receive academic intervention services in Science is determined by reviewing end of unit assessment results, exit slips, project comments, etc. Criteria for identifying students to receive academic intervention services in Social Studies is determined by reviewing end of unit assessment results, exit slips, project comments, etc. Criteria for determining at-risk services are teacher/administration, social worker referrals, crisis or emergency support, additional socialization or transition support, mediation and conflict resolution support identified. on Wednesdays and Thursdays. Intervention services are provided during conferences and small group instruction during the science period of instruction. Science intervention services are provided one-to-one and in small groups when teachers provide differentiated instruction during science. Social Studies academic intervention services are provided to students during conferences and small group instruction. Intervention services are provided during conferences and small group instruction during the social studies period of instruction. One-to-one and small group guidance and counseling sessions. Intervention services are provided during the school day in one-on-one and/or small group sessions. Students may also receive services via Visiting Nurse Service if parents grant consent. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 65  Section 9: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) Currently we have 62 students living in temporary housing. Fifteen reside in shelters, thirty-six are doubled-up with other families and eleven live in other temporary situations. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 66  Students living in temporary housing receive school uniforms, book bags and supplies during the school year. These students are also matched to a success mentor who monitors their attendance and provides out-reach to their families. All of their trips and extra curricular activities are paid for to ensure that they are able to participate in all educational experiences. In addition, they will receive dental screenings and eye exams twice a year, where eyeglasses will be provided if needed. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 CEP-RISE 67  Section 10: Title I Program Information Directions:  All schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Teacher recruitment begins in April where administrators and teachers attend job fairs and collect resumes. Once vacancies are identified, interviews are conducted. At Urban Scholars we work hard to retain our teachers by offering in-class support, mentoring, focused professional development and school-wide collaboration. Our goal is to ensure that 100% of our staff is highly qualified and working in their proper license area. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the strategies and activities for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, staff, and paraprofessionals that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). All teachers, administration, paraprofessionals and staff are afforded the opportunity to attend professional development in their specialized areas as well as areas where they need improvement. Professional development is provided for all teachers in the areas of Literacy and Mathematics by Generation Ready REACH and Southern Cross consultants. In addition to the professional development provided, our teachers are supported by their grade leaders and have the opportunity to collaborate with grade colleagues daily during their common preparation period. New teachers are supported by an in-house mentor and they meet a minimum of two periods a week (during and after school). One of our mentors and our assistant principal will continue to attend professional development facilitated by the New Teachers Center (NTC). Our mentor will work with our new teacher to support her academic growth. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program 2018-19 CEP-RISE 68  Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/information, early intervention services, etc.). PS 463 Pre-Kindergarten teachers have aligned their curriculum to the CCLS. In addition, they collaborate and work closely with Kindergarten teachers when planning units and modules. Our Pre-K staff (teachers and paraprofessionals) participates in all school-wide professional development sessions and school-wide events. Grade meetings are conducted to analyze student data and identify additional supports to address student needs. Monthly workshops on early childhood development and related topics are offered to ensure parents are maintained informed on early childhood program events. Parent workshops/breakfasts are held during the school year and in June, our Pre-Kindergarten parents visit our Kindergarten classes in order to see what will be expected from their children the next school year. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Administrators and teachers discuss and review the menu of periodic assessments that are aligned to the curricula and select assessments that will be administered to the students at each respective grade level. Grade level meetings and professional development sessions are conducted prior to the administration of the assessments to review administration, scoring and interpretation of assessment results. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds enables, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (R-CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 69  Title I Part A (Basic) Title I School Improvement 1003(a) Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funds Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Local school allocation amounts) N/A N/A 36, 306 34,498 12,366 N/A 1,786,783 Column A Verify with an (X) N/A N/A X X X N/A X Column B Section Reference(s) N/A N/A Sections 5A, 5B Sections 5A and 5B Sections 5A and 5B N/A Sections 5A, 5B 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH). 2018-19 CEP-RISE 70   Title I School Improvement 1003(a): To support implementation of school improvement activities identified through the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) reviews or a school review with district oversight and included in the DCIP/R-CEP.  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: To support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs.  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan.  Title I Priority and Focus School Parent Engagement Set-aside: Additional set-aside is to enable greater and  more meaningful parent participation in the education of their children. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process, including Title I 1003(g) SIG funds: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 71  Section 11: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current R-CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students [Urban Scholars Community School], in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. [Urban Scholars Community School] will support parents and families of Title I students by:  providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology;  providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and  decision making in support of the education of their children; fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress;  providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments;  sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand;  providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; 2018-19 CEP-RISE 72  Parental Involvement and School Quality Our school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, our school will:  actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact;  engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills;  ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and  strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills;  maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home;   provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report;  host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act. schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help;    2018-19 CEP-RISE 73  Our school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by:  holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference;  hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year;  encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; supporting or hosting Family Day events;   establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents;  encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers;  providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress;  developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress;  providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand School-Parent Compact (SPC) [Urban Scholars Community School], in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards;  using academic learning time efficiently;    offering high quality instruction in all content areas;  providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act. I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by:     conducting parent-teacher conferences four times per year during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; 2018-19 CEP-RISE 74   providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact;   providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information;  ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff Provide parents reasonable access to staff by:  ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents;  notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff  member; arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities;  planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by:    creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents;   ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as  described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Every Student Succeeds Act.Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; Parent/Guardian Responsibilities: II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities  monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent;  ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games;     promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time;  encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; 2018-19 CEP-RISE 75  volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits;   participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education;  communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested;   become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact;  participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child;   III. Student Responsibilities Student Responsibilities: attend school regularly and arrive on time; complete my homework and submit all assignments on time;    Wear my school uniform everyday     follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; show respect for myself, other people and property; try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 76  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP-RISE 77  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: Title III at PS 463 Urban Scholars Community School will support teaching and learning in core subject areas, and native language and English teaching and learning by providing English Language Learners in Grades 2-5 with supplemental direct instructional services on Tuesdays and Wednesdays in an after school program. The program is scheduled to begin in October 2018 through April-May 2019. The after school program will provide ELLs with a minimum of 35 weeks of one and a half hour long sessions, two times a week of small-group. The hours of operation will be from 3:40 to 5:10 PM with targeted instruction to address the specific needs of ELLs. Teachers will review student work, 2018 NYSESLAT results, etc. to plan targeted instruction that will support ELLs to demonstrate gains in the 2019 NYSESLAT administration. The program will provide direct instruction to build their skills in reading comprehension, speaking and listening, academic vocabulary and writing development. The program will also provide small group instruction to support students' mathematical problem-solving skills. The program will engage them in pre-reading, and after-reading activities that will support language and literacy development in addition to providing ELLs with support as they are engaged in text-related discussions to meet the speaking/listening and language Learning Standards. Teachers of this program will be certified bilingual teachers who will participate in professional development to assist them with program implementation and managing data reports to monitor progress of ELLs in the program. The language of instruction will be English although native language support will be also be provided. Students will be grouped based on Fountas and Pinnell reading levels and relevant assessment results. The program will utilize materials such as leveled texts for guided reading/strategy group lessons, computer software programs and math manipulatives. Student work and data (e.g., independent reading levels, NYSESLAT and ELL periodic assessment results, item analysis reports, etc. will be analyzed to identify strengths and needs of ELLs to formulate groups for program. Imagine Learning, a engaging language and literacy software program, will provide students with additional support to accelerate English language learning by developing their vocabulary-a key aspect of language acquisition for ELLs. In the program, ELL students are taught vocabulary through videos, pictures, glossaries, and direct translations. Words and concepts are repeated in multiple contexts in various books and activities, which provide students with a rich language experience and deeper understanding. The program highlights both general academic words and content-specific vocabulary words, to support ELLs can use their new vocabulary across the curriculum throughout the day. Additionally, before students read informational leveled texts, context-based words are reviewed and added to students' word lists. Shared reading of text (e.g., Read Works) will provide strategic instruction and guidance for ELLs to listen to text and progressively gain the confidence, word knowledge and fluency required to develop of the English language and literacy skills required to make strides in their academic achievement. . 2018-19 CEP-RISE 78  Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Title III professional development will advance and support language development, English and native language instruction, high student academic achievement in math, and other core academic areas. Rigorous professional learning will be directly correlated to providing teachers of ELLs with the content and language instruction that will support their planning and implementation of explicit instruction that will ensure ELLs can access the curriculum and engage in purposeful learning. Professional development will guide teachers with the framework of effective and evidence-based methods for planning and delivery of lessons and related rigorous learning tasks that will ensure ELLs are prepared to meet the high expectations as we prepare to transition to the Next Generation Learning Standards. We will offer expanded support for teachers of ELLs with a series of tailored professional development sessions that will prepare them with the pedagogical knowledge to adjust their practice to understand and support the learning needs of ELLs at PS 463 Urban Scholars Community School. Professional development activities will include on-site sessions facilitated by consultants. In addition, teachers of ELLs and the ENL teacher will participate in conferences offered by the NYCDOE Office of English Language Learners, Bronx Field Office ELL Support Staff (K. Tejeda), and consultants (S. Ramsey/Literacy and S. Morris/Mathematics). PS 463 will provide teachers of ELLs with the professional development to advance their knowledge of instructional models that accelerate literacy and language development to ensure ELLs continue making gains towards meeting the Learning Standards. The Monday Professional Development Series at PS 463 will offer professional learning to increase ELLs' language and content access: Supporting ELLs with Common Core-Aligned Tasks in Mathematics. Expanding ELLs Oral Language to Support Literacy Learning and Content Knowledge. Scaffolds: Responsive Supports for ELLs. Content Area Literacy: Developing Academic Literacy. Professional development themes will include training on analysis of diagnostic assessments and its implications for driving instruction. More specifically, teachers of ELLs will participate in professional development to ensure that they are planning and implementing lessons that provide appropriate scaffolds and supports for ELLs to meet respective instructional targets. Teachers will participate in professional development opportunities offered by The Division of English Language Learners to further their knowledge of best practices and effective strategies. Teachers will continue to enhance the support they provide ELLs with standards-based and grade level instruction. Title III funds will be allocated to provide teachers with professional development on literacy and language development, effective literacy practices, strategic assessments (NYSITELL and NYSESLAT), analysis of student data (e.g., running records and unit assessments) and the explicit instructional support teachers must provide for ELLs. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration  topics to be covered 2018-19 CEP-RISE 79  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities  name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities Begin description here: Title III funds will be used to expand outreach and engagement of families of ELLs. Families of ELLs will receive information about programs and resources to advance the success of all ELLs across all content areas, with an emphasis on vocabulary development, reading comprehension and mathematical problem solving skills. Outreach efforts will include the distribution and display of appealing and translated notices and fliers of school events to increase families of ELLs participation in the academic lives of their children. Engagement activities will include ongoing family literacy and mathematics events to showcase and share ways families can support with activities at home. This initiative will support PS 463 in strengthening its partnership with families of ELLs. Parent workshops will be scheduled throughout the school year with interpreters of represented languages readily available to ensure information is accessible. Workshops will be facilitated by Reading Recovery trained teachers. In addition, PS 463 will plan and conduct workshops on topics on tests/assessments that are administered to ELLs such as the New York State English Language Achievement. Workshop agenda will include a presentation on the modalities and recent changes to levels, an overview to guide parents of ELLs through an interpretation of the their child's respective results and, more importantly, how PS 463 is addressing the academic needs of ELLs with differentiated and small group targeted instruction. This workshop will be offered during Fall 2018 and Spring 2019 and facilitated by Assistant Principal, Literacy Coach, Math Specialist and ENL teachers. Parent/guardian will also be provided with times and dates when he/she can schedule a conference with ENL teachers to review results of interim assessments and the instructional supports student receives. Families of ELLs will be afforded opportunities to provide feedback and share areas of interests and comments on a brief survey to generate ongoing topics and themes of interest for future events. Surveys will be distributed during monthly Coffee and Conversation with the Principal sessions and collected by Parent Coordinator and CBO East Side House Settlement. Parent Coordinator and CBO director will meet with school administrators to discuss parent responses and identify workshops and/or resources aligned with survey results. Dates, facilitators, etc. are selected and shared with school community. Learning Leaders will also facilitate workshops. Coffee and Conversation with the school administration and staff sessions are scheduled and held the last Friday of every month. Our first breakfast will be held on Friday, September 28, 2018 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. N/A Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) N/A  Per session  Per diem 2018-19 CEP-RISE 80  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. N/A Purchased services  High quality staff N/A and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP-RISE 81  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 12 School Name PS 463 Urban Scholars Community Borough Bronx School Number 463 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Debra Jones Coach Martha Fabre ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Miriam Lacob Stix Starkeisha S Teacher/Subject Area Bonnie Ortiz/Math Teacher/Subject Area type here Related-Service Provider Frances Wilson Watson Superintendent Assistant Principal Ivonne Torres Coach type here School Counselor Hosea Givan Parent Phyllis Rosario Parent Coordinator Kenshana Goff Field Support Center Staff Member K. Tejeda Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 2 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 5 0 D. Student Demographics 2018-19 CEP-RISE 82  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 265 Total number of ELLs 33 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 12.45% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): N/A If yes, indicate language(s): Spanish Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 2008 2 3 4 K 1 SP Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 5 0 0 5 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Formative and curriculum assessments that guide instructional planning for ELLs at PS 463 includes tools such as the Fountas and Pinnell literacy assessment, on demand writing, spelling inventories, etc. that assesses literacy development and skills such as decoding, etc. Through the ongoing administration, collection and analysis of multiple data sources including observations, conference notes, pre- and post-module and unit assessments, measurable goals are identified and closely monitored to guide planning and instruction that will advance the learning of ELLs at PS 463. To assess the early literacy skills of ELLs, assessment tools such as the Fountas and Pinnell Literacy Assessments, spelling inventories, and performance based assessments are administered during pre-determined assessment cycles that are strategically scheduled throughout the school year. Assessments are administered and results are analyzed to determine areas of mastery and development and next steps for whole class, small group and/or individual instruction. Assessment results are compared to benchmarks and serve to 2018-19 CEP-RISE 83  identify areas where interventions are required for ELLs. All English proficient students and ELLs in the dual language program are assessed in the second language-Spanish with the Fountas and Pinnell "Sistema de Evaluacion de la Lectura" based on the Benchmark Assessment System. Kindergarten ELLs begin the school year as "Pre" and "Early Emergent" readers and by March and June assessments cycles K students are at reading levels ranging from Levels B and above. ELLs in grades 3 and 4 who arrived this year made significant gains in their English literacy and language development and were reading at a range from levels H-O. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Structures that support the collection, analysis and instructional planning for ELLs includes teachers adhering to the assessment cycles that are critical to planning and student grouping for differentiated instruction. Grade level meetings and professional development sessions are planned accordingly to ensure teachers receive guidance to analyze data. that is informed by assessment results. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? The success of our instructional programs for ELLs is measured by reviewing results of ongoing assessments such as periodic assessments, the administration of running records to determine independent reading levels. Analysis of student work where reading and writing products in both languages are collected are reviewed to monitor progress and gains made by ELLs in academic areas. Areas of need include targeted phonic instruction to guide ELLs through the development of strong English language skill development. Once students demonstrate consistent use of language skills in listening, speaking, reading and writing activities, academic vocabulary development is embedded through preview and review of text based and content related vocabulary. Learning outcomes and tasks are guided by there alignment to standards based rubrics. Baseline assessments are administered in September, in addition to on demand writing, pre-module assessment in Mathematics. Progress monitoring is also measured by results of performance levels of ELLs on NYSESLAT, NYS ELA and Mathematics tests, English Language Learners periodic assessments, in addition to other content area assessments (unit test, projects, etc.). Targets and goals for all ELLs are established at each assessment interval. For example, as independent reading goals are identified, ELLs receive guided instruction of the respective skills and strategies necessary to continue moving along reading levels. Assessment results are monitored for continued growth and ELLs receive targeted instruction during conferences, small group instruction to ensure ELLs gain practice and mastery of content and language skills. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Summaries of assessments results are reviewed during grade meetings following assessment cycles when teachers submit assessment results. The Intervention team reviews results and schedules meetings with classroom teachers. Teachers present student data, samples of student writing, assessment results and review instructional practices they have implemented. Response to Interventions meetings with classroom teachers are conducted to review student data, etc. Interventions provided by teacher are identified, next steps, supports, and time line of events are articulated. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Data is essential to guiding instruction and intervention plans for ELLs with the RtI instructional model. Through a tiered system of instructional support that reinforces the standard based classroom instruction through targeted intervention , ELLs are provided with effective individualized instructional supports. To meet the needs of ELLs, it is important to understand their academic and linguistic histories to develop effective instructional and intervention plans. Assessment results of ELLs are analyzed and reviewed by intervention staff to develop instructional plan that will be executed by classroom teachers and designated intervention staff such as reading specialist and staff who has been trained in literacy intervention programs. For example, ELLs in 1st and 2nd grades are assessed and selected for literacy interventions such as Reading Recovery and Reading Rescue to provide them with individualized instruction and support. ELLs in 3rd-5th grades are also provided with English 2018-19 CEP-RISE 84  literacy development support through programs such as Leveled Literacy Instruction and digital learning platforms such as Imagine Learning and iReady. Both programs are calibrated to provide individualized support to ELLs. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Four students Tested Out at the Commanding NYSESLAT Level. Only 12 of the 54 students who were tested in 2017 scored at the Entering and Emerging levels on the 2017 NYSESLAT. Twenty one students scored at the Expanding level and 4 students tested out at the Commanding level. We have steadily increased the number of ELLs who scored at the Transitioning and Expanding levels each year. Only two students scored at the Entering level. Fifteen out of 21 students with 2015 and 2016 scores demonstrated progress of at least one level. Four of the fifteen students Tested Out at the Commanding level. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Findings and outcomes of assessments are disseminated and reviewed with classroom teachers, intervention and support staff, consultants and appropriate adjustments are initiated and monitored. A Data Wall serves as a repository of all student data and includes assessment results across core academic areas. Monitoring of independent reading levels, baseline and benchmark assessments , etc. is regularly conducted at intervals of 4-6 weeks to identify and initiate adjustments to students' next steps to address learning needs. ENL teachers work alongside teachers to review and discuss students' goals and supports and scaffolds that will be embedded in instruction. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. The PS 463 Dual Language Program is designed to develop students' native language as well as English or Spanish as a New Language proficiency. The program is currently available in grades Kindergarten through Grade Five. The Kindergarten and Grades 1 and 2 classes of the dual language program class follow a self-contained 50:50 model. Grades 2-4: Spanish language instruction supports content areas Science and Social Studies.Teachers in the dual language program are highly qualified to teach in both languages and ensure that students receive Spanish language instruction in the academic areas of Reading, Writing, Mathematics, Science, and Social Studies. Two to three of the writing units of study are taught in Spanish. Science and Social Studies units are also taught in Spanish with Spanish language materials from National Geographic. The use of both languages for instruction is clearly defined to support the development of oral and written language fluency and content area knowledge. All mandated ENL, ELA and NL instruction for dual language students is provided daily by the dual language classroom teachers. Dual Language program teachers are certified. A balanced literacy program (e.g., read aloud, shared reading and writing, etc.) is delivered in both languages. Dual language classrooms have libraries to support language and literacy development in both languages (Spanish and English) with leveled text and a range of books in fiction and non-fiction genres to support units of study. Mathematics (engageny A Story of Units) , Science (Amplify and National Geographic) and Social Studies (Passport) teacher resources and student materials are available in Spanish and English to support content and second language development. Curriculum maps provide teachers with an overview of essential questions, unit goals and teaching points which dual language program teachers in turn use as a guide to plan for delivery of instruction in both languages. Teaching resources and student materials in both languages are identified and unit lesson plans are developed. All content areas are taught in both languages. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 85  Instruction is differentiated for ELL subgroups: Two ENL teachers provided services to ELLs via an Integrated model. For the Integrated model, the ENL teacher provide services to ELLs during content instruction in collaboration with the classroom teachers and Social Studies/Writing and Science and Mathematics specialists to provide scaffolds for language acquisition and vocabulary support during content instruction. Both ENL teachers provide services in the Free Standing ESL program and to students in the Dual Language classes. Instruction through ESL methodologies and practices scaffold instruction in balanced literacy components such as guided reading, reading and writing workshop and shared reading. During push-in services, ENL teacher plans for guided instruction to build student's background knowledge, vocabulary and support English language and literacy development. Groups are formed based on language proficiency, grade level and academic needs of ELLs. ELLs receive ENL instructional periods as per CR Part 154. Groups are heterogeneous with mixed levels of proficiency. The mandated amount of ENL instructional minutes is provided by ENL teacher during co-teaching with classroom and content areas teachers or in small group such as our "Newcomers" group. b. TBE program. If applicable. NA c. DL program. If applicable. The PS 463 Dual Language Program is designed to develop students' native language as well as English or Spanish as a New Language proficiency language skills. The program is currently available in grades Kindergarten through Grade Five. The Kindergarten and 1st grade classes of the dual language program class follow a self-contained 50:50. Grades 2-5 Teachers in the dual language program are highly qualified to teach in both languages and ensure that students receive Spanish language instruction in the academic areas of Writing, Science and Social Studies. Two to three of the writing units of study are taught in Spanish. Science and Social Studies units are also taught in Spanish. The use of both languages for instruction is clearly defined to support the development of oral and written language fluency and content area knowledge. All mandated ENL, ELA and NL instruction for dual language students is provided daily by the dual language classroom teachers. Dual Language program teachers are certified. A balanced literacy program (e.g., read aloud, shared reading and writing, etc.) is delivered in both languages. Dual language classrooms have libraries to support language and literacy development in both languages (Spanish and English) with leveled text and a range of books in genres to support units of study. Mathematics, Science and Social Studies teacher resources and student materials are available in Spanish and English to support content and second language development. Curriculum maps provide teachers with an overview of essential questions, unit goals and teaching points which dual language program teachers in turn use as a guide to plan for delivery of instruction in both languages. Teaching resources and student materials in both languages are identified and unit lesson plans are developed. All content areas are taught in both languages. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Mandated number of instructional minutes are provided according to proficiency levels through daily literacy blocks when ELA and NLA instruction is delivered in the Dual Language Program classes by certified teacher. ENL instructional minutes are delivered in targeted small group instruction during co-teaching of content area instruction. Push-in and pull-out ESL is combined to ensure mandated number of instructional minutes are provided to ELLs in ENL program. Former ELLs continue to receive ENL services with content area and academic vocabulary development support informed by looking at student data such as writing samples, unit assessments, ec. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 86  3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. In the dual language program, core content is delivered through the explicit instruction, modeling, guided practice afforded students in the workshop model that identifies an explicit teaching point that the teacher will model or demonstrate to students during a minilesson. During the minilesson the teacher activates prior knowledge and engages students in guided practice. Students are then transitioned to independent or group work and the teacher proceeds to confer with individual student or small groups. The teacher will also provide guided instruction to a small group and takes conferences notes. Following independent/group work, the teacher highlights behaviors and/or skills students demonstrated and reiterates teaching point to ongoing learning. To make content comprehensible, the teacher provides students with visuals and scaffolds such as graphic organizer, preview of vocabulary, etc. to promote language and content knowledge acquisition. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Our assessment cycles includes administration of literacy assessments such as the Fountas and Pinnell "Sistema de Evaluacion de la Lectura" based on the Fountas and Pinnell Benchmark Assessment System to assess the development of Spanish literacy skills. In addition, during the spring, Spanish reading is assessed with the administration of the "Examen de Lectura en Espanol" (ELE) in the spring of each year. Content area tests (e.g., Grade 4 Science and Grades 3-5 Mathematics) that are administered in Spanish are also referenced to ensure students are evaluated in their home language. Baseline and benchmark periodic assessments are also administered in Spanish. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Our instructional plan for SIFE students includes scaffolding instruction with additional teacher support by ENL teachers . We also provide individual and small group instruction during extended time sessions to support SIFE students with literacy intervention programs (Leveled Literacy Intervention) that will provide student with language and literacy support to accelerate the develop of foundational literacy learning (e.g. phonemic awareness). Literacy specialists support classroom and ENL teachers with instructional resources and practices catered to address the gaps in students' academic profile. With an instructional framework for teachers to coordinate planning and the implementation of appropriate learning tasks they will ensure that all SIFE students can access the content and language skills required to demonstrate mastery. Learning tasks are developed to ensure that SIFE students are well prepared to engage in building literacy skills, enhance critical thinking, and tap into their knowledge helping students develop and maintain interconnectedness and making lessons relevant to students' lives and experiences. To make the new tasks accessible to students, teachers ELLs with less than 3 years receive instruction based on language and academic needs. English language and literacy development is advanced through activities that promote phonics and early reading strategies. ELLs students are matched to leveled text and provided with guided reading and writing instruction to promote development of reading and comprehension skills. In addition to instructional support provided by classroom teacher during literacy block, Classroom teachers provide SIFE student with additional intervention during ELT Tuesdays-Fridays when students will be provided with a customized program of instruction and interventions based on assessment results. Former ELLs will receive 90 minutes of integrated ENL for 2 additional years after reaching Proficiency level. English language learners identified as having special needs are provided with instructional support based on teacher recommendation and a review of student work/data. PS 463 currently has 10 ELLs in self-contained and 2 ELLs in Integrated Co-Teaching classes. In addition, there are 3 students with special needs in our dual language program. ELLs who have special needs are provided with individual or small group guidance during reading and writing workshop when teacher meets to conduct a conference or with a small group for guided practice. Scaffolds such as a range of paper choice, graphic 2018-19 CEP-RISE 87  organizers, and matching readers with text at their independent reading level with guidance on a reading skill or strategy provides ELLs with language and literacy development support. For ELLs in US schools less than three years, Ms. Stix works closely with the classroom teacher and Language Arts is taught using NLA, ESL, and ELA instruction with targeted instruction to develop language and literacy skills Content based instruction that is aligned to Common Core Learning Standards to provide ELLs with high quality academic opportunities is taught in both English, using second-language acquisition strategies, and the target language. Long-term ELLs are provided with support based on proficiency level and factors such as independent reading levels and an analysis of student work to establish goals in reading, writing and mathematics. Instruction is planned to address individual student needs: ELLs are provided with guidance through instructional practices that develop phonics, fluency and development of writing based on a review of assessments such as on-demand writing samples and reading assessments such as spelling inventories, sight words, and reading assessments. Former ELLs continue to receive 90 minutes of integrated ENL for an additional 2 years after reaching Proficiency level. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Teachers of ELLs use the Universal Design for Learning (UDL) framework to develop instruction to meet the diverse needs of all learners. By planning for flexibility in how instruction is presented, how students express their ideas, and how teachers can engage students in their learning, instruction is customized and adjusted to meet individual student needs. In addition, the Sheltered Instruction Observation Protocol (SIOP) is used to for lesson planning, preparation of language and content objectives that are explicitly stated, shared in writing and presented orally to students. Mathematics instruction at all grade levels is modified for ELL-SWDs through the engageny. A Story of Units modules. Teachers make adjustments to students' problem solving word problems and also provide students with strategies such as "Read, Draw and Write" that students maintain in a notebook for quick reference. Process harts and table tools are also easily accessible by students to support independent and group work. Content and language objectives guide the planning of appropriate and meaningful learning tasks and activities that will provide ELL-SWDs with the supports to practice and apply content knowledge while developing English proficiency. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? For ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency the classroom teacher works closely with ENL teacher and related services providers to customize curricula and lessons to meet the students' academic and language needs. ENL teacher support teachers of ELL-SWDs during literacy block and provides English language support with explicit instruction that makes content comprehensible. Scheduling ENL for ELLs-SWDs is guided by scheduling ENL support during core academic instruction to increase access to rigorous academic content standards on students' level of proficiency and to ensure students' language development and academic needs are being supported. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Targeted interventions programs for ELLs in literacy includes instruction in programs such as “Fundations” phonics, Leveled Literacy Intervention and Words their Way to advance development of phonemic awareness, phonics, decoding and fluency. Through instructional practices such as conferring, small group instruction and mini-lessons, planning and instruction is targeted to address students with specific learning or language needs. Students are assessed using program assessment benchmarks (unit tests, running records, etc.) to identify student need and monitor progress towards grade benchmarks and determine student goals and next steps. Targeted mathematics intervention includes guided math group lessons and implementing intervention strategies detailed in engageNY Mathematics modules. Additional teaching and learning resources 2018-19 CEP-RISE 88  includes "Targeted Reading Intervention" and Leveled Literacy Intervention program components. Specialists participated in a two day professional development on Leveled Literacy Intervention program implementation during Spring 2011 and have begun delivering program to select ELLs. English language learners in grades 1-5 are targeted with literacy intervention support. Guided reading instruction when additional instructional support is provided by staff who is trained in programs such as Reading Recovery (Grade 1) and Reading Rescue (Grade 2). During this time, guided instruction is provided based on student's level of proficiency and reading level in small group and/or individual instruction. PS 463 has also implemented an instructional program for Newcomers to support students transition regularly ensures continuity of instruction and language development. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? PS 463 will continue to expand programs for the 2018-2019 school year: TCRWP Writing Units of Study, Passport Social Studies Curriculum , Social Emotional Learning Curriculum: Morningside Center for Teaching Social Responsibility 4Rs Program Reading, Writing, Respect and Resolution. The “Text Talk” program providing students with direct, robust vocabulary instruction. “Text Talk” lessons highlight specific vocabulary through read aloud text, active talk and direct instruction. "Text Talk" has supported students in developing 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? None. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All ELLs at PS 463 Urban Scholars Community School are afforded equal access to all all school programs. Supplemental programs includes: Eagle Alpha Mentoring Program for boys, Boys and Girls Scouts, and enrichment programs offered by East Side House Settlement. WE offer Schoolwide Enrichment Clubs every Tuesday for Grades 2-Five. Club activities include Yearbook, Movie Critics, Basketball Planet, Arts, Crafts and More, etc. Programs such as Dance, Graphic Design, Music Production, etc. are available during our after school program to develop students' appreciation and skills of the visual and performing arts. Basketball and mentoring programs such as the Boys and Girl Scouts are offered on Saturdays. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. To support ELLs, instructional materials include guided reading book sets, leveled classroom library for independent reading, graphic organizers to guide students through pre-writing and paper choices to highlight key vocabulary and information. Technology based programs include i-Ready and Imagine Learning. Internet sites and multi-media presentations are consistently embedded into lessons to activate and expose students to information necessary to continue building their knowledge. iPads, desktops and laptops provide ELLs with opportunities to conduct research and 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Native language support is provided in the Dual Language Program with visual cues, guided reading materials and instruction, talk prompts, modeling, sentence prompts, realia and software programs such as Imagine Learning. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Language and literacy development are developed in meaningful and relevant ways. In the early grades, explicit instruction in phonemic awareness with the "Fundations" program has proven to be effective when used with ELLs. Integrating phonics instruction and activities such as generating word lists with specific rhymes in conjunction with highlighting sight words connected to books read in classroom promote ELLs literacy and language development. Instructional materials include guided reading book sets, leveled classroom library for independent reading, graphic organizers to guide students through pre-writing and paper choices to highlight key vocabulary and information. Internet sites and multi-media presentations are consistently embedded into lessons to activate and expose students to information necessary to continue building their knowledge. iPads, desktops and laptops provide ELLs with opportunities to conduct research. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? 2018-19 CEP-RISE 89  Resources are shared among the ENL teachers to support ELLs' needs. ELLs that have graduated from our school and attend our neighboring middle schools are supported through ongoing communication of teachers and contact is maintained with parents of ELLs. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). New ELLs are invited to August-September Open House and Orientation Events. At this time, families and students have the opportunity to meet with classroom teachers and the ENL teachers. Teacher present an overview of the curriculum, instructional materials and resources, programs and initiatives such as MyOn, Imagine Learning, iReady, CookShop, and other partnerships we offer. During these events, PS 463 also emphasizes support available to families such as on-site, district and city-wide workshops and programs that provide parent/guardian with academic support. ELLs enrolled throughout the year are included and invited to attend all student/family events such as Movie Night, Family Literacy Night, etc. Translation and interpretation of all materials and presentations are available. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? None at this time. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Dual language program's language distribution is as follows: Kindergarten, 1st and 2nd Grades: 50% English and 50% Target Language Spanish. Grades 3 and 4: Spanish language instruction supports content areas Science and Social Studies. EPs and ELLs are fully integrated throughout the instructional day. PS 463 Dual Language Model is self-contained and it is designed to continue developing students' native language as well as English language skills. The dual language program offers students in need of English language development and monolingual English speaking students the opportunity to learn a second language. The program integrates ELLs with native English speakers and supports all students to develop second language skills while learning content knowledge in both languages. Emergent literacy is taught via both languages simultaneously.In the Dual Language Program, English and Spanish are used consistently to teach core academic content areas, language arts, mathematics, science, and social studies. English is the language of instruction for 60-80 percent and targeted language-Spanish-is used for the remaining 20-40 percent of the instructional time. Spanish and English will be used to teach core academic content areas: language arts, mathematics, science, and social studies. Teachers will plan lessons that will connect students’ prior knowledge and other disciplines, providing them with opportunities to develop critical and creative skills. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 90  Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Rigorous professional learning to strengthen instruction and raise achievement for our ELLs to meet the expectations of becoming college and career ready established and the transition to the Next Generation Learning Standards will be provided to teachers of ELLs. We will offer expanded support for teachers of ELLs with a series of tailored professional development sessions that will provide them best practices and effective strategies to deliver rigorous and coherent instructional programs that promote the development of cognitive development and academic skills. ELL personnel will be afforded with opportunities to participate professional development covering topics such as literacy and language assessments, analysis of student data and implications for instructional planning. Our focus will be to identify the instructional program, more specifically, the academic interventions that will accelerate language and academic learning for ELLs. Our ESL teacher will attend professional development and workshops offered by Office of English Language Learners, and Field Staff Specialists to promote learning and application of current methodologies and practices. In addition, professional development will focus on dual language theory and models and second language acquisition and bi-literacy development. Standards-based literacy instruction will be provided in the native language and in English. Summer professional development and planning activities will guide teachers with exemplars to effectively integrate literacy and language development with curriculum that is student-centered and connected to real-world applications. English language learners will be engaged in learning that will peak their interests and challenge them to delve deeper through well-designed interdisciplinary units of study. PS 463 will provide key staff (e.g., Guidance Counselor, Special Education staff, etc. ) with support such as identifying procedures and expectations of to assist ELLs and their families as they prepare to transition to middle schools. We will schedule middle school orientation sessions during spring to inform families, with a special focus on parents of ELLs on middle school choice and application process. PS 463 staff participates in professional development sessions on best practices for ELLs offered by AUSSIE consultants, The Division of English Language Learners and Student Support, Borough Field Office specialists, and other consultants/providers. Participants must turn key information during weekly professional development sessions on Monday afternoons or during common grade prep meetings to maintain all staff informed of Teachers of ELLs will participate in workshops offered by the Division of English Language Learners and Student Support. Teachers will be provided with listings and links to enroll in workshops and other professional learning opportunities offered on topics such as Tier 1 Math and Response to Intervention Models for Mathematics Instruction for Ells, Scaffoldling Instruction for Elementary Mathematics, Culturally Responsive Classrooms, etc. to support our teachers with providing standard-based and grade-level instruction for English language learners. Teachers will be engaged in developing examples of Common Core aligned units for beginner-level ELLs. While the research points clearly to the fact that all students, ELLs included, should be reading texts at all levels of difficulty, it is an especially challenging task for teachers to develop their own units that allow ELLs to engage with multi-level texts. Unit planning will provide teachers with guidance to showcase instructional methods that scaffolds challenging texts. Teachers will provide scaffolds as they assess that students are able to engage with the text with less support. Paste response to question here: 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Rigorous professional learning to strengthen instruction and raise achievement for our ELLs to meet the expectations of becoming college and career ready established by the Common Core Learning Standards will be provided to teachers of ELLs. CR Part 154.2 professional development requirements will be met. PS 463 will offer expanded support for teachers of ELLs with a series of tailored professional development sessions that will provide them best practices and effective strategies to deliver 2018-19 CEP-RISE 91  rigorous and coherent instructional programs that promote the development of cognitive development and academic skills. ELL personnel will be afforded with opportunities to participate professional development covering topics such as literacy and language assessments, analysis of student data and implications for instructional planning. Our focus will be to identify the instructional program, more specifically, the academic interventions that will accelerate language and academic learning for ELLs. Our ENL teachers will attend professional development and workshops offered by Borough Field Office ELL Specialists that will support the implementation of learning and application of current methodologies and practices. Classroom teachers will participate in professional development provided by the Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Professional Learning Opportunities to support them in planning and implementing standard-based and grade level instruction and the strategies and skills ELLs need for content and academic language development. Progress of ELLs will be discussed during teach team meeting such grade level meeting, individual conferencing and articulation with teachers. All teachers will be required to fulfill the requirements of mandated hours of ELL-specific professional development. All documentation and records of professional development including agendas, handouts, attendance sheets are collected, archived, and maintained in a binder. Teachers will be required to turnkey professional learning during teach teams (e.g., professional learning communities and grade levels) The Pupil Accounting Secretary and Parent Coordinator will also attend professional development regarding their special roles in assisting parents of ELLS. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? The school provides opportunities for parent of ELLs to meet to discuss goals, language development and assessment results during Parent Teacher Conferences and weekly parental engagement meetings. In addition, meetings with classroom teacher and/ or ENL staff are scheduled with parents following the distribution of monthly progress reports at the teacher and/or parent requests. English as a New Language teacher also conducts regular outreach to parents of ELLs to discuss their child's language progress, learning goals and next steps. ENL staff presents information regarding supports and programs offered such as Imagine Learning. In addition, ENL teacher provides resources and information to extend support to the child and family at home. ENL teachers schedule workshops for families of ELLs to provide them with information and guidance such as reviewing themes, content vocabulary, learning tasks and objectives that their children are engaged in. ENL teachers also survey families of ELLs to develop workshop themes. Interpretation is provided at all meetings. Materials and resources distributed are translated. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Activities that have fostered parental involvement for parents of ELLs have been Teamwork Tuesdays, Morning Drop Off Classroom Visits and our monthly Coffee and Conversations. The Parent Coordinator develops and distributes monthly calendar, fliers, automatic phone call messages that are translated/interpreted to maintain and increase ELL parental engagement and involvement. Coffee and Conversation monthly breakfasts have provided parents of ELLs with an informal forum to learn about programs (e.g., afterschool programs, upcoming school events, etc.) and other supports readily accessible to them. Follow up outreach by ENL teachers ensures that parents are provided with personal phone calls and notices and serve to identify who to contact if any additional information is requested by parents. All notices, fliers, posters, etc. are translated. Interpretation and translated materials are readily accessible and provided during workshops, meetings and all family events. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 92  Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 2018-19 CEP-RISE 93 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Debra Jones, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 94  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Urban Scholars Community Schoo School DBN: 12X463 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Debra Jones Title Principal Ivonne Torres Assistant Principal Kenshana Goff Miriam Lacob StixStarkeisha St Phyllis Rosario Parent Coordinator ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent Bonnie Ortiz/Math Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Martha Fabre Coach Coach Hosea Givan School Counselor Rafaela Espinal Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member K. Tejeda Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 06/28/18 06/28/18 06/28/18 06/28/18 06/28/18 06/28/18 06/28/18 06/28/18 06/28/18 2018-19 CEP-RISE 95  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 12X463 School Name: Urban Scholars Community School Superintendent: Rafaela Espinal The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (Kenshana) Goff Parent Coordinator Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. We conduct a preliminary assessment of the school's written translation and oral interpretation needs based on intake during initial registration of students as families complete forms such as the Home Language Identification Survey and confirm communication language preference. Families are asked to identify language(s) other that English that are spoken at home and to indicate language they would like to receive school notices on Emergency Contact cards. ATS reports RPOB and RHLA are also reviewed to update translation and interpretation needs of school. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 96  Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral According to ATS report RCPL, Spanish language is the language with the highest number of families that have identified speaking a language other than English. The school's written translation and oral interpretation findings and needs are reported to the school community at staff conferences, PT meetings, posted announcements and in the Parental Involvement section of the school's Language Allocation Policy English Spanish French, Son See below: See below: See below: See below: 216 62 7 76% 22% .03% 218 61 7 77% 22% .03% 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? The following documents are disseminated every year and require translation: Family Handbook is distributed in September. Families Family Handbook: September 2018 Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. All notices, class news are translated in Spanish language on-site. All notices, fliers, etc. are archived and updated in a timely manner to ensure Spanish translation is readily available for distribution. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 97  Monthly class/grade newsletters. After-school programming information, consent forms, parent notifications, etc. . Progress Reports are distributed every month. Progress Reports: September, October, December, January, February, April, May and June. Fliers of school events such as workshops, meetings, testing dates. Notices are reminders of events are sent as needed. Parent Teacher Conference notices announcing conferences, schedule appointments, and confirmations of appointments are sent home 4 times a year. September and November 2018, March and May 2019 Outreach to the Translation and Interpretation Unit is secured when school staff has not identified a family member who can provide appropriate translation and/or interpretation to the respective family at events such as Parent Teacher Conferences, assembly programs, and parental engagement events. Teachers translate classroom materials, Spanish interpretation is provided at all events, meetings, workshops, etc. Interpretation for other languages is secured with services provided by Translation and Interpretation Unit. Outreach to the Translation and Interpretation Unit will be made when school staff has not identified a family member who can provide appropriate translation and/or interpretation to the respective family at events such as Parent Teacher Conferences, Coffee and Conversation, and all family engagement events. All notices, class news are translated in Spanish language on-site. All notices, fliers, etc. are archived and updated in a timely manner to ensure Spanish translation is readily available for distribution. Outreach to the Translation and Interpretation Unit will be made when school staff has not identified a family member who can provide appropriate translation and/or interpretation to the respective family at events such as Parent Teacher Conferences, All notices, class news are translated in Spanish language on-site. All presentations, materials, handouts, etc. are reviewed prior to events to determine who will translate materials or provide interpretation during presentations. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 98  All notices, fliers, etc. are archived and updated in a timely manner to ensure Spanish translation is readily available for distribution. Outreach to the Translation and Interpretation Unit will be scheduled in a timely manner when school staff have not identified a family member who can provide appropriate translation and/or interpretation to the respective family at events such as Parent Teacher Conferences (4 times a year), Coffee and Conversation (monthly), and other family engagement events. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? Third Friday of every month. Morning Drop Off Classroom Visits (every month) Guidance Counselor outreach. Teacher outreach. Parent Association/School leadership outreach to parent/guardian. Teachers translate classroom materials, Spanish interpretation is provided at all events, meetings, workshops, etc. Interpretation for other languages is secured with services provided by Translation and Interpretation Unit. Outreach to the Translation and Interpretation Unit will be made when school staff has not identified a family member who can provide appropriate translation and/or interpretation to the respective family at events such as Parent Teacher Conferences, Teamwork Tuesdays (weekly) Bi monthly Spanish interpretation is provided at all events, meetings, workshops, etc. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 99  Attendance Team phone calls. Daily outreach and follow up. Guidance Counselor outreach. Teacher outreach. Daily outreach and follow up. Parent Formal face-to-face meetings include: Parent teacher conferences September, November, March and May. Ice Cream Social (September) September Open School/Curriculum Night September Teamwork Tuesdays Monthly Interpretation for other languages is secured with services provided by Translation and Interpretation Unit. Spanish interpretation is provided at all events, meetings, workshops, etc. Interpretation for other languages is secured with services provided by Translation and Interpretation Unit. Spanish interpretation is provided at all events, meetings, workshops, etc. Interpretation for other languages is secured with services provided by Translation and Interpretation Unit. Outreach to the Translation and Interpretation Unit will be made when school staff has not identified a family member who can provide appropriate translation and/or interpretation to the respective family at events such as Parent Teacher Conferences, Teachers translate classroom materials, Spanish interpretation is provided at all events, meetings, workshops, etc. Interpretation for other languages is secured with services provided by Translation and Interpretation Unit. Teachers translate classroom materials, Spanish interpretation is provided at all events, meetings, workshops, etc. Interpretation for other languages is secured with services provided by Translation and Interpretation Unit. Teachers translate classroom materials, Spanish interpretation is provided at all events, meetings, workshops, etc. Interpretation for other languages is secured with services provided by Translation and Interpretation Unit. Spanish interpretation and translation services are provided during presentations and activities. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 100  Coffee and Conversation Monthly Spanish interpretation and translation services are provided during presentations and activities. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. We maintain communication with limited English proficient families and request that all families provided current and updated family contact information. During school events, families are reminded to maintain the school informed of any change and request that they provide us with alternate contacts who can be reached in the event of a school emergency. Spanish translation and interpretation is provided on-site. Families requiring language interpretation other than Spanish will be contacted with interpretation services provided by Translation unit. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. During monthly staff meetings and ongoing professional development sessions, we ensure that all staff members are aware of the Chancellor's Regulations securing that Limited English Speaking parents are provided with a meaningful opportunity to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education. Our Language Access Coordinator will provide school staff with literature, handouts, links, etc. to keep them informed of the services provided by and procedures required to contact The Translation and Interpretation Unit to ensure language access support is readily available to families and parent leaders. The Language Access Coordinator will conduct staff information sessions 3 times a year to highlight resources and services. Our Language Access Coordinator will maintain an information board that will display Translation and Interpretation Unit resources and information.. The Translation and Interpretation Unit will provide periodic training to parent coordinators and other key school-based personnel (e.g., Pupil Accounting Secretary, Family Worker, etc.) on the language access requirements stipulated in Chancellor's Regulations. All staff members will be provided with a copy of this regulation and the information related to materials and resources available to support these requirements. Staff will reference the Translation and Interpretation Unit and Language Access Resources such as free translation, over-the-phone interpretation, and on-site interpretation. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) PS 463 displays and posts translated signage informing families of their right to receive information in their preferred language. Signage and posters informing parents of the availability of and access to language assistance services are posted at the main entrance, main office, and Parent Center. The school updates and maintains current records of the primary language of each parent. Such information is generated from ATS reports, in addition to reviewing student 2018-19 CEP-RISE 101  emergency contact card completed during intake. Outreach is also conducted throughout the school year during Parent Teacher Conferences and monthly family events such as Coffee and Conversation, Morning Drop Offs and Teamwork Tuesdays. Consistent with this regulation, translations and interpretation services are provided to all parents who require language assistance in order to communicate effectively. School support staff provides written translation and interpretation for Spanish at parent engagement events. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Mechanisms to gather feedback from parents on quality and availability will include surveys and feedback sheets that will be distributed during home-school connection events. We will also conduct brief interviews and invite parents to share their comments regarding the translation and interpretation services we have provided. We will continue to seek information regarding the caliber of services and areas that services can be improved upon and make the appropriate revisions. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 102 
