2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 11X481 School Name: THE STEAM BRIDGE SCHOOL Principal: KATIRIA ROJAS 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information The STEAM Bridge School 321100010481 Kindergarten, 1st, 2nd, & 3rd School Number (DBN): 11X481 1684 White Plains Road Bronx, NY 10462 718-239-5660 Phone Number: 718-239-5665 Fax: KatiriaRojas KRojas3@schools.nyc.gov Email Address: School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: KatiriaRojas AdinaDelgado Crystal Tirado Josefina Rodriguez KatriceJohnson N/A N/A N/A District Information Geographical District: 11 MeishaRoss-Porter Superintendent: 1250 Arnow Avenue Bronx, New York 10469 Superintendent’s Office Address: MRoss@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718- 519-2620 Phone Number: 718-519-2626 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 CEP 3  Bronx Field Support Center FSC: Jose Ruiz Executive Director: 1230 Zerega Avenue Bronx New York 10462 Executive Director’s Office Address: JRUIZ@@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-828-7776 Phone Number: 718-828-3113 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) KatiriaRojas AdinaDelgado Crystal Tirado David Sampong KatriceJohnson N/A N/A Irene Munoz Jenny Padin *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Parent Member/ Parent 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Maria Candelario Josefina Rodriguez Carmen Casado Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ DC 37 Member Member/ UFTChapter Leader Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/ Principal Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Mission: Section 4: CEP Overview Through collaborative discussion, differentiated instruction, and engagement, the STEAM Bridge School will develop 21st Century Leaders who will be College and Career ready. 2018-19 CEP 9  2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. OVERVIEW PS 481 is an elementary school which opened September 2015 in the Morris Park section of the Bronx. In September 2018 we will serve about 200 students (three kindergarten classes, two first grade classes, two second grade classes, two third grade classes and one bridge 1/2 12:1 class). We will continue adding a grade level each year until we are a full grown K-5 school. In our vision we are committed to preparing an educational atmosphere for ALL students through rigorous and engaging curriculum that embeds collaborative discussion, differentiated instruction, and engagement.  Rigorous and engaging curriculum – By providing a set of intentionally aligned components, we create learning outcomes that offer engaging experiences and instructional strategies into an organized sequential unit of study. This serves as a road map to high quality teaching and learning. o  Collaborative discussion – Having significant communication skills is critical and valuable in the workplace and in our lives. Having discourse will allow our students to collaborate on existing and new ideas which will provide opportunities for input and feedback. As a result, our students will assume shared responsibilities and contribute to accomplishing common goals in meaningful and respectful ways.  Differentiated instruction – Each student has a unique learning style and interest. We provide students with varying avenues and opportunities for learning. Through continuous data driven instruction, we address various learning needs and develop personalized instruction so that ALL students can learn effectively.  Engagement- Students show their thinking and learning in a creative and expressive manner. The teacher plays the role of a facilitator as students take ownership of their learning. Students use accountable talk, academic vocabulary, and challenge one another’s thinking. Through daily problem solving, synthesizing of information and exploration, students will experience learning that will create 21st century leaders. Our Instructional Focus: If teachers provide engaging rigorous opportunities for tiered groups then students will have the chance to justify their thinking through a range of strategies and discussion techniques. (Engaging Students in Learning (3c) and Questioning and Discussion Techniques (3b)) Strategic Collaboration: The Steam Bridge School partner with Neighborhood Initiatives Development Corporation which provides families with an after school program. They offer a variety of services for students including homework support, arts and craft and leadership skills. In addition, we also partner with Education Through Music to provide students with a quality music program that support comprehensive, sequential music and arts instruction. Also, as part of the Mayor's and Chancellor's initiative, we were provided a universal literacy coach to build our K-2 instructional reading skills. 2018-19 CEP 10  We work collaboratively with other school throughout the school year through the District 11 Instructional Focus Collaborative Group (IFC). Teachers are given the chance to peer with other teachers in our district 11 sister schools with a focus on best practices. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. The student body includes about 40% of English Language Learners and about 14% Special Education Students 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Framework for Great School: Progress-Quality Review Findings Celebration Based on the 2017-2018 Quality Review Findings School leaders and teacher peers strategically use effective feedback and next steps from classroom observations to support teacher development. The Danielson Framework for Teaching provides teachers with rubric-based feedback, capturing strengths, challenges, and next steps. Impact The strategic use of frequent cycles of classroom observations supported by peer visitation and collaboration with colleagues and school leaders ensures that actionable feedback articulates clear expectations and is aligned to professional development plans. This process promotes teachers’ growth by elevating instructional practices across the school. Supporting Evidence: School leaders articulated their beliefs about the observation process. We strongly feel that through observing our teachers and providing them with specific next steps, actionable feedback, and support around our instructional focus, then we will see improved student outcomes. School leaders designed a strategic plan to conduct frequent cycles of observations and to support teachers in raising the quality of instruction for students. During the summer professional development sessions, new teachers received intensive support before school started, such as expectations for instruction, school culture, and logistics, as well as a mentor. School leaders ensure ongoing instructional support throughout the year. As a result of extensive professional development, teachers have a deep understanding of the Danielson Framework for Teaching expectations. Through feedback and next steps given in observations, school leaders support teachers’ performance. Based on Advance data, leaders ensure that teachers engage in inter-visitation and debrief after these lessons, discussing how to incorporate their learning into future lessons. Teachers set goals at the beginning of each school year and school leaders meet with teachers three times yearly to check on the progress of the goals, review student data, and provide actionable feedback with next steps. Goals are also addressed in observation reports and at 2018-19 CEP 11  post-observation conferences. All of this work has led to improved teacher practice, with teachers taking on the role of facilitator in classrooms, enabling students to think and speak more critically, as evidenced in observation reports. A review of teacher observation reports highlights that the focus of written feedback on detailed low inference notes and rationale provides thoughtful evidence supporting the ratings. Observation reports include actionable feedback encompassing teacher reflection, “glows and grows,” and next steps using the Danielson Framework for Teaching. Actionable feedback articulates clear expectations for teacher practice and development and aligns with teacher professional goals. Thus, targeted feedback further informs and supports teachers growth in instructional practice. Focus Findings School leaders and faculty have a clear set of instructional goals aligned with the learning needs of students and staff. Goals and action plans are informed by ongoing data-driven needs assessment and analysis. Impact Even though the school has developed collaborative structures to meet the goals, these goals have yet to leverage thoughtful changes to explicitly accelerate student learning and social-emotional growth or to purposefully improve teacher practice. Supporting Evidence: A review of the school’s planning documents and School Leadership Team (SLT) agendas and minutes revealed that the team has clearly defined five areas of focus for school improvement: increase the number of English Language Learners (ELLs) and students with disabilities reading on or above grade level, as measured by Fountas and Pinnell (F&P) running records; increase student participation in "Fun Friday;" improve teachers’ practice by at least one level on the Danielson Framework for Teaching, as measured by the Advance data tracker; use the Danielson Framework for Teaching to develop a shared understanding through norming of components of instruction during collaborative meetings and demonstrating core principles during instruction; and increase parent attendance and participation at functions such as parent workshops, schoolwide events, Parent Association (PA) meetings, and Parent-Teacher Conferences. Furthermore, the SLT engages in discussions and analysis of student achievement data and develops and tracks these schoolwide goals. Although the school has designed five goals around the framework for great school, some of them do not have clear metrics to measure whether or not the school will accomplish the goal by the end of the school year. As a result, outcomes may not be reflecting leverage changes that directly connect to accelerated student learning outcomes and social-emotional growth. Goal-setting and effective action planning at the school level, including professional development planning, are informed by a comprehensive, data-driven needs assessment and ongoing data gathering and analysis. These practices improve pedagogy across classrooms and close the achievement gap, as evident in the goals’ midpoint check-in system. For example, school leaders monitor and track all goals based on the Chancellor’s Framework. In addition, school leaders have made the organizational decision of creating and implementing an after-school academy that addresses the needs of ELLs (entering and emerging) and students with disabilities to support the achievement of the goals. Furthermore, with regard to rigorous instruction, school leaders established the goal that teachers design and implement Common Core-aligned curricula, offering reading strategies that provide opportunities for students in kindergarten and first grade. During the midpoint analysis of the goals, the ELL population reading on or above grade level grew twelve percent, which surpasses the expected midpoint reading growth by five percent. School leaders and teachers connect the growth in teacher and student performance to an expectation of increased rigor during instruction and in curriculum planning. School leaders and teachers use common assessments to track students' progress toward goals across grades and subject areas and the result are used to adjust curricula and instruction. For example, teachers use midpoint assessment analysis to identify class strengths, class weaknesses, and 2018-19 CEP 12  next steps to support the achievement of the school goals and action plans. Consequently, goal setting and decision-making, based on school data, is informed by regular communication among faculty members that helps determine next steps for ongoing school improvement. 2018-19 CEP 13  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 11X481 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 164 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 5 5 1 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 10 2 2 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 87.0% % Attendance Rate 83.5% % Reduced Lunch 28.7% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.6% 62.8% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 14.0% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 2.67 0% 0% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 4 4 92.2% 4.3% 14.6% 14.6% 7.3% 1.2% 0 0% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 14  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The Framework for Great Schools defines a successful classroom as one with a strong, common core aligned curriculum, customized to meet the needs of every student. A vital component of The Steam Bridge School is to create a rigorous educational experience that challenges and supports all students. Therefore, we will continue to effectively establish structures to ensure our curriculum is aligned to the common core and instructional shift and meets the needs of all our students. To continue providing rigorous curricula, our teachers have and will continue to create and develop curricula that address misconceptions in their planning, rigorous differentiated activities/tasks, opportunities for cooperative learning through engaging discussions and on the spot assessment. Strength:  Based on the 2017-2018 Quality Review feedback: o Rigorous habits and higher-order skills are emphasized in the school’s curricula and academic tasks, which are embedded in a coherent way across grades and subjects. Curricular and academic tasks are planned and refined using student work and data. o Teachers plan differentiated instruction strategies to develop or modify tasks that require the application of increasingly complex thinking to new situations. Instructional planning documents incorporate tasks requiring real world application of higher-order thinking skills to contextual situations. o Teachers reviewed and revised ELA and Math Curriculum by embedding ENL and SWD instructional strategies o Strategic planning and professional development around reading strategies and centers/stations implementation as seen in daily lesson plans o Math structure is implemented across the entire school with an emphasis on entrance ticket, discussion activity, collaborative /independent group work and exit ticket. o Grade level reading structure is implemented to support center/station work around cooperative learning. Weakness:  We exceeded our mid point growth percentage, unfortunately we did not reach our end of the year goal. Although most of our ENL and SWD students showed growth based on our Fountas and Pinnell assessment, 2018-19 CEP 15  majority of them did not reach the grade level reading benchmark, as evident in our end of the year Fountas and Pinnel running record. Many students fell short by one reading level. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 15% of ENL and SWD students will read on or above grade level as measured by the Fountas and Pinnell running record. 2018-19 CEP 16  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). - ENL and Special Education teachers will focus on reading comprehension strategies during guided reading by December 2018. - Units of study in reading and writing will continue to be reviewed and revised monthly amongst the grade teams. ENL coach will provide strategies surrounding language skills and scaffolds for ENL and SWD. -Teachers will plan collaboratively and focus on curriculum and instructional practice based on student’s needs as evidence in assessments. -Teachers will design rigorous tasks driven by Fountas and Pinnell data to ascertain all students have mastered about the text, within the text, and beyond the text comprehension questions. -Teachers will continue to use total participation techniques to enhance classroom discussion around Fountas and Pinnell comprehension questions. -After school will be conducted to address the needs of our ENL and SWD population. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers, ENL students, Tier 3 students September 2018 - June 2019 Teachers, ENL provider, Special Education teachers, Administration ENL Parents, ENL Students September 2018-June 2019 ENL teachers, classroom teachers, 2018-19 CEP 17  ENL coordinator and classroom teachers will hold parent meetings and workshops for parents to support the academic needs of their child by provided reading, writing and math resources, materials and strategies. ENL Coordinator and Special Education teachers will facilitate monthly parent meetings to discuss curriculum and strategies to drive reading comprehension. SWD teachers, Administration Teachers use assessment data to provide Response to Intervention (RTI) to students in academic need particular ENL students. Teachers, ALL students September 2018-June 2019 All teachers, Administration Daily use of CKLA skills which develops oral language especially for ENL. Teachers, All students September 2018- June 2019 All teachers, administrators Teachers will differentiate instruction for performance tasks that align to student needs. In addition, teachers will be mindful of language acquisition. Teachers and administrators will conduct a 6 week learning cycle surrounding guided reading. Bi-weekly vertical and horizontal teams will analyze student work to evaluate and adjust (if needed) the unit of study. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Administration, ENL Coordinator, and teachers will facilitate monthly meetings to provide parents ongoing updates on student’s academic progress. Additionally, the following activities will be included throughout the school year. Student-Led conferences   Culture Night  Reading Workshop  Saturday Social 2018-19 CEP 18   Monthly ENL Parent Workshop Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. -Substitutes will allow for professional learning sessions and extended planning at the school level and outside professional development around UDL, reading strategies, and critical thinking. - Monthly guided reading professional development will be conducted in-house by the ULIT coach and administration. -Varying resources and materials will be used to assess and develop reading level. -Additional Professional Development opportunities will be provided weekly to all teachers (per session will be offered for after school sessions) Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy Title I SWP X Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2019, grade teams and administration will analyze the results of our Fountas and Pinnell running records which should reveal 7% of ENL and SWD students reading on or above grade level. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Assessment data from Fountas and Pinnell running record. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 19  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? At the STEAM bridge school we have successfully implemented a Positive Behavior Intervention (PBIS) initiative in which all students and staff are participants. We utilize Positive Behavior Intervention (PBIS) on a school wide level to address behavioral concerns throughout our school community. Our students have opportunities to receive classroom incentives such as Fun Friday, Student of the Month Recognition, Field Trips, and other special privileges within the school. Our data has shown using these positive reinforcements to acknowledge expected behaviors have decreased the occurrences within the ambit of our school community. Strengths: School community (students and staff) are aware of expected behavior. School provides an open door policy that builds a community of respect and rapport. Families are fully aware of PBIS expectations through parent meetings and parent handbook.     As evidenced within our 2017-2018 OORS report, there were 0 occurrences. Needs:   Students taking ownership of their actions. Students becoming aware of the social-emotional needs of each other. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we will sustain a less than 5% occurrence rate as measured by OORS. 2018-19 CEP 20  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All students and staff will continue to be trained and normed in Positive Behavior Intervention Supports (PBIS) at the beginning of the school year. Students and staff Administration, students, teachers, all staff members September 2018 (beginning) June 2019 (end) Teachers will acknowledge students on a consistent basis for positive behavior using a points system. Students will participate in "Fun Friday". All students September 2018 (beginning) June 2019 (end) Administration, teachers, all staff members Students of the month will receive a special award during a monthly school assembly. Administrators will provide the school community with adequate time and support to implement elements of PBIS program. All students, teachers In keeping with new Chancellor’s Regulation a-411, we will establish a crisis de-escalation team that will meet monthly to place students into behavior “tiers.” The team will work closely with students, teachers, and family members to come up with strategies to best fit the needs of our Tier 3 behavioral students. Students with Tier 3 behavior 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Administration, teachers, all staff members Administration, teachers, all staff members September 2018 (beginning) June 2019 (end) September 2018 (beginning) June 2019 (end) How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. During parent engagement and other school activities, teachers, and administrators will facilitate workshops to introduce the PBIS program. Parents will receive a copy of the PBIS matrix which is used throughout the school year. 2018-19 CEP 21  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Administration and staff will continue to monitor student behavior and purchase resources to assist in continuing the positive growth in the PBIS program. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP X Title I TA Title II, Part A 21st Century Grant SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2019 (mid-point check) our OORS report will show less than 3% occurrences. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Our OORS reports will be analyzed to evaluate the occurrences as we proceed throughout the school year. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 22  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. According to the Framework for Great Schools, collaborative teachers frequently and consistently improve their practice through ongoing learning and professional development. At The Steam Bridge School, efforts have been made by administration to create opportunities for teachers to collaborate on a weekly basis to strengthen their craft as instructional leaders. We believe that education is a process. Therefore, we will continue to create professional opportunities for our teachers to expose our students to best practice instruction. Our teachers will continue to work collaboratively to share best practices within instruction that are aligned to city and state-wide expectations. Strengths:  Inter-class visitations provide teachers the opportunity to highlight the strengths and weaknesses of their colleagues’ instructional craft. Additionally, teachers are provided the opportunity to provide timely and tangible feedback, which sustains a supportive, and collaborative school community.  Teacher teams meet bi-weekly to analyze student work, provide different strategies to help teachers reach instructional outcomes, and sustain PBIS protocols to strengthen their classroom management skills.  Based on the Instructional Focus Collaborative team’s feedback, teachers meet on a weekly basis to plan  differentiated tasks and activities to provide opportunities for students to justify their thinking. Inter-school visitations allow teachers to collaborate and gain insight into the expectations of the district as a whole with regards to instruction. Weaknesses:  In anticipation of the upcoming school year, 24% of our staff will be new. Hence it’s incumbent on our existing teachers to work collaboratively with our new teachers to help them adapt to the best practice standards.  Although all of our teachers MOTP end of the year ratings are within the effective or highly effective range of the Danielson Rubric. Further development is still needed to help continue advancing teacher's pedagogy around foster genuine discussion among the students.  Teachers will continue to conduct inter-class visitation that will highlight pedagogical consistency in student led discussion and engagement. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 2018-19 CEP 23  By June 2019, 80% of teachers will be rated Effective or Highly Effective in Danielson component Questioning and Discussion Techniques (3b) and Engaging Students in Learning (3c) as measured by ADVANCE data tracker. 2018-19 CEP 24  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Teachers work collaboratively to create rigorous learning tasks across grades. Teachers Weekly opportunities for teachers to meet and look over lessons/unit to address any discrepancies with pacing to ensure the needs of all students are met. Weekly observation and feedback between administration and teachers; post observation and mid-point professional conference reflecting on progress (Winter 2018). Six teacher inter-visitations will be scheduled based upon areas in need of improvement around questioning and discussion techniques and engaging students in learning. Teaching Staff, students Administration, Teachers September 2018 (beginning)June 2019 (end) Administration, Teachers September 2018 (beginning)June 2019 (end) Teacher Team(s) will meet in 6-8 week cycles during the professional learning time slot on Mondays to engage in an inquiry-based protocol that addresses a school-wide area of growth around learning task using research-based practices. Teaching Staff, Students September 2018 (beginning)June 2019 (end) Administration, Teachers Professional development opportunities will be given around questioning and discussion techniques and engaging students in learning. Teachers will research and share strategies for curriculum goals and objectives as well as strategies to address areas of need such as quality of questions, techniques for discussion, student participation, and differentiated tasks. Teaching Staff, Students Administration, Teachers September 2018 (beginning) June 2019 (end) 2018-19 CEP 25  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Once a month during Tuesday's parent engagement, teachers will facilitate workshops around the quality of questions and accountable talk stems which shows parents the expectations in the classroom and will carry over to increase engagement by students. Teachers will provide parents with level 3 and level 4 questions to enhance students comprehension and allow them to have discourse within the classroom. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Tax Levy money will be used to provide substitute teachers for those attending professional development outside the school to be turn-keyed, inter-class visitation/debrief sessions for teachers in need of extra planning and support. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2019, administration will have conducted at least two rounds of observation. Administration will use the ADVANCE data tracking system to identify trends which should reveal 40% of teachers performing effective or highly effective in components 3B and 3C based on the Danielson rubric. If teachers are not at the 40% mark by January 2019, targeted professional development will be provided for teachers and added support visitation from administration will be conducted. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Teacher observation data in Advance will be analyzed at least 3 time for the year to provide targeted support needed to teachers. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 26  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. According to the Framework for Great Schools, effective school leadership requires the principal setting a clear vision for student achievement that builds coherent instruction and social emotional support. At The STEAM Bridge school we are committing to investing the time and resources necessary to truly nurture pedagogical growth. Strength: Based on the 2017-2018 PPO feedback:  The majority of teachers are engaged in structured, inquiry-based professional collaborations that promotes the achievement of school goals and the implementation of CCLS (including instructional shifts), strengthening the instructional capacity of teachers as well as distributed leadership structures are in place so the teachers have built leadership capacity and have a voice in key decisions that affect student learning across the school. The principal has established a set schedule and program of monthly team and grade meetings. Such examples, range from mentor/mentee meetings, special team meetings (special education team, ENL team, bottom third team, collaborative analysis team and curriculum planning team). In addition, teacher leaders facilitate the various teams as well as supporting how the principal builds capacity. All team leaders use a school wide protocol/document to ensure accountability emphasising the priority meeting points as well as next steps.   Based on the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide  100% of teachers say that principal makes clear to the staff his or her expectations for meeting instructional goals, principal participates in instructional planning with teams of teachers, principal sets clear expectations for teachers about implementing what they have learned in professional development, and the principal knows what's going on in their classroom. Weakness: 2018-19 CEP 27   In most classes there were rich student led conversation. However, in other classes students were not engaged in genuine discussion. More streamline instructional practice needs to implemented to ensure more authentic discussion that will enhance student engagement. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 70% of teachers will either be rated effective or highly effective in Danielson component 3B. This will be done by administration conducting ongoing professional development and creating opportunities for inter-class visitation among teachers around the elements associated with Danielson 3B. 2018-19 CEP 28  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Grade level team meetings will be conducted around discussion techniques that can be used throughout the lesson. Teachers September 2018-June 2019 Administration, teachers Effective and/or Highly Effective teachers in Danielson 3B will assist in developing other teachers pedagogical practice to enhance their rating and understanding in the above mentioned component. During parent engagement block time, teachers discuss and show parents the rigorous tasks and discussion activities presented in lesson. Inter-class visitation will be scheduled to observe colleagues demonstrating the characteristics of student led discussion. Teachers will submit a friendly protocol sheet noting quality of questions, discussion techniques, and student participation observed and how they will incorporate it within their classroom. On a bi-monthly basis, teachers will be engaged in discussion around inter-class visitations protocols and next steps. Teachers September 2018- June 2019 Teachers and Administration Administrators will conduct daily walk through to ascertain the level of student led discussion and provide teachers with timely feedback with next steps. Teachers September 2018-June 2019 Teachers and Administration 2018-19 CEP 29 Administration will focus on how teachers are implementing suggestions (grows) from their fellow teachers based of the inter-class visitation notes. Professional Learning opportunities will be provided to staff around component 3B. Teachers September 2018- June 2019 Teachers and Administration 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. There will be student led conferences twice a year (November and March) to showcase student's growth and development to their parents/guardian around Danielson 3B. In addition, teachers will host workshop related to their expertise to foster parents understanding regarding how they foster more conversation at home. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Inter-class visitation time will be scheduled. As well as professional development will be given around Danielson component 3B. Per-session will be offered for After School & Saturday workshops. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP X Title I TA 21st Century Grant SIG Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2019, 35% of teachers will either be rated effective or highly effective in Danielson component 3B. If the mid target goal is not meet, administration will conduct professional development directly with the group of teachers that are still struggling. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Advance data tracker will be used to measure and assess progress around Danielson component 3B. Also we will use our inter-class visitation spread sheet particular focusing on the grow area to ascertain if teachers are utilizing the strategies given to them by colleagues and administration. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 30  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. According to the Framework for Great Schools, to build and maintain strong family-community ties, it is important to integrate families and the larger community into the school and classrooms to enhance and deepen “the civil life of the school”. There are several ways we build and maintain strong family and community ties. Parent workshops are offered throughout the year and are geared at supporting the parents in assisting their child at home. Teachers provide the parents with resources that can be used to strengthen their child’s academic skills. On Tuesday afternoons, teachers allotted time for parent communication which consist of one-to-one parent conference, class news letter, email, progress report, phone calls, etc. The data below highlights the parent activities and the attendance percentage based on our sign in sheets: ENL Meeting 48% parent attendance Parent Translation Classes 68% parent attendance Coffee and Connect 17% parent attendance Parent Teacher Conference 80% parent attendance Culture Night 70% parent attendance Carnival 100% parent attendance Musical Concerts 90% parent attendance Strength:  We at PS 481 The Steam Bridge School recognizes the critical role of parents as partners with the school. Therefore we are committed to offering monthly parent activities of interest to parents. In order to accomplish growth in reading and writing, we are offering opportunities for parents to participate in curriculum and strategy building workshops. 2018-19 CEP 31   There are several ways we communicate with parents to ensure they are apart of the school. We have a website, monthly school calendar, monthly grade calendar, flyers, letters, etc. Weakness:  The attendance at our ENL meeting and Coffee and Connect are below 50%.  Parent Association (PA) need to plan parent workshops around the needs of the parents Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 20% of parents will attend school functions which includes parent workshops, school wide events, Parent Association (PA) meetings, and Parent-Teacher Conferences as measured by school attendance sheets. 2018-19 CEP 32  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Teachers will use parent engagement time on Tuesday afternoons to provide support around Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS), MOSL, reading behaviors, etc. Four times throughout the year we will conduct student led core subject activities. Monthly parent meetings will be held 30 minutes prior to the start of said events. Family events and workshops will be conducted to address students needs including students with disabilities (SWDs) and English Language Learners (ELLs). School website is updated weekly with information for parents on homework and important upcoming events. Monthly school calendar sent home with students, in addition to being placed on school website. Social media platform being used to increase parent awareness about school activities and events. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Parents/Guardians September 2018 (beginning) June 2019 (end) Parents/Guardians September 2018(beginning) June 2019(end) Parents/Guardians September 2017 (beginning) June 2018 (end) Parents/Guardians September 2017 (Beginning) June 2018 (end) Administration, Teachers Administration, SLT, Teachers, Parent Association Administration, Special Education Teachers, Special Education Liaison, ENL Teacher Administration, Teachers, secretary, tech specialist If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. N/A Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2018-19 CEP 33  Sub teachers will be provided for Special Education Liaison and ENL Coordinator/Teacher to have monthly meeting. Materials and Resources needed for Workshops will be purchased. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2019, there will be a 10% of parent attendance at school functions including workshops, school wide events, Parent Association meeting and Parent-Teacher Conferences as indicated by the attendance sheets collected at each function. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Attendance sheets will be collected at each function and analyze to see the increase of parent participation. Administration will examine the function that made consistent growth among parent participation. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 34  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) English Language Arts (ELA) K, 1st, 2nd, and 3rd grade students reading at least two/three reading level below grade benchmark based on Fountasand Pinnellrunning records, writing samples, writing rubrics, ongoing conferring and assessment Mathematics *Formative Assessments Science * Summative Assessments * Report Card *Mid-point assessments * Formative Assessments * Summative Assessments * Report Card *Mid-point assessment When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Services are provided during the school day. In addition, extra after school services will be provided for ENL and SWDstudents. Services are provided during the school day. In addition, extra after school services will be provided for ENL and SWDstudents. Services are provided during the school day. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) GuidedReading, Core Knowledge Language Arts (CKLA)Skills Building, expeditionary learning (3rd grade), Thematic teacher created curriculum, Scaffoldedstrategies, Envision math program, word problems, Fluency Activity, Scaffolding, Differentiated materials and manipulative Building Blocks of Science. Differentiated instruction based on student's needs. Daily hands on activities that foster engineer aspects Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Small group, partner group, collaborative work and/or one-to-one instruction by the classroom teacher and/or ENL teacher Small group, partner group, collaborative work and/or One to One instruction supported by classroom teachers Small group, partner group, collaborative work and/or one-to-one instruction supported by classroom teachers 2018-19 CEP 35  *Projects Social Studies *Formative Assessments NYCPassport *SummativeAssessments * Report Card At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Students who exhibit patterns of difficulties in their social emotional development Individual or group counseling Small group, partner group, collaborative work and/or one-to-one instruction supported by classroom teachers One to One or Group setting Services are provided during the school day. Services are provided during the school day. 2018-19 CEP 36  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) For the 2018-2019 school year, we will have two in temporary housing. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Free lunch, after school tutorial (as needed), RTI services (as needed), backpack filled with school uniform and school supplies, and attendance workshop/breakfast for parents held by attendance teacher Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 37  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 CEP 38  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. At The Steam Bridge School we arrange our hiring committee to consist of administration, UFT, parents, and teachers. Administration and teachers reviews all resumes. Top candidates will be asked to come to the school and conduct a lesson. Administration and teachers sit in and observed the lesson. Hiring Process Step 1: Attendant Job Fairs and collect resumes via email, mail, and/or in person (Administration and teachers go to fairs) Step 2: Comb through the resume with staff, leadership team and SLT. Step 3: Sectary contact candidates for “Round 2” (Demo Lesson). If candidates do well they will be invited to “Round 3” process. Step 4: Candidates go through group interview and collaborative lesson plan segment. (Round 3) Step 5: Hiring team will deliberate. If candidates do really well they could be offered a position at the end of the session. THEN Step 6: Teacher(s) are called in and given the good news! For retention and support all new teachers are assigned to a mentor that will assist them throughout the school year. Like all classroom teachers throughout the building, new teachers are provided with additional unevaluated support visits with actionable feed back to improve teacher practice and student learning. Professional development workshop are conducted in house and out house throughout the year to support teachers in strengthening their practice. These workshop are planned to support teachers in particular area(s) of need. 2018-19 CEP 39  We at the STEAM Bridge School foster leadership role for our teachers. Throughout our building we have teacher leaders such as a ENL lead, a ELA lead, a Math lead and SpEd lead. These lead teachers conduct workshops and meet with other teachers to support their pedagogical practice. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). To support teaching staff, the following structures are in place: Development of Pedagogical Goals and Objectives:  Teaching staff participated in an initial principal meeting in September to discuss and outline 1-2 pedagogical goals designed to ultimately improve their practice as well as student outcomes. In this September meeting, said staff members set forth their goals and an action plan to reach them. Pedagogical Improvement Plans Based on Classroom Observations:  Observations completed by administration are discussed within 24 to 48 hours with teachers. During these meetings, classroom data will be reviewed and as such, teachers’ needs are prioritized. These discussions form the basis for Individual (and sometimes small group) cycles of professional development. Weekly Grade Level Professional Development:  Teachers and administration meet for grade level professional development sessions. These meeting evolve around examining student work against an established rubric(s) and/or examining data collected from a variety of sources. The data is then used to make a variety of decisions including: o How to address a specific student’s needs? o How to better scaffold or modify a lesson, task or unit of study to support a variety of learners? o How to better group students for instruction? o What changes should be made in the next unit of study to better address the needs of students? Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A 2018-19 CEP 40  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). Pre-K parents welcome into the school for information about the school and how to prepare their child for entering kindergarten. In August, all kindergarten parents as well as first grade, second grade, and third grade parents will be invited to a welcome picnic/open house, were parents will learn about the expectation of the school and up coming school year (2018-2019). In September there was be a "Family Night" where parents will learn about the classroom expectations, flow of the day, and overview of what their child should learn by June 2019. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Teachers are involved in all decisions about how students will be assessed, what assessment measures will be used, and the grading criteria . All teachers participate in the creation and development of a curriculum, based on standards that is customized to meet the needs of our students. Consequently, they are the developers of the rubrics and assessment measures as well. These decisions are reviewed for their effectiveness and revised as necessary with administration guidance. Decisions are constantly assessed as teachers bring student work and data to meetings to reflect on the effectiveness of their teaching, and, if necessary, to create plans for reassessment of particular students or classes. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Federal Federal $206,602 0.00 X n/a 2018-19 CEP 41 Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) 5A, 5B, 5C, 5D, 5E n/a  Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Local $12,366 0.00 $1,701,673 X n/a x 5A, 5B, 5C, 5D, 5E n/a 5A, 5B, 5C, 5D, 5E 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the 2018-19 CEP 42  participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 43  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. PS 481X, The STEAM Bridge School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students [ PS 481X, The STEAM Bridge School] will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 2018-19 CEP 44  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 2018-19 CEP 45  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) Template School-Parent Compact (SPC) The STEAM Bridge School] , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for 2018-19 CEP 46  improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act; I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; 2018-19 CEP 47  ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities 2018-19 CEP 48  ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; 2018-19 CEP 49  ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 50  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP 51  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: Language learners (ELLs) acquire skills that promote academic learning, such as customizing the program with language development supports and technology," (Learning English and Beyond: A Holistic Approach to Supporting English Learners in Afterschool Programs by Bhattacharya & Quiroga, 2011). To assure success for our students we will use Title III funds to provide supplemental services that help the students in English Language acquisition in an after school and Saturday academy program. ELLs are offered the opportunity to participate in various interventions throughout the school year. Our interventions focus on literacy,ELA and math, as well as prepares the students for the NYSESLAT and the English Language Arts and Math Exams. Our ENL After-school program takes place on Wednesdays and Thursdays from 2:30 to 4PM, from October to April, for a total of 31 sessions. From October to December, students are grouped by grade within the entering/emerging levels. Classes are filled at 15 students, which allows for all students the opportunity to participate in this program. Two certified ENL teachers work in this program to help students with the mechanics of reading. Teachers will use Kindergarten CKLA Strand Skills to deliver a systematic and explicit phonics instruction as their primary resource for decoding and segmenting written English. In addition students will use Imagine Learning. This is an interactive computer program that is appropriate for all levels and has a variety of activities to enhance Ells’ vocabulary, grammar, pronunciation and reading comprehension. This program allows children to work independently on language skills at their level and at their own pace. As a child's skills level increases, the program moves the child to the next higher level. It sets the pace according to the needs of the students as well as provides verbal scaffolds in the Native language. From January to April students will be grouped by grade within the transitioning/expanding levels with a focus on reading and writing. Teachers will use F & P reading Assessments to incorporate targeted guided reading instruction. In addition to these materials, students use Brainpop.com during these sessions. We will use thematic units using leveled books for guided reading as well as posters, charts, and worktexts to integrate the content areas of science, social studies, and mathematics, helping to reinforce content and skills needed by the children for successful achievement of the Common Core Learning Standards. The sessions are structured with interactive, multi-sensory elements where plenty of visual aids and auditory components are provided. The ENL Afterschool program is designed to target instruction addressing all four modalities with differentiated instruction. Our Saturday ENL Program is tailored for our Entering, Emerging and Transitioning and Expanding ELLs. This program runs from January through April , from 9AM to 11PM, for 10 Saturdays. All students are invited on Saturday where classes are made to accommodate 15 children within two grade levels. This program will target approximately 50-60 students in grades K-3. Service providers will include two certified ENL teachers and 4 content /CB teachers. The ENL teacher will push-in one hour per class to provide language support. Students in grades K-1 will use CKLA Strand Skills and other resources to reinforce literacy throughout the content areas. Grades 2-3 are using Non-fiction and Fiction reading passages to enhance their literacy skills. In addition, these students use our computer based program Imagine 2018-19 CEP 52  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Learning English. This program is highly individualized and rich in visual graphics. It sets the pace according to the needs of the students as well as provides verbal scaffolds in the Native language. Students are provided with worksheets and discussion to reinforce the skills taught through this program. Supervisors and teachers are able to monitor progress through individualized reports and use the data to drive instruction. 11x481 will complement the cost of the program, using other funding sources. Test prep activities such as listening exercises, grammar and phonics work will also be incorporated in the instruction to help all ENL children to make the necessary academic gains in their Writing to better perform on the NYSESLAT and other state tests. Based on the data of the NYSESLAT Test scores our ENL population has been making positive gains in this area of need. In addition, each child will receive a "Home Tool Kit" on their proficiency level that will support their language development at home. Together, these components provide the resources needed for differentiated instruction according to students' needs. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: ENL teachers will be sent out for professional development- Making the Curriculum Accessible for ELLs to engage ELLs students in rigorous, targeted and strategic instruction for our ELLs beyond the NYSESLAT and scaffolding. Furthermore, ENL teachers will receive professional ongoing training through workshops offered under the DOE to further develop their understanding of ESL methodologies and will turnkey that information to the classroom teachers. Teachers participate in school-wide professional development every week. School-wide professional development is focusing on reading ( guided and independent) and writing. In September our ESL teacher along with the monolingual teachers, and support staff will review the NYSESLAT data to determine the status of our ELLs and to determine how to continue to support our ELLs. It is our observation that low NYSESLAT writing scores are the primary factor preventing students from reaching the proficient level. We are addressing this with an increased emphasis on writing and writing mechanics. These teachers will work collaboratively in planning more effective lessons during small group instruction time during the ENL after school session. The Literacy Consultant will meet with teachers to: * Running records and conferencing Fountas and Pinnel (assessment tool) and individualized reading * How to use questioning to develop higher order thinking skills * Targeted Guided and Strategy Reading Instruction In addition to these weekly activities, our teachers develop their capacity to improve ELL academic achievement and language development through professional development such as: • Peer observations – several times a year, teachers visit one another’s classrooms to observe best practices and offer next steps on improving ELL achievement. 2018-19 CEP 53  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Parent Engagement Activities will support our students through a cohesive home-school connection that will help meet the needs of our ELLs and ELLs with severe disabilities in an academic as well as social environment. In addition to the initial parent orientation during the ELL identification process and the three school-sponsored parent-teacher nights/afternoons throughout the year,parents of ELLs will be invited to participate in workshop series that will be conducted once a month. Parents will be notified of these activities via our P.S 481 school website, monthly calendar and weekly flyers. ENL Parent Workshops: September- discuss assessments: New York State English as a Second Language Achievement, LAB and P.S 481 ENL Program Overview. October - parents will be invited to participate in a workshop that will address Second Language Acquisition and how parents can use Imagine Learning at home. November - ENL parents will be provided with different at home strategies that can be used to help their child strengthen their skills. Workshops will address developing reading skills and Math Games. December - Parents will be invited to share a display of the students’ writing genre. This will be a celebration of our English as a New Language students and each child will present their writing orally. January - Each parent will meet with the ENL teacher and administration to discuss their child’s progress, the method of delivery and adjustments that will be made for the rest of the school year. Workshops will also address the writing process and English language arts and New York State English as Second language Achievement test prep. February- Workshop will address Promotional Criteria. March - ENL teachers will present a Literacy Development Workshops focusing on Reading Comprehension as well as, a Parent Survey information Session. April- - ENL teachers will and present a Math Workshops focusing on Math Word Problems. May- The topic of the Parent’s Meeting will be Writing, Reading, Listening and Speaking for the NYSESLAT June- The parents will meet to discuss the results of the Assessments and their child’s placement for next year and the End of the Year Conference. Topics to be covered will be school curriculum, reading, writing (grammar and mechanics),IEP goals, NYSESLAT, as well as topics decided by parent need and interest. 2018-19 CEP 54 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. N/A Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) N/A  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 55  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 11 School Name The STEAM Bridge School Borough Bronx School Number 481 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Katiria Rojas Coach ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Josefina Rodriguez/ESL Teacher Teacher/Subject Area Josefina Rodriguez/CB teacher Teacher/Subject Area N/a Related-Service Provider N/A Superintendent Meisha Ross Porter Assistant Principal Dayne Mclean Coach School Counselor N/A Parent N/A Parent Coordinator N/A Field Support Center Staff Member N/A Other (Name and Title) N/A C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 w 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 2 w 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics 2018-19 CEP 56  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 200 Total number of ELLs 76 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 38.00% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 3 4 K 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? We use Fountas and Pinnel assessment and teacher created assessments. These assessments give us information about fluency, decoding, phonemic awareness, vocabulary and writing abilities of our ELL students. Teachers use the data to design our instructional practices. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Students are tested throughout of the school year starting in September. We use this initial data to provide our ENLs students with rigours instruction and academic intervention. Students will be assessed in January, March and April. 2018-19 CEP 57  3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? Success of the program will be based upon student growth on the NYSESLAT and Fountas and Pinnell assessments and classroom observation. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Students are grouped according to their reading levels. Teachers provided tailored- instruction that address our students academic needs. Students participate in small group instruction during reading and skills. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] P.S. 481 will provide all Ells rigorous and evidenced based instruction that been shown beneficial to Ells. If students demonstrate a need for additional support, the student will move into Tier 2. Tier 2 instruction will be targeted for specific students with additional activities to core instruction in the classroom. Progress will be monitored. After analysis of Tier 2 progress, a student may receive Tier 3 support which will be in a small group or 1:1. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The NYSITELL has revealed that there are 27 eligible students who receive freestanding ESL. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Based on the results of our NYSITELL and their proficiency levels, students will be placed in our ESL program. Students will receive pull-out and push-out differentiated instruction. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. All eligible students receive Freestanding ENL. The ESL teacher will push in to the classroom as well as pull students out as mandated by proficiency levels as per the CR Part 154.2. 6 out of 10 classes has students with mixed proficiency levels. b. TBE program. If applicable. Not applicable c. DL program. If applicable. Not applicable 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? All ENL students will receive 100% of their ENL/ELA instructional time based upon state mandates and individual student NYSITELL. The teacher for the free-standing program holds permanent certification for NYS TESOL. Once a student reaches the proficient level, the student will continue to receive service (.5) for two years. 2018-19 CEP 58  3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. The multiple entry point model will be utilized to foster language development. Additionally, all classrooms are print rich and students will be explicitly taught to interact with one another through questioning, class discussion and using academic vocabulary. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? The school will administer the Spanish LAB for students who have Spanish as the home language. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status All students that are in each subgroup and receive instruction according to academic levels. Differentiated instruction is provided throughout all content areas. Students will receive guided reading and writing instruction based upon baseline scores and teacher observation. Visuals and techniques will be provided for all students as well as many opportunities to verbally communicate. Newcomer- Instruction is focus on language development through phonemic awareness and writing. Developing- Instruction is focus on language development through guided reading, reading comprehension and writing. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Teachers of ELL-SWDs will utilize the I do, we do, you do Model, explicit instruction, modeling, Simplify Language, Extended Time, technology programs and strategic activities to accelerate English language development. All ELL-SWDs will receive all services mandated on their IEPs. The teachers have common planning time built into their schedules to plan instruction. Teachers accommodate and modify instruction, content and assessments to provide all our students with equal access to success in all content areas. The Special Education Implementation Team reviews each IEP to ensure all students receive mandated services. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? All ELL-SWDs will have IEP goals monitored for progress. Progress reports are distributed three times per year. The ESL teacher and Special Education teacher will work to support the language development of the students in the least restrictive environment. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. The school will provide targeted intervention for ELLs in ELA through small group instruction and individual conferences between teacher/student. This intervention is provided in English, and to all levels of English Language Learners. Small group instruction is provided throughout the lessons daily. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? For the upcoming school year we will be incorporating supplementary guided materials and instruction as well as after-school reading and math programs. 2018-19 CEP 59  10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? There are no programs or services that will be discontinued. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs are offered equal access to all school programs. P.S 481 will be providing academic after school program in addition to Optimum Enrichment (outside provided). 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Technology such as computers, Elmo Document Reader, Promethean Boards, and chrome books are available to support the needs of all English Language Learners in every content areas. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Home language support is presented to support the students as needed. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. The requires services support and resources used are selected with the student's needs in mind. Instructional materials purchased are useful for various ages and proficiency levels. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Technology such as computers, Elmo Document Reader, Promethean Boards, and chrome books, Ipads, Imagine Learning are available to support the needs of all English Language Learners in every content areas. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). We are committed to providing a welcoming environment for our newly enrolled ELLs. Grouping our ELLs accordingly provides extra language support. In addition to working with their classroom teachers, some students are pulled out or the ESL teacher pushes in for support. In addition, we conduct parent orientation and workshops to support students academic development. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? At the present time, the school does not offer language electives. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Not applicable 2018-19 CEP 60  Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Ongoing professional development and training will be provided to all teachers to support ELLs in their development of academic language proficiency will include differentiation, data, scaffolding strategies, UDL, and cultural sensitivity. Administration will have a strong focus on monitoring the effectiveness of instruction for ELLs. All teachers of ELLS will be provided with either in school our out of school professional development on ESL to support ELLs in mastering the Common Core Learning Standards. Professional development provided by the school will include the use of research based ESL strategies in the classroom, Universal Design for Learning strategies in order to make content comprehensible for all learners, and language targets and language development for ELLs. When planning units of study and individual lessons, teachers of ELLs will receive support in how to help ELL students engage in and master the Common Core Learning Standards. ESL teachers will also meet and study literature on teaching ELLs and engage in inquiry study in their classrooms. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. For the new school year 2018-2019 we are projecting to have 3 kindergarten, 2 first grade, 2 second grade, 2 Third grade and 1 12:1 bridge class. We provide social emotional lesson and activities to assist all students with their responsive and expressive development. The professional development committee will meet in September and plan a PD calendar for the year to ensure that professional development for all teachers in terms of how to support the ELLs in their classroom is scheduled. Sign in sheet will serve as documentation of the workshops. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? During weekly parental engagement time and common planning time the teachers analyze language data and contact the parents on a consistent basis. The Translation and Interpretation unit is utilized with parents who are in need of translation services. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. P.S. 481 has conducted a survey to identify the needs of workshops that the parents would like to partake in. The PA also assists with identifying the needs of parents to create programs and workshops. The PA holds meeting both during the school day and evening to accommodate parents' work schedule. The Translation and Interpretation unit is utilized with parents who are in need of translation services to provide notification of meetings. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. 2018-19 CEP 61  2018-19 CEP 62 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Katiria Rojas, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 63  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: The Steambridge School School DBN: 11X481 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Katiria Rojas Title Principal Dayne Mclean Assistant Principal N/A Parent Coordinator Josefina Rodriguez ENL/Bilingual Teacher N/A Parent Josefina Rodriguez Teacher/Subject Area N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Wladimir Pierre N/a Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other n/a Other n/a Other n/a Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 6/29/2018 6/29/2018 N/A 6/29/2018 N/A 6/29/2018 N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A n/a N/a n/a N/a 2018-19 CEP 64  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 11X481 School Name: The STEAM Bridge School Superintendent: Meisha Porter The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (Josefina) Rodriguez ENL Teacher yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. If the HLIS indicates that the child uses a language other than English at home, he or she is administered an English proficiency test, NYSITELL after the interview between the child and pedagogue suggests that the student may require language support. Once the proficiency level is identified, the parent will receive an entitlement or non-entitlement letter for ELL services. The parent is then invited to the school to view the Parent Orientation Video and complete a program selection form as well as a parent survey. Currently, there are Spanish speaking pedagogues available to translate. The NYC Department of Education Translation and Interpretation Unit will be utilized to communicate with families where English or Spanish is not the home language. The school will maintain a current record of the primary language of each parent which will be maintained in ATS as well as on the student emergency card. 2018-19 CEP 65  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Spanish Arabic N/A n/a n/a English Spanish Arabic n/a n/a n/a English Spanish Arabic n/a n/a n/a English Spanish Arabic n/a n/a n/a TBD n/a n/a n/a 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. The documents that the school typically distributes each year that requires translation are the Parent handbook which is provided to the parents in September. Additionally, the parents receive a monthly newsletter which includes upcoming events that is translated. The school provides Parent Association election procedure information and election dates which is translated to the parents. All parent workshop, training opportunities and family/guardian events sent communicated to parents are translated. Sept - June Use translation services Spanish speaking pedagogues available to translate. n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a 2018-19 CEP 66  n/a n/a n/a 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? On August 29th a Welcome Picnic will be held for parents. Back to school night for parents to meet the teachers and provide curriculum overview. Parents will participate in workshops throughout the year. Additionally, the principal, teachers, staff members and PA will host workshops and activities to foster collaboration. n/a n/a n/a Sept. - June n/a n/a n/a Translation Services Spanish speaking pedagogues available to translate n/a n/a n/a 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. P.S 481 has bilingual personnel and parents that would assist with school's communication to reach families in the event of a school emergency. In addition, many of our teachers use Remind App to get in contact with parents. Parents also receive the brochure Parent's Guide to Language Access. Staff and teachers are trained on how to use the Over-the-Phone Interpretation Services. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. During September 2018, teachers will receive a copy of the Chancellor's Regulation A-633 and administration will present the key components. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services 2018-19 CEP 67  Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) At the beginning of our school year, P.S 481 survey parents to find out if they need interpreter during any school event including parental engagement. We have onside staff and parents available to interpreter or translate signage, brochures, flyers and letters shared with parents. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? PS 481 will gather feedback through a parent survey to gather informative feedback on the quality of translated services as well as their satisfaction with the availability of the services. 2018-19 CEP 68 
