2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 11X498 School Name: PS/MS 11X498 - VAN NEST ACADEMY Principal: CAROL ANN GILLIGAN 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: PS/MS 498 The Van Nest Academy 321100010498 School Number (DBN): 11X498 BEDS Code: Grades Served: K-8 School Address: 1640 Bronxdale Avenue Phone Number: 7184093001 Fax: 7184093002 School Contact Person: Carol Ann Gilligan Email Address: Cgillig2@schools.nyc.gov Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Carol Ann Gilligan Anne McConville Parents’ Association President: Tricia Madsen SLT Chairperson: Annie McConville Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Lily Chan-Santiago N/A N/A District Information Geographical District: 11 Superintendent: MeishaRoss-Porter Superintendent’s Office Address: PS 121 2750 Throop Bronx, NY 10469 Superintendent’s Email Address: MRoss@schools.nyc.gov Phone Number: 718-519-2647 Fax: 718-519-2646 Field Support Center (FSC) FSC: Bronx Executive Director’s Office Address: Executive Director: 1 FordhamPlaza, Bronx, NY 10458 and 1230 ZeregaAve, Bronx, 10462 Jose Ruiz Executive Director’s Email Address: JRuiz2@schools.nyc.gov Phone Number: 7188287776 Fax: 7188286280 2018-19 CEP 3  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Carol Ann Gilligan Anne McConville Patricia Madsen Lily Chan-Santiago Lily Chan-Santiago Jessica Rivas Tania Piarulli Tina Alessandro Jason McConnell Cate McNamee *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/Teacher Member/ Teacher 2018-19 CEP 4  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/ Teacher Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 5  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 6  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 7  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? PS/MS 498 Mission Statement Mission Statement: 2018-19 CEP 8  The Van Nest Academy is a community of HEROES* and life-long learners who work together to develop our students into exemplary, critically-thinking citizens, positively impacting our society for a brighter future…...globally, nationally, locally and personally. *H-helping others E-engaging in learning R-respecting all people and property O-organized E-everyday responsible S- safe, first and always Vision: We at VNA are dedicated to cultivating a community of proficient readers and writers across ALL content areas, by creating increased opportunities for students to consistently validate opinions, both orally and in writing, read rigorous text closely, use academic vocabulary in multiple settings, cull data and relevant information from multiple sources to draw valid conclusions, and, in a methodical manner, make their thinking visible. We will also shape generations of problem solvers who confidently dissect real world tasks, both independently and collaboratively, and who can cohesively express themselves in a high school, college and career setting. The core of our philosophy here at The Van Nest Academy (VNA) is the pursuit of academic excellence and the abiding belief and expectation that every child can and must succeed. All staff within our learning community share a common goal for our students: to create joyful, lifelong learners who succeed academically and who are confident, caring and knowledgeable about him/herself and our community 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. The primary goal of our school is to produce public health-minded citizen scientists who reflect the values of our “Learn and Serve” philosophy. Recognizing that environmental factors influence 85 out of the 102 categories of diseases and injuries listed in The World Health Report, The Van Nest Academy will provide a rigorous and relevant inquiry-based education in Environmental Health Sciences to create students who are problem solvers, armed with the critical thinking, research and collaborative skills and knowledge required to recognize and overcome challenges both locally and globally. Our close partnerships with Urban Advantage, Operation Explore, NY Botanical Garden and Bronx River Alliance will provide rich opportunities for students to work closely with medical and environmental education staff in researching the history, causes and impact of specific health issues within the community. With the school wide availability of a wide range of technological tools, students will engage in dynamic instruction designed to empower them as learners. Technology will not be taught in isolation but will be infused throughout all lessons to model its use as a medium for learning and accessing knowledge, a tool which makes life and work easier, and an instrument to help solve problems. What We Do Well at VNA 2018-19 CEP 9  The Van Nest Academy focuses on providing an outstanding academic program, an inclusive environment and a unique experience in collaborating with local medical and environmental education facilities. In working with real world scientists both in the classroom and in their own workplace, students will be provided role models to encourage them to become creative problem solvers, insightful leaders and responsible citizens who will thrive in our ever-changing world. In addition to a rigorous curriculum in Literacy, Mathematics, Science and Social Studies, VNA students will participate in an Education through Music (ETM) General Music & Band Program and Dancing Classrooms Ballroom Dancing Program. VNA students receive weekly Visual Arts instruction, learning the ART of observation and communication through various media, and receive regular physical education and health instruction to support our exploration of local community medical conditions and the environmental factors contributing to them. Our partners, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, The NY Botanical Garden and the Bronx River Alliance assist us in providing rich, hands-on and meaningful experiences for our children. All classroom teachers model the full integration and use of technology in the classroom as a tool for all students to access information, solve problems, organize data and share knowledge with others. This well-rounded education attained in our school community is the foundation for our children’s future success in life. To solidify our sense of community at The Van Nest Academy, we continually strive to cultivate a very active role with parents as our learning partners, hosting monthly grade celebrations of student work, parent workshops, art gallery walks of our students' masterpieces and frequent field trips with parent chaperons to model and introduce the rich resources available to our students and families for experiential learning within the tri-state area. Aside from the traditional communication we provide parents (progress reports, school website, conferences) and the events we host for families to celebrate our successes, learnings and milestones, we have made our grading of student work transparent by utilizing Skedula/Pupil path to communicate all grades, test and attendance data with parents and students directly via internet or app. Based on continuous feedback in surveys and meetings with parents, students and teachers, since opening VNA has set a very high bar for student success and equally high expectations for all members of the community. This is inherent in the school culture we have created and is coherent in all aspects of school-wide decision making. For students to understand the high expectations, the staff and parents are held to the same standards and share the same vision for student success. Since opening the school in 2010, our phone message you hear when you call the school is, “At VNA, our students are High School ready, College bound and Career –oriented.” Our school logo has a quote from Paul Hawken that says, “You are brilliant and the Earth is Hiring!” to convey the efforts expended on each and every child to make them honest, hard-working citizens that are on an exemplary career path, one that hopefully provides some service to the community. The creation of and continued successes of our Van Nest Academy (VNA) school community is directly attributable to the strong culture of shared responsibility that has developed and matured over the last 6 years since our opening. We share a common vision that student achievement has a direct relationship with clear goals, high expectations for staff, students and parents alike, and consistently open lines of communication among all constituents in the school community. Starting in the Spring of 2016, our school community worked together to 2018-19 CEP 10  revise and refresh our school's instructional focus. Through that work we have strengthened the school's common vision, mission, beliefs and instructional focus (as outlined above). Our School-wide Instructional Focus is: IF we plan for and provide daily, rigorous opportunities for students to conference with one another and their teachers about their reading, writing and problem solving, reinforcing that they communicate their progress and justify their thinking to others, THEN students will be more engaged in their learning in ALL subject areas and have a full stake in their own improved academic performance. Since opening in 2010, VNA has embraced the shifts of the Common Core Learning Standards and teacher teams have worked as a school community to refine our curriculum, teaching practices and academic tasks to reflect that change. Changes in curriculum development and the purchase of curricular materials have been driven by consensus decision making. Grade teams have researched options and efficacy, provided opinions and have effected change. The Unique Features of VNA Worth Mentioning · VNA was ranked the #1 Elementary School in the Bronx on a parent opinion website based on our student achievement data from 2014. · We have an Education Through Music program providing K-8 access to high-quality music instruction on a weekly basis · We offer a trimester of Dancing Classrooms Ballroom Dancing program for 4th and 8th graders to supplement our Arts and Fitness program. This is made possible by BOOST money from Senator Klein. · All students receive PE, Art, Music, and Health on a weekly basis. The Arts and teaching of Healthy Habits are important to our mission. · Monthly celebrations of student work are calendared by each grade inviting parents to come share what we are learning or have accomplished. · Our school website www.498vanestacademy.org has been up and running for 6 years now and is very successful in disseminating school news and class information (HW) quickly. Parent communication is optimized. ' We added Pupil Path as an additional means by which to instantly communicate K-8 grades, student progress and attendance data to parents and students. · Our art teacher provides interdisciplinary K-8 visual arts instruction and is an excellent collaborator with teacher teams. All artwork has a reading and writing component and is tied somehow to another discipline. One grade each month showcases their work in our Art Gallery on the second floor and parents are invited to attend. · Our parent coordinator piggybacks off the Art Gallery walks and invites the same grade parents to attend Literacy or Math workshops to improve their ability to help their children study at home. 2018-19 CEP 11  · At VNA we are all EVERYDAY HEROES!!!- PBIS Expectations are indoctrinated and positive reinforcement WORKS!!! · We have an array of individual student rewards and class rewards that are earned on a daily or monthly basis. 100% attendance, Eco – HEROES bucks! · Students are taught to care about others besides themselves and we participate in many charitable events: March of Dimes, Food drives, Breast Cancer walks, Honor Flight, HERO of the Month etc. · We have the second best average daily attendance of all schools in District 11 for the 2015-2016 school year. In 2016-17, we have met our school’s goal of a 95% attendance rate. Our overall attendance rate for the 2016-2017 school year was 95%. This is due to clear expectations, positive rewards and a negative consequence in not being able to earn honor roll if attendance is poor. VNA has a strong attendance team which follows up on all absences and lateness. · We are a D75 inclusion school, partnered with our PS 176 program in our campus and have increased the number of students each year that we co-teach with D75 staff. in 2016-2017, we had students in grades K, 4, and 6th grades and they are performing as well as our general education students. General Education students in the 7th grade are also partnered with D75 students through our "Best Buddies" program designed to promote comradery and citizenship. The program is seamless and we are the richer for the partnership. - As of the Spring of 2017, VNA has been accepted as "Showcase School" for our partnership with D75 and ICahn Charter School. During the 2017-18 school year, schools throughout the NYC Department of Education will be invited to visit and learn from our on-going successful partnership. · VNA’s guidance counselors provide excellent weekly Character Education assemblies, surrounding the 6 pillars of Character Education. Values education, Respect for ALL, anti- bullying, Cyber-safety topics are covered, as well. · We maintain a highly effective system of immediate consequences for students with repeated negative behavior in single day, No HW or excessive lateness. Students are expected to stay for 50 minutes of Mandated Study Hall after school on the day in which they earned the consequence. They are required to begin their written HW. This is a valuable deterrent for undesired behavior and, coupled with our Positive Behavior Interventions and Supports, has led to a marked reduction of incidences. · VNA is honored to be a Respect for All School - VNA is part of the Department of Education College Access for All Program, Algebra for All and Urban Advantage. · Each year in November, the PTA, DFOY afterschool program and the SLT combine forces and money to serve Thanksgiving Dinner to all of our families at VNA. Additionally, with these same partners throughout the year we have pancake breakfasts, dances, Halloween Haunted House, etc. to boost morale and “give back” to the community. · We are a science focus school that is partnered with Operation Explore, Urban Advantage and Bronx River Alliance, all of which promote STEM instruction and science inquiry · VNA is a uniform school. One of our Five Elements of VNA Success is to Dress for Success. Our school colors of Green and Gold and our distinctive logo provide for a shared, collective identity among staff and students. Year 6 has seen a tremendous growth in this identity as evidenced by the exponential increase in students wearing uniforms on a daily basis and the incredible daily decrease in loaner uniforms provided. · VNA continues to have a very low OORS incidence and recidivism rate. Currently there are only 103 OORS incidences at VNA for this school year. Additionally, the places in which most of these incidences occurred were 2018-19 CEP 12  identified as needing the creation of clear expectations and the posting them in our PBIS school-wide Matrix. Most of our consequences for not being a VNA HERO are community services or mandated study hall. · Quarterly parent-teacher conferences are now STUDENT-LED conferences. All students in Grades K-8 participate in a reflection process with teachers and share their progress and goals with their parents. Changes that have brought VNA Success:  VNA staff strategically selected common core aligned, coherent curriculum (K-8), American Reading Company's 100 Book Challenge for Independent Reading and IRLA to level students for Independent Reading for K-8, Ready Gen and Zaner-Bloser Strategies for Writers for K-5 ELA Curriculum, Envision Math for K-5 Math Curriculum, Code X for 6-8 ELA Curriculum, Eureka for 6-8 Math Curriculum)  After analyzing state test data and MOTP observation data, administration and teachers noticed that high quality supports and extensions to the curricula were needed so that all learners, including ELLs, Students with Disabilities and higher performing students were appropriately engaged. IReady for math was determined to be a high quality tool that would support multiple entry points and the IRLA Foundational Toolkit for ELA. Teachers received training and time was allocated in their schedule for whole class iReady usage, as well as usage in small, targeted groups of students.  Teacher teams, when planning curriculum, utilize the Understanding By Design (UBD) backwards planning method to ensure alignment of assessments and daily learning targets to the CCLS standards identified as objectives for the unit. The template on Rubicon ATLAS curriculum mapping software was created by the school when we opened in 2010 to mimic the 3 stage UBD planning template.  Since December of 2014, teacher teams, when planning assessments in ATLAS, can now flag unit standards that are addressed by that particular assessment. A report can now be run to ascertain whether all planned standards for the unit have been addressed and assessed and it can also isolate the standards for which an assessment was not developed. This facilitates our ensuring vertical, horizontal and standards alignment.  Grade level teacher teams create and plan for a school-wide 3 part rubric to be used to assess major writing pieces in all content areas. One part of the rubric identifies the CCLS writing standards associated with the task and requires a valuation on the student’s mastery of each standard. Teacher teams, in this way, provide for further alignment to CCLS in their unit planning.  Teacher teams, with our math coach, have worked to ensure Math word problem solving strategies are now vertically aligned, yet developmentally appropriate, for students to use independently or in small groups. 2018-19 CEP 13  The Lesson Study protocol for coaching in math has been truly effective in revising academic tasks to meet the needs of students, based on data from prior exit slips or formative assessment that day. While begun as a MS initiative, it is now being used in the K-8 spectrum of teaching at VNA.  Centers in the mathematics classrooms from K to 8 are planned by using formative assessments. Based on  checks for understandings, students are grouped in leveled centers. Instructional tasks for these centers are planned based on the needs of students. In K-5, formative assessment is also used to differentiate homework. For the first year, during the 2016-2017 school year, VNA worked with New Teacher Center by identifying a mentor teacher and an administrator to attend monthly workshops focused on supporting new teachers in the school building. The mentor teacher met with the new teachers to plan and reflect on lessons, visited teachers during lesson implementation to provide feedback and conducted intervistations among teachers in order to observe best practices in specific areas of need for the mentees. The administrative cabinet met with the mentor to reflect on work completed for the month and provided feedback and next steps. In 2017-2018, the mentor teacher from 2016-2017 will be working as a full-time instructional coach. The school chose a new mentor teacher to work with new teachers in the building for the 2017-2018 school year.  Teachers in K-8 will meet at least once a week for common planning. The ELA, Math and Special Education Departments in Middle School will also meet once a week to common plan.  VNA will continue to collaborate with other K-8 schools throughout the district by meeting monthly to visit schools and provide feedback on their instructional focus. VNA will host visitors from the district in order to receive feedback and create next steps to better align our work with the instructional focus. Promotion of Higher Order Thinking Skills at VNA  Incorporation of Socratic Seminars in ELA, Science and SS in the middle school grades  Project Based Learning has been a priority to implement at the MS level, with a dedicated set of teachers sharing a common belief... It had its successful inception last year with 6th and 8th grade and is being planned this year in a single unit in 7th grade for the spring. From this model, we hope to duplicate the process and implement across all grades for at least one unit per year, slowly expanding the model. This aligns with our Belief that children learn best when they are doing!  Teachers plan a variety of discussion techniques and methods to encourage students to make their thinking visible. Staff have attended the Harvard course and have turn-keyed the strategies to make this more universal in our classrooms. During the 2016-2017 school year, teachers led a PD on the various discussion routines in the classrooms. Teachers in K-8 shared their discussion routines with their colleagues by describing or showing videos so their colleagues can expand their repertoire of discussion routines used in their classroom. In 2017-2018 teachers will refine their discussion routines and share their work with their colleagues.  Students are encouraged in K-8 to Self-Reflect and Assess (I can self-reflection sheets, student self-reflection on school-wide writing rubrics, Student-led portfolio based conferences with parents), to peer assess providing constructive feedback and to articulate their own next steps on our school wide rubrics.  Students are expected to read tough text at grade level and are taught strategies to tackle this text independently (close reading). 2018-19 CEP 14   Specificity of language in explaining ideas or in justification of opinions is promoted, both verbally and in writing. This is seen throughout K-8. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Special Populations of Students Upon Which to Focus in 2017-18: At VNA, Students With Disabilities (SWD's) and English Language Learners (Ells) are included and supported in all core instruction. We most value the integrated model of support services (as much as possible) and provide scaffolds and interventions to improve student performance. Highest achieving students are also provided additional support and tiered activities to challenge them to perform above grade level on a consistent basis (i.e. Socratic seminars, choice in additional tasks once core tasks are completed, etc.) Lowest achieving students are provided Tier 2 and 3 interventions in the form of Iready Math and IRLA Foundational Skills Toolkit. (Will reflect 2016-2017 data once received) According to our 2016-2017 cut score data, 10% of our students tested in the bottom 10% of students across the city in ELA and less than 1% of students tested in the bottom 10% of students across the city in Math. However, despite the efforts described above to provide for the needs of special populations, according to disaggregated data from the NYS Report Card from 2015-16, our SWD and ELL populations of students did not perform as well on the NYS exams as we would have liked. We moved 1 ENL student to a level 3, which constitutes 6% of the ENL population in 2015-16, this is up from 0% of ENL students performing at a level 3 or 4 in 2014-15. Students with Disabilities in ELA made no movement in 2016 staying steady at 7% proficiency (from 2015). In Math students with disabilities percent proficiency fell from 19% in 2015 to 13% in 2016. VNA will focus on these needs of these students: 2018-19 CEP 15  · Student work needs to increasingly reflect argumentative writing, with more evidence of student self-reflection and teacher self-reflection · Centers activities and use of manipulatives need to be infused in all classrooms as an effective way to provide differentiated instruction and to increase opportunities for conferencing with students. · Increased use of thinking and discussion routine · Increased student-centered teaching and student to student discussion · Cohesive rubrics, writing across the content areas, more engaging lessons as planned by teacher teams with the new core curriculum and supplements - Students will increase the number of hours spent reading and responding to grade level text. - Increased time spent conferencing with students to meet individual student needs and set goals. - Identify misconceptions (in unit plans and lesson plans) in Math in order to provided targeted instruction. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Elements of the Framework for Great Schools According to the 2016 Framework for Great Schools Report, VNA was most successful in Rigorous Instruction, Effective School Leadership and Supportive Environment. While these three elements, based on the various sources of data referenced, may have been strong points for the school, there are always ways to improve upon these areas, as noted from the Quality Review, surveys and feedback from Staff, students and parents. The element in which most of our focus this year will fall will be Rigorous Instruction. While we have made tremendous changes to curriculum and instruction to positively impact student learning over the last 5 years, the hard data does not yet support the premise that we are a predominantly proficient school. VNA will continuously strive in this area until at least 75% of our student population is performing on grade level. Of course 100% of students is the ultimate long-term goal, but 75% is the 10 year milestone to reach. 2018-19 CEP 16  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 11X498 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 0K,01,02,03,04,05,06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 636 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 14 14 24 7 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 54 37 24 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 75.0% % Attendance Rate 69.0% % Reduced Lunch 6.8% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.6% 63.5% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 16.0% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 8.25 0% 8% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 49.8% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 88% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES YES NO YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES NO NO YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A NO N/A N/A NO High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 97 97 94.2% 6.0% 22.2% 11.9% 7.4% 1.1% 6 18% 6.4 51.5% 55% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No YES YES N/A N/A YES YES YES N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 17  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. ELA Needs Assessment: According to our 2015-16 School Quality Guide metrics, reflecting the 2016 NYS ELA exam scores, our 3rd - 8th grade students had a median adjusted growth percentile of 66%. Each year our students continue to make considerable growth as compared to similarly scoring peers of the year before. Our lowest third performing students had a median adjusted growth %ile of 81%, up 7 percent from the year before. Additionally, as has occurred since opening in 2010, we continue to exceed targets in our Learning Environment Survey. Student Progress and maintaining an excellent Learning Environment are two dimensions at which our school continues to excel. While we excel in individual growth of students, there is a persisting need for improvement in student performance or % proficiency among our students in ELA. Although we have historically increased the numbers of students who perform at grade level or above each year, this past 2016-17 SY, our student performance in ELA raised slightly from 32% profiecient in 2015 to 39% proficient in 2016. There remains the need to increase proficiency in ELA each and every year until our 10 year goal of 75% proficiency is reached. Thus, a 5% percent increase in % proficiency as this year’s goal for ELA is attainable and desirable. This would result in a minimum 44% proficiency in ELA this year. In order to align our reading assessments and interventions the school purchased Independent reading Level Assessment Framework and 100 Book Challenge. During our first year of the program (2016-17) we saw students improve their reading level on average by 1.2 years, but only 13.9% of students are reading on grade level (grades K-8). As our teachers continue to learn how to create just right power goals and reading conferences, we hope to see the number of students reading on grade level increase. Math Needs Assessment: According to our 2015-16 School Quality Guide metrics, reflecting the 2016 NYS Math exam scores, our 3rd-8th grade students had a median adjusted growth percentile of 55%. Each year our students continue to make considerable growth as compared to similarly scoring peers of the year before. Our lowest third performing students had a median adjusted growth %ile of 66%, although this represents a 10%ile drop since last year. While we excel in individual growth of students, there is a persisting need for improvement in student performance or % proficiency among our students in Math. Although we have historically increased the numbers of students who perform at grade level or above each year, this past 2015-16 SY our student performance stagnated, holding 2018-19 CEP 18  steady at 36% proficiency. There remains a clear need to increase proficiency in Math each and every year until our 10 year goal of 75% proficiency is reached. Thus, a 5% percent increase in % proficiency as this year’s goal is attainable and desirable. This would result in a minimum 41% proficiency in Math next year. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June, 2018, students in grades 3-8 will demonstrate progress towards achieving mastery of state standards as measured by a 5% increase in the % proficiency (students scoring level 3 or 4) on the New York State ELA and Math exams 2018-19 CEP 19  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teacher teams will implement and administration will oversee with the assistance of grade leaders Teacher teams will implement and administration will oversee with the assistance of grade leaders Teachers will develop and utilize a standards checklist for each student per unit of study in order for students to self-assess and teachers to gauge mastery. All students Sept 2018-June 2019 All teachers, paras and students Sept 2018-June 2019 Teachers will engage in consistent vertical planning and utilization of lessons, assessments and data collection tools. Teachers will continue to utilize common school-wide rubrics to reinforce and monitor progress in literacy across all content areas. Teachers will further support the development of the 6+1 traits of writing through the employment of connected writing strategies, such as the writing process and RA/ICE Implementing the Independent Reading Level Assessment Framework (IRLA). It is an essential diagnostic and formative assessment that enables teachers to use a baseline reading level, and outline a course of remediation and, acceleration of maintenance. All classrooms from K-8 will have rotating classroom libraries with different levels for students to have access to just-right text during independent reading occurring at home or at school everyday. Teachers will conference independently and in small group with students to provide targeted differentiated instruction based from the results of the baseline. Teachers and students will use results from iReady Math Diagnostic, Strategies for Writers online resources, SchoolPace (IRLA Data), Skedula DDC data (in class assessments) and rubrics for students to both assess and provide targeted differentiated instruction based on data. They are used as baseline data sources and also employed for progress monitoring purposes (referrals and follow up to RTI, efficacy of At-risk interventions, additional data to supplement IRLA in order to show growth). Teachers regularly review data, in conjunction with other sources, to create targeted groups for intervention services, assign 2018-19 CEP 20  intervention strategies or lessons, or to prescribe enrichment work for highest achieving students. Teachers will plan increased opportunities for student independent reading, both within the classroom ( Daily Independent Reading Practice) and at home. Students will be responsible for increased reading at home. Teachers will increase the number of times that students will be provided targeted conference with their teacher. Professional development in promoting reading,writing and problem solving across the content areas will be provided by consultants, coaches, administration and teachers, themselves. Professional learning team (PLT) meetings will be used to promote data analysis and best practices. Consultants, instructional coach and math specialist will provide differentiated modelled support through "Whisper Coaching" sessions, planned and delivered with teachers and viewed by contiguous grade members. Teachers will meet regularly on Mondays and Tuesdays, as well as during preps, in both departmental and grade level teams. Teachers will be provided with regular opportunities for intervisitations. These visits will be based on data from administrative feedback and teacher self-reflections. Teachers will engage in Inquiry- based work in Teacher Teams: micro-analysis of data garnered from in-class formative and summative assessments, identify patterns and trends in gaps of understanding, connect to research- based articles and video, engage in authentic, focused discussion on needs of targeted students/student groups during their regular professional learning team (PLT) meetings. Administrators will lead teacher teams through whole-school formalized Data Dives at least 3 times per year to analyze school-wide data, discuss next steps for students, realign ourselves to our instructional focus and share best practices All Students Sept 2018-June 2019 Teachers and paras Sept 2018-June 2019 Teacher teams will implement and administration will oversee with the assistance of grade leaders Teacher teams will implement and administration will oversee with the assistance of grade leaders. Assistance from consultants and coaches will be provided Teachers and paras Sept 2018-June 2019 Teacher Teams Teachers and paras Sept 2018-June 2019 Administrators For math, Teachers will develop vertically-aligned mixed review word problems in math to reinforce close reading strategies and improve interpretation skills. Math teachers Sept 2018-June 2019 To increase proficiency in basic computation skills and math fluency, the school will incorporate and make Tier 3 math vocabulary visible, universal and celebrated. Math teachers will Institute Math Problem of the Day/ Week and leverage math competitions such as Math Olympiad, MLK Math Club Competition, Sumdog and Mathcon to promote enthusiasm for learning and increase confidence in problem solving. Teacher teams will implement and administration will oversee with the assistance of grade leaders. Assistance from consultants and coaches will be provided 2018-19 CEP 21  Math teachers will increase the opportunities for student self-assessment and peer assessment via problem solving and student-generated problems For ELA, K-5 teachers will purposefully choose and substitute Zaner-Bloser Strategies for Writers Units into the ELA courses, instead of continuing to utilize an ineffective and inferior Ready Gen writing program. K-5 Teachers July 2018-June 2019 Teachers will be provided multiple opportunities for compensated time to work in grade teams and with consultants and administrators in order to plan out the revised ELA curriculum and align the reading and writing components to the standards. This time will be offered during the summer, after school and on weekends. Teachers and administration will leverage the existing VNA pool of knowledge and expertise in content and pedagogy via monthly lesson studies and intervisitations, facilitated by administration, math coach and literacy consultant. Teachers and paras Sept 2018-June 2019 VNA will increase parent involvement and knowledge of common core standards–based math by calendaring "Math Family Nights" Parents Sept 2018-June 2019 Teacher teams will implement and administration will oversee with the assistance of grade leaders. Assistance from consultants and coaches will be provided Teacher teams will implement and administration will oversee with the assistance of grade leaders. Assistance from consultants and coaches will be provided Teachers, Administrators, Students and Parent Coordinator VNA parent coordinator will host Monthly Math and Literacy Parent Workshops Administration will continue to meet regularly with a Tier III cabinet comprised of grade leaders for purposes of needs assessments, re-orienting on Instructional focus and school wide curriculum and instruction consensus decision- making ENL teachers will provide afterschool, Saturday and February Break intervention programs for our K-8 ELLs and F-ELLs in support of English Language acquisition Teachers Sept 2018-June 2019 Administration ENL students Nov 2018-June 2019 ENL teachers 3rd-8th grade students will be provided the opportunity for enrichment/intervention in ELA and Math on a regular basis during Saturday and February Break academies as well as teacher designed after school academic programs . 3rd-8th grade students Nov 2018-May 2019 Teachers, in common planning, will improve the alignment and frequency of rigorous performance assessments and formative checks for understanding. Teachers July 2018-June 2019 Teacher teams will implement and administration will oversee with the assistance of grade leaders Teacher teams will implement and administration will 2018-19 CEP 22 Students will self-assess in K-5 via a cohesive color coding assessment system which requires teachers to assess whether students perform on grade level after each daily lesson and requires students to self-assess to determine the various differentiated groups for math games and for assigned tiered HW. Teacher teams have expanded the use of this color coding system to other subjects in order to ensure horizontal and vertical alignment of assessment. Students Sept 2018-June 2019 oversee with the assistance of grade leaders. Assistance from consultants and coaches will be provided Teacher teams will implement and administration will oversee with the assistance of grade leaders. Assistance from consultants and coaches will be provided 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We will provide families with opportunities to engage with teachers, their child and other staff members in meaningful workshops aligned to our instructional focus, curriculum and instruction and data sources. At least three times during the 2017-18 school year, teachers will plan and implement "Math Family Nights" which will be designed to mirror curriculum and instruction in the classroom and support math knowledge of families At least three times during the 2017-18 school year, teachers, with the support of other staff members, will plan and implement "Family Literacy Nights" which will focus on what parents can do at home, with the support of 100 Book Challenge Skill Cards to assist their students in reading. Opportunities to ask questions and learn what teachers do during a reading conferences will assist parents in understanding the individual needs of their child. The ENL Teachers will host parent workshops, specifically designed to support parents of ENL students in reading and math (as well as NYSESLAT readiness). At least once a month, parents will be invited into the classroom for celebrations, presentations and/or shadowing by all K-8 teachers. This will allow parents the opportunity to see what their children are doing in the classroom and/or producing as a result of their class work. 2018-19 CEP 23  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Teacher programming and use of professional activity periods reflect the focus on teacher teaming and planning. The continued purchase of Zaner-Bloser (Strategies for Writers), Rubicon Atlas, Skedula and I-Ready Math diagnostic and our brand new instructional reading program 100 Book Challenge and IRLA Assessment will reinforce the plan for action. A Staff Professional Learning Opportunities (PLO's) will occur via the purchase of educational consultant and math coach days, attendance at off-site PLO's via workshops and inter-school collaborations (requires substitute teachers), lesson studies, in-school intervisitation and learning walks (require substitutes and reprogramming), regular teacher team meetings (require creative scheduling) and use of additional half days for planning and PD (require calendar change request process through the DOE). Per session allocations will additionally be employed for planning, afterschool and Saturday PD. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A Immigrant C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. For ELA, the efficacy and impact of ongoing PD for staff and the above mentioned activities will be measured by increased student proficiency by February on the following: o daily quick writes and reading fluency checks on a weekly basis, o daily self-assessments in Ready Gen, Zaner-Bloser Strategies for Writers and Code X, o end of unit performance tasks in all subjects o IRLA o NYC ELA performance tasks (MOSL) -Beginning of Year, End of Year o Skedula DDC Exams o IRLA Foundational Toolkit o NYS ELA Exam o NYSAA Portfolio in ELA 2018-19 CEP 24  For Math, the efficacy and impact of ongoing PD and the above mentioned activities will be measured by increased student proficiency by February on the following: o daily quick checks in the K-5 Envision math program, o daily self-assessments in Eureka math, o topic, unit and end of unit performance tasks o student self assessment of simple math computations o i- Ready Math Instructional and Diagnostic program for K-8 (Tiers 1-3) o Math Benchmark exams o NYC Math Performance Tasks (MOSL)- Beginning of Year and End of Year o Skedula DDC Exams o NYS Math Exam - NYSAA Portfolio in Math Additionally, the above activities’ effectiveness can also be measured by the increasing evidence of highly effective teaching observed by Administrators while in classrooms. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) In ELA - daily quick writes and reading fluency checks on a weekly basis, o daily self-assessments in Ready Gen, Zaner-Bloser Strategies for Writers and Code X, o end of unit performance tasks in all subjects o i-Ready Reading Instructional and Diagnostic program for K-8 (Tiers 1-3) o IRLA o NYC ELA performance tasks (MOSL) -Beginning of Year, End of Year o Scantron Performance series in ELA o Wilson reading program and Just Words for tiers 2 and 3 interventions o NYS ELA Exam o NYSAA Portfolio in ELA In Math: - daily quick checks in the K-5 Envision math program, o daily self-assessments in CMP3 math, o topic, unit and end of unit performance tasks o student self assessment of simple math computations o i- Ready Math Instructional and Diagnostic program for K-8 (Tiers 1-3) o Math Benchmark exams o NYC Math Performance Tasks (MOSL)- Beginning of Year and End of Year o Scantron Performance series in Math o NYS Math Exam Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 25  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Van Nest Academy takes pride in our performance on the Learning Environment Survey each year for 5 years now in particular, our successes in providing a Supportive Environment for students, parents and staff rigorous instruction for our students. The majority of students feel that VNA supports and nurtures them and that school is important. However, interestingly enough, when we reflected upon the results in the survey in the section where students were asked to judge whether all, most, some or none of their peers think coming to school every day is important, only 57% of our students felt most or all of their peers felt the same way. (Will reflect 2016-2017 data once received) Similarly, when asked if they thought their peers felt it was important to pay attention in class, only 59% of students felt most of their peers thought this way. Only 46% os students felt that most of their peers felt HW is important and only 45% of students perceive that their peers in class think that homework is important. Only 72% of the students felt that most of their peers try hard to get good grades. Why?? There is a great disconnect between the average 87% of positive views on how well VNA provides a supportive environment for students and this above-mentioned poor perception that students have of their peers' valuation on education. In the same way that VNA cannot be successful without the shared vision of the entire staff and the common belief on how students learn best, VNA cannot reach its optimum performance of its students without the student population holding a common belief in the importance or relevance of school. It is not enough that individual students feel we are doing a good job in providing a supportive environment, they need to see and believe that their peers feel the same way. Common belief, common perception= Collective success!!! The entire VNA staff needs to make a shift to show all students the value of attendance, HW, getting good grades, and the relevance of learning, so that students will be prepared for college and careers. VNA staff must change student perception in order to effect change and improve student performance. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 2018-19 CEP 26  By June 2018, most students will feel that school is an important aspect of their life and that the work assigned and learning involved is relevant to their becoming good citizens, High School-Ready, College-Bound, and Career -Oriented. This will be measured by an increase in the percentage of students who feel school is relevant to their lives according to the results on the Learning Environment Survey. 2018-19 CEP 27  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). VNA community will continue to use Skedula/Pupil Path, a school management/communication system, to empower teachers, parents and students to communicate instantly and better drive instruction and learning. Teachers share day to day grades, homework, events and socio-emotional well being of a student. Administration will continue to meet with the Tier III Cabinet, made up of a constituent of teachers from all content areas and grades (including special education) to help inform school wide decisions and act as a liaison to the greater teacher community. Absence monitoring done by teachers and school aides daily. School aides make daily calls to verify student's absence. Parent outreach is made for excessive absences and to develop a plan for student's attendance improvement. Response to Intervention (RTI) teams will meet to support students in accessing the curriculum by providing Tier I, II,and III interventions. Character Education Assembly -students attend weekly assemblies focusing on a character trait that students will demonstrate for the month throughout month. Counselors will use Success Highways Program with students to teach he importance of learning, increase student self-motivation and to provide staff and family with concrete data on the underlying issues with which students are dealing that may impact their academic achievement. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers, parents and students Sept 2018 - June 2019 Administration, teachers, parents and students Teachers Sept.2018- June 2019 Administration Parents and students Sept.2018- June 2019 Teachers, Administration and staff Students Students Sept.2018- June 2019 Sept.2018- June 2019 Teachers, Administration and staff Teachers, Administration and staff Students Sept.2018- June 2019 Guidance Counselors Continued partnership with College Access for All and The Teachers and Writers Collaborative to support students in understanding their potential college journey and application process. Teachers will incorporate into units and daily lessons real-world tasks and problems designed to garner interest, to engage students in activities and information they deem important to learn and to have students make connections to their own experiences. Students and Teachers January 2018-June 2019 7th Grade Teachers and students. Teachers Sept.2018- June 2019 Teacher teams will implement and administration will oversee with the assistance of grade 2018-19 CEP 28 Teachers will provide more opportunities for student-student discussion in lessons in order for students to engage in inquiry work, have more choice and voice in what is learned and feel more vested in the course that lessons take. Teachers Sept.2018- June 2019 Teachers will incorporate more field trips, whether virtual or real, to encourage the relevance of learning certain concepts. Teachers Sept. 2018-June 2019 leaders. Assistance from consultants and coaches will be provided Teacher teams will implement and administration will oversee with the assistance of grade leaders. Assistance from consultants and coaches will be provided Teacher teams will implement and administration will oversee with the assistance of grade leaders. Assistance from consultants and coaches will be provided 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. All teachers will use PupilPath and the VNA School Web Site to communicate clear academic expectations, post homework and major projects and as well as invite students to access and complete homework digitally. The parent coordinator will assist in ensuring all parents have access to PupilPath in order to communicated with the school digitally. By October 2018, all parents will have the chance to log onto PupilPath with their child (at the meet the teacher night) in order to set up families for success in using the PupikPath system. Teachers and other staff members will communicate throughout the year using PupilPath. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Teacher programming and use of professional activity periods reflect the focus on small group instruction in order to show all students the value of attendance, HW, getting good grades, and the relevance of learning, 2018-19 CEP 29  so that students will be prepared for college and careers. Homeroom teachers will provide students with explicit instruction in organizational skills, use of planner and other VNA system and structures. The TWO Guidance Counselors will be programmed to provide weekly character education assemblies to all students K-8. The 7th Grade teacher team will work closely with the Teachers and Writers Collaborative to create a comprehensive unit of study around the pillars of College Access for All initiative. Students will engage in narrative writing focused on the general college application (personal statement). Homeroom teachers will have increased accountability and assist in attendance monitoring, grade monitoring, organizational skills development, response to intervention and increasing students' awareness of academic needs. Certain, high need students, will also have increased support of a check-in - check-out system via the homeroom teacher. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February school wide student survey based on questions from Learning Environment survey will reveal progress towards a change in student perception of education at VNA *Teachers tracking students homework and daily assignments on Skedula *Most, if not all, parents creating a parent account on Skedula to communicate *Communication with parents through Skedula missing assignments, incidents, concerns, or assignments *Monitoring and tracking students' daily attendance and school's daily overall attendance rate *Assess students in RTI at the end of an eight week cycle *Teachers reflecting on practices and making the necessary changes in Atlas to motivate students to learn Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Teachers tracking students homework and daily assignments on Skedula *Most, if not all, parents creating a parent account on Skedula to communicate *Communication with parents through Skedula missing assignments, incidents, concerns, or assignments *Monitoring and tracking students' daily attendance and school's daily overall attendance rate *Assess students in RTI at the end of an eight week cycle *Teachers reflecting on practices and making the necessary changes in Atlas to motivate students to learn Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 30  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. (Will reflect 2016-2017 data once received) According to the 2015-2016 Quality Review and 2016 Framework for Great Schools Report, an area of celebration (Well Developed on QR and 4.02 on Framework Report) was centered around the design of rigorous instruction, accessible for all learners, aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards and Instructional Shifts. This would not have been possible without teacher teams meeting on a regular basis. Teachers met weekly as Professional Learning Teams and identified an inquiry focus. Administration and teachers realized that even though the meetings, planning and implementation was successful, teachers were not analyzing data as regularly as needed to move the work forward. This realization aligns to the Quality Review suggested systems for improvement, Quality Indicator 4.2: Engage in structured professional collaborations on teams using an inquiry approach that promotes shared leadership and focuses on improved student learning. In order to effectively improve upon this work, teachers must analyze data and plan next steps for implementation. Teacher teams will engage in 6-week cycles of Professional Learning Teams (PLT). Teachers will meet with their grade team and department team for at least one cycle each. Each grade team will focus on student achievement as a direct outgrowth of the data they collect from student work in their PLT meetings. Each department team will focus on planning rigorous units and performance tasks as a direct outgrowth of the data they collect from student work in their PLT meetings. Additionally, teacher teams will meet during preparation periods, Tuesday OPW time. It was determined by administration and staff that in order to effectively build capacity by communicating and indoctrinating all faculty into the established data protocols and routines of creating and maintaining effective instruction. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified 2018-19 CEP 31  priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 100% of teaching staff will have engaged in continuous data analysis (macro and micro) , examination of student work and self-reflection on pedagogy on a regular basis. This inquiry-based work will occur during structured Grade Level and Departmental Professional Learning Team (PLT) meetings, preparation periods and Tuesday OPW time to surface gaps, share best practices, and align curriculum, instruction and assessment to the school-wide Instructional Focus and the CCLS Shifts, as measured by their attendance at assessment PD and creation of new opportunities for PD, resulting in revised end of unit assessments and an increase in student performance on all assessments. 2018-19 CEP 32  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Administration will meet weekly, as a Tier I Committee, to reflect on teacher pedagogy, student learning and identify next steps for key stakeholders that are aligned to our 2017-2018 Instructional Focus. Administration Sept 2018-June 2019 Administration will share next steps with the Tier III Committee. All teachers will meet in a Departmental PLT for six weeks in order to analyze micro and macro data to identify trends. Teachers will plan next steps around the areas of challenge and implement them before their next meeting. Teachers, Paraprofessionals and Students Sept 2018-June 2019 Teachers and Administration All teachers will meet in a Grade Level PLT for six weeks in order to analyze micro and macro data to identify trends. Teachers will plan next steps around the areas of challenge and implement them before their next meeting. Teachers, Paraprofessionals and Students Sept 2018-June 2019 Teachers and Administration 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Professional Learning teams will be transparent, publishing their minutes, agenda items and findings with the entire school community via the PLT Board near the main office. Parents are welcome to review minutes, contact teaches about their work. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Professional Development Calendar for the year- Monthly PLT Meetings Grade Level 1x per month, Departmental 1x per month. Tier I, Tier II and Tier III weekly meetings to ensure that all work is aligned to the Instructional Focus. After school per session provided for curriculum mapping. Training rate provided for special education meetings, ICT training. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant 2018-19 CEP 33  C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Minutes and Action plans derived from weekly meetings will inform administration as to focus and investigations of PLT’s. Classroom environments, daily lesson plans and lesson implementation in the classroom should reflect the team’s joint efforts to effect change in student learning across all the content areas in a grade. Observable across a grade will be: Shared graphic organizers Shared process charts Shared scaffolding strategies Shared use of technology and other resources Shared assessments- both students self-assessments and teacher assessments       Common School-wide Rubrics The impact of each of these activities will be increased student learning as measured by the formative and summative assessments listed in Goals 1 and 2, as well as similar assessments in Social Studies and Science (Teacher-created and program-made). Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Observable across a grade will be: Shared graphic organizers Shared process charts Shared scaffolding strategies Shared use of technology and other resources Shared assessments- both students self-assessments and teacher assessments       Common School-wide Rubrics Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 34  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. (Will reflect 2017-2018 data once received) During the 2016 School Quality Review, it was noted that while the school leaders promoted an engaging, rigorous environment that was welcoming to all school community members, it would be important for school leaders to focus on developing teacher pedagogy from a coherent set of beliefs about how students learn best and informed by Danielson. Focusing on teacher feedback and professional development would meet the next steps prescribed by the Quality Review and directly impact the small dip in the overall proficiency on the NYS ELA and MATH exams during the 2014-15 school year. To improve student learning we must improve teaching. Holding both teachers and students to high academic standards, as articulated through Danielson, is an important next step for the school. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Throughout the 2018-2019 school year, school leaders will give all teachers targeted, regular, actionable feedback using the Danielson Framework in the TeachBoost system. Teachers and school leaders will regularly monitor goals and next steps with 100% of teachers writing goals (in Teachboost), minimally 4 times during the 2017-18 school year. School leaders will regularly monitor teacher progress and teacher made goals, creating a more open dialogue about best practices. 2018-19 CEP 35  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Continue to meet with a Tier III cabinet made up of the NTC Mentors to help inform school wide decisions and act as a liaison to the greater teacher community. The Tier III cabinet will help shape the instructional focus, create an action plan and monitor school wide decisions about curriculum and instruction, using data to inform their decisions. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Selected Teachers Administration September 2018-June 2019 Administration Members of the Tier III committee Utilize TeachBoost for teacher goal writing, regular/ actionable, teacher feedback and observations. School leaders and teachers will regularly use TeachBoost to monitor classroom practice and create goals/next steps to improve teaching and learning. School Leaders All Teachers Provide on-going, differentiate professional development for all teachers including on-site and off-site professional learning. Create a professional development calendar. Provide time for regular grade band professional learning teams and department level professional learning teams. Send teachers and other staff members to professional development opportunities offered by the Bronx Borough Center. School Leaders Teachers Professional Development Committee Beginning September 2018, with four distinct cycles of observations. Administration will be responsible for observing teachers and given actionable feedback on a regular basis. All Teachers will write and revise goals Beginning September 2018 and on-going throughout the year. Administration Teachers Implement an inter-visitation procedures and protocols aligned to teacher goals. Create teacher teams aligned to self selected goals. Create an inter-visitation protocol, which includes time for reflection with the visiting teacher, notes during the visit and next steps. Seek out visitation opportunities with other schools in the area. Consultant School Leaders Teachers Beginning November 2018 and continuing through June 2019. Consultant Administration 3b – Parent and Family Engagement 2018-19 CEP 36  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. To be determined. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Continued purchase of Teachboost to use as our feedback and observation system for both Administration and Teachers. The purchase of consultant days to assistant and plan for inter-visitations, refine the inter-visitation protocols/procedure, support teachers in their goals through in-classroom coaching, design an inter-visitation schedule and assist administration in progress monitoring of teaching. The purchase of and the knowledge gained from the off-site professional learning opportunities afforded teachers and resultant on-site sharing will also require budget allocations and schedule changes for implementation. Per session allocations will additionally be employed for the teacher team work. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. After every observation cycle (November, January, March, May), the Administration, along with the education consultant, will review next steps and teacher goals to ensure that needs are being met and professional development can be planned. The administration will also monitor teacher ratings (after every observation cycle) in individual components to ensure progress towards, rigorous, high-standards teaching and learning. Administration and teachers will use TeachBoost to run reports, look at teacher goals and monitor ratings. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. All Tech Boost and Advance data reports by Domain and component will be reviewed for progress from September, as well as personal goal achievement for teachers within Teachboost. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 37  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Based on continuous feedback in surveys and meetings with parents, students and teachers, since opening, VNA has set a very high bar for student success and equally high expectations for all members of the community. This is inherent in the school culture we have created and is coherent in all aspects of school-wide decision making. Educational Research shows there is a direct correlation between student achievement and parent involvement Efforts to communicate among parents and staff are taken very seriously at VNA and each year we strive to improve upon our strategies to ensure all constituents in the school community are aware of the events we hold, the progress of students and the expectations we set for all VNA community members. Efforts to communicate high expectations to all community members and the ways in which VNA advocates for and establishes partnerships with families for a common purpose:  Our Student Handbook, revised yearly, provide clear, comprehensive protocols and guidelines conveying the high expectations we have for pedagogy, student learning and professional contributions to our community.  Emails, memos and weekly bulletins from AP’s and Principal cohesively hold staff and families accountable for the provision of an excellent education and a safe learning environment for all students. It is a collective effort and the fact that ALL staff members are on our email distribution list, not just teachers, underlines the stake all constituents have in the success of our school.  Adults are expected to model expected behaviors of students.  Conferencing with students and parents is a consistent practice in order to provide feedback and effect changes in behaviors or understanding.  Our VNA Parent /Student handbook, Behavior contract, Parent-School Compact and CEP, revised yearly, as well as our daily updated website and Pupil Path , convey the high expectations we have for our students and parents. We revere and emulate positive behaviors, good decision making and hard work. These high expectations are also communicated via our website and Pupil Path.  Parents are invited to attend trips and actively learn with their child  Parent Engagement Time on Tuesdays utilized by teachers to formalize parent outreach   Monthly celebrations that teachers plan by grade level to celebrate student work and reinforce the rigor School Environment Survey Results- share with PTA and SLT exhibited by our CCLS-aligned curricula. Such as:  · Author Studies · Project presentations · Publishing parties 2018-19 CEP 38  · Gallery walks · Spelling Bees and Math contests · Monthly Art Gallery walk and Parent Coordinator led Parent workshops on Literacy and Math  Parents and students are expected to be on Iready each day to complete instructional sessions and check student progress: to log into Pupil Path each day to check progress; to log into VNA website and check events, info and HW.  Orientation for 6th and K parents and students every August is differentiated for separate breakout sessions. VNA expectations are indoctrinated.  K screening in June for incoming K students- complete developmental multi- modal assessments  Parents are expected to contribute a minimum of funds to the PTA and are recognized by a wall of fame for all donors.  Parents are expected to attend as many school functions as possible. Attendance is tracked and in June, parents are provided raffle tickets equal to the number of events they attended. The Raffles are for prizes provided by our PTA and school funds and via donation.  College and Career Week- activities in assemblies, teachers boast about their alma maters and all dress and display College logos and colors. Visitors come in and speak at assemblies. Message: every VNA student is expected to attend College.  VNA celebrates students who have achieved honor roll or principal's list each marking period. Honor Roll is made to be very prestigious and something to aspire to as one must have excellent grades, no lateness (minimal), 95% attendance and good conduct. This is the first year we hosted our VNA Honor Society Induction Ceremony. It is sustainable for every marking period and as we have done annually, we will still host our EOY awards ceremonies by grade to celebrate year-long excellence  VNA is consistently maintaining an attendance rate above 95%… 96.2% Year to Date attendance rate Room for Improvement in Building Strong Family-Community Ties at VNA While the Learning Environment surveys consistently show each year that students, teachers and parents feel our curriculum and teaching are rigorous, that we have excellent communication and high expectations for students and staff, our own data collection tracking Parent attendance and involvement has shown that we continue to struggle with parent attendance at school functions, whether school organized or PTA organized. Based on the data collected from our event sign-in sheets, despite the increased number of parent events held this past year, there was a decrease in parent participation in PTA meetings, as well as middle school functions. This correlated to an increased disconnect by some middle school parents as to the status of their children’s academic progress and a decrease in the number of middle school parents in the role of involved partners in their child’s education, despite our efforts to constantly include them. After improving upon advertising this year and last in paper, website, phone calls, calendars, etc. communication sources, and adding the new Pupil Path software for internet gradebook and messaging we, as an SLT and school community, came to the realization that we need to entice more families into the building and keep them here for worthwhile school events that will benefit their learning as adults and parents within our school community. If we want to increase our parent partnership, there has to be increased understanding as to the value of their participation. As of now, most parents on an average only participate in 4 or less activities during the year, including the 4 P/T conferences and 2 concerts. SLT, PTA and staff have committed to an even greater focus this coming year on strengthening family and community ties at VNA across all K-8 grades. Part 2 – Annual Goal 2018-19 CEP 39  Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, family and student engagement in all school activities (academic, informational, cultural and those promoting social-emotional well-being) will be dramatically improved as evidenced by 75% of our parents having attended at least 6 or more school-generated events. Of particular importance is increasing the number of events that Middle School parents attend with/for their children. 2018-19 CEP 40  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Parents will be asked to participate in occasional internal surveys from the PTA to assure customer satisfaction and loyalty Parents Sept 2018- June 2019 PTA, PC and admin PTA Meetings will continue to be offered twice a month on the same day, in the AM and PM, so as to accommodate varied parent and teacher schedules. PTA Heroes of the Month awards will be provided Parents will hand out reminder flyers on the morning of the PTA meetings and will rotate the job All PTA events, as well as school events will now be communicated via Pupil Path messaging, as well as through the VNA website and calendar, the hard copy calendar, flyers and email blast. Cheerleaders will assist the morning of the PTA meetings to get parents into the building 8th graders will, as part of their new community service requirement, provide child care in the cafeteria during PTA meetings (supervised by an adult) Teachers and staff will increase the number of monthly parent invitations to classroom or grade functions/celebrations, including our community dinners, art gallery walks, math, science and ELA presentations, workshops and Community Read Aloud days Each class will request volunteers for Class Parents/Learning partners in order to leverage the assistance of willing and able parents Our parent coordinator will quantify and track all parent participation on an excel spreadsheet, allowing for easy monitoring of progress towards goal and for the acknowledgment Besides the continued use of our school website from Echalk, VNA has now replaced our online grading system in 5th-8th with a K-8th grade Skedula online gradebook that parents access through Pupil path Parents and Teachers Sept 2018- June 2019 PTA Parents Sept 2018- June 2019 Teachers Parents Sept 2018- June 2019 Teachers Parents Sept 2018- June 2019 Parent Coordinator and PTA Whole school community Sept 2018- June 2019 Teachers and administration Leverage time provided by the September and May additions to Evening Parent Conferences to empower students to lead their Parents and Students Sept 2018- June 2019 Teachers and administration 2018-19 CEP 41 own portfolio presentations to the parents. Student-led conferences will dominate this year's model in P/T conferences. VNA will keep a chaperone book in the lobby for all trip chaperones to sign up in order to recognize them for their volunteering by giving them extra raffle chances at our end of year PTA Meeting Raffle night. If a parent comes to the PTA meetings or the parent workshops offered by the school or PC, they will immediately earn a Free No HW pass for their child. In this way, students will put pressure on parents to attend, whether MS or Elementary. PTA will purchase planners for all 3rd-8th grade students to improve executive functions and to communicate HW, deadlines and events to students and parents Parents Sept 2018- June 2019 Administration Parents and Students Sept 2018- June 2019 PTA and PC Parents and Students Sept 2018- June 2019 PTA, Teachers and administration 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable.  In support of our goal to increase the attendance (K-8) in parent activities, we will seek the assistance of some of our community based organizations. Urban advantage will provide free access to NYC museums and zoos for weekend visits by families and field trips, DFOY (our after school program) will assist VNA staff members in implementing after school activities workshops and events. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Parent coordinator and PTA will work more closely this year so that data can be more effectively analyzed and tracked for adjustments to plan. Leverage Tuesday OPW time of teachers for more parent phone calls, meeting and publicizing of upcoming events via email, flyer, website, calendar and pupil path Space and funds for our new PTA executive board will need to be provided in order for them to have multiple meetings a month (permits, supervisor, etc.) General School fund monies will be utilized for rewards to students Persession funding for afterschool workshops provided by teachers and staff Continued purchase of Echalk school website, now incorporating new purchase of Skedula/Pupil Path Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A SIG X PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Data from Parent sign-ins from all activities will be entered on a regular basis into a spreadsheet tracking activities and attendance. The number of activities grade teams offer, as well as parent participation will be analyzed and monitored for opportunities for improvement. 2018-19 CEP 42  Three times through out the year (December, March and June) stats on parent involvement will be shared on our school website. Students with parents that have attended 3 or more activities between these benchmark times will receive free HW passes. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Data from Parent sign-ins from all activities will be entered on a regular basis into a spreadsheet tracking activities and attendance. The number of activities grade teams offer, as well as parent participation will be analyzed and monitored for opportunities for improvement. Three times through out the year (December, March and June) stats on parent involvement will be shared on our school website. Students with parents that have attended 3 or more activities between these benchmark times will receive free HW passes. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 43 Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) ● IRLA Fundations/Wilson/Just Words and Ready Gen Phonics ● Additional Guided Reading ● Paired reading ● Interactive writing and close reading Speech support - Independent Reading -After School academic help (varying grades) ● Pearson Envision Math Program Reteaching lessons K-5 ● EurekaMath Reteaching Skills lessons, grades 6-8 ● I-Ready Math Instruction and Diagnostic Program ● Math tutoring by teacher - After school academic program in varying grades ● Independent ● Small group and One-to-one ● Small group and one-to-one ● One-to –one ● Independent ● Whole group, small ● Small group and one-to-one ● Small group and one-to-one ● Small group and one-to-one ● Independent ● Small group and one-to-one ● During school and at home ● During school ● During school ● During school ● During school ● During school, and Saturdays ● Before school and after school ● During School ● During School ● During School ● During School and at home ● Afterschool and Saturdays Use of data from: - NYS exams; -IRLA assessments -Teacher observation reports -IRLA Strategies for Writers data -Pre-tests All utilized by RTI teams to target specific students for AIS Use of data from: - NYS exams; -Envision and Eureka assessments -Teacher observation reports -Iready Diagnostics -Pre-tests All utilized by RTI teams to target 2018-19 CEP 44  - Tier II and III Interventions ● Ready Gen K-5 ELA close reading of non-fiction and Argumentative writing ●MS World Cultures and American History integration within ELA curriculum ● Independent ● Small group ●During school ●Whole class and small group ● Whole class and small group ● During school ● During School At-risk counseling provided by guidance counselors and social worker 1-2x/week Small group and one-to-one During School Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) specific students for AIS Use of data from: - NYS exams; -IRLA -Teacher observation reports -Iready Diagnostics -Pre-tests All utilized by RTI teams to target specific students for AIS Use of data from: - NYS exams; -IRLA -Teacher observation reports -Pre-tests All utilized by RTI teams to target specific students for AIS Use of data from: - Success Highways At-Risk assessment for 4 th and 6 th graders - Teacher observations and recommendation -OORS data -SWIS referral data to determine Tier 2 2018-19 CEP 45  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 7 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population.  Our Parent Coordinator and Guidance Counselors will make outreach to parents to gauge if additional monetary assistance is needed that can be funded by PTA, STH funds or GSF funds (i.e. food, clothing for uniforms, school materials/supplies and field trip opportunities). The goal is to level the playing field and to make sure students are not excluded from participation in all academic and non-academic school activities/ functions.  We can provide additional time before and after school for STH’s to complete HW in a secure environment  Peer mentoring/buddy/big brother/ sister program will be essential for these students and will be provided by staff, peers and by leveraging our afterschool program resources. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 46  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 CEP 47  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Recruitment: ● Administrative staff regularly attends hiring fairs to identify and recruit highly-qualified teachers. ● Use of data in Teacher Finder and in Open Market system to recruit highly-qualified teachers to 18D interview process. ● Requirement of a writing sample and demo lesson of all applicants ● Utilization of a hiring team of current teaching staff and administrators to vet resumes, create questions and interview applicants in order to leverage a wide range of experience and knowledge in the selection process. Retention: ● The Payroll secretary will work closely with the Bronx FSC HR point person to ensure that non-HQT meet all required documentation and assessment deadlines. ● Administration will provide support to assure satisfactory lesson planning and implementation of all teachers ● If teachers are not highly qualified, Title 1 monies will be utilized to supplement costs for coursework and professional development of such staff in order to become HQ. Assignments: ● Teachers are assigned to positions which maximize their effectiveness with students, taking into account experience/qualifications, level of comfort, preference, past performance, programming needs and flexibility of programming due to certifications. Support: ● NTC Mentors are assigned to support new, struggling and un-qualified teachers. ● Professional development (both onsite and offsite) and coursework in the license area, Literacy across the content areas, CIE and Danielson provided to teachers to improve teaching efficacy. ● Intervisitations among colleagues within the school and with other schools is encouraged and scheduled. ● Educational Consultants hired to provide ongoing in-classroom support in modeling, co-teaching and workshops on targeted areas of need. ● Math coaches work with MS and Elementary math teachers on a monthly basis Purchase of high quality curricular materials, as determined by joint administrator/teacher review and request 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development 2018-19 CEP 48  Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). ● Staff provided off-site and on-site professional development by educational consultants in ELA, Math, technology, special education, strategies for struggling learners, collaborative team teaching, ESL support, Guidance and YD, lesson planning, improving student engagement, curriculum planning ● Principals and assistant principals attend regular PD through the network and the CSA to improve leadership, effective observation and feedback process, use of data to drive instruction, community building, and effective management of resources. Parent coordinator, guidance counselors and support staff are also provided on and off site PD through the district and network to improve parent and student relations, increase productivity and improve compliance with regulations. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). ● June screening process to meet parents and students and provide holistic assessment of student developmental and academic status prior to attending Kindergarten in the Fall ● K and 6 th grade orientation for both parents and students to provide opportunity to become acclimated to staff, classroom and buildings and to orientate students and parents in vision, curricular expectations and procedures of school - School implementation team and RTI team reviews assessments and any IEP’s of incoming K’s and 6 th graders to strategically plan interventions, staffing and materials for students to meet individualized needs 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. ● Teachers or administration bring possible assessments to grade/faculty conference, common planning or PLT meetings. ● Overview provided by either consultant, admin or teacher 2018-19 CEP 49  ● Determination made by teachers and administration dependent upon intent of assessment and for which purpose the data collected will fill. Validity of data is considered, reputation of usefulness from other schools and colleagues, facility of use – both in administration, scoring input and analysis of data. ● Multiple forms of assessment sought and implemented to provide a wide variety of data points encompassing multiple modes of learning. - Peer PD provided by teachers/for teachers, consultants brought in to provide on-site PD and Administration provides ongoing support in proper implementation, scoring and use of data to drive instructional planning. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) X X X Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 444,757 0 12,366 0 4,143,062 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used 2018-19 CEP 50  conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 51  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy PS/MS 498X The Van Nest Academy for Environmental Health Sciences & Technology 1640 Bronxdale Avenue Bronx, NY 10462 Ph.(718) 409-3001 Fax (718)409-3002 Carol Ann Gilligan, Principal Ann Reynolds, Assistant Principal Melanie Marino, Assistant Principal Megan Gundogdu, Assistant Principal Title I Parent Involvement Policy and Parent-School Compact for PS/MS 498X Revised 12/2015 Section I: Title I Parent Involvement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. PS/MS 498X, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. This Parent Involvement Policy was updated in __December, 2014 by the VNA School Leadership Team and will be updated once again in the Fall of 2015. This document will be distributed to the school community in __January, 2015_ and will be available on file in the Parent Coordinator’s office. 2018-19 CEP 52  A copy of the final version of this policy will also be submitted to the Office of School Improvement as an attachment to the school’s CEP and filed with DFCE. PS/MS 498X will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students 1. providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level (e.g., literacy, math, science, social studies and use of technology); 2. providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; 3. fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can successfully support and monitor their child’s progress; 4. providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 5. sharing information about school and parent-related programs, meetings and other activities in a format and in languages that parents can understand; 6. providing opportunities for school staff, with the assistance of parents, to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural awareness in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of our school community; PS/MS 498X’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. Our school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents and the School Leadership Team (SLT) to improve the academic quality of our school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. Parental Involvement and School Quality In developing the PS/MS 498X Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent-Teacher Association, as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, PS/MS 498X will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to schools to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in our Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent/Teacher Association and Title I Parent Advisory Council. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend our school and will work to ensure that our school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the Division of Family and Community Engagement (DFCE); 2018-19 CEP 53  ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations, literacy, CCLS, accessing community and support services, and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system (e.g. ARIS,ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Guide, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report;) ● host the required Title I Parent Annual Meeting on or before February 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; ● schedule additional parent meetings (e.g. meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed. PS/MS 498X will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Open School Week and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent/Teacher Association and Title I Parent Advisory Council; ● supporting or hosting DFCE District Family Day events; ● encouraging parent use of the lending library and providing informational materials for parents. ● hosting events to support parents/guardians and families in asserting leadership in education for their children. ● encouraging more parents to become school volunteers, assisting in supervised classroom activities and school events; ● providing periodic written and verbal progress reports to inform parents of their child’s academic growth; ● providing access to all 5 th -8 th parents and students to their teachers’ online grading system (Engrade) ● providing I-Ready Instructional and Diagnostic Software in ELA and Math to provide additional class and home instruction, as well as detailed progress reports for parents and students. ● developing and distributing a monthly school calendar, email blasts and school website designed to keep parents informed about school activities; and ● providing regular written/verbal communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable, in the languages that parents can understand, including Parent-Teacher meetings; ● providing parent workshops to provide assistance in accessing the VNA school website, DOE website and parent/student online resources ● providing September and May opportunities for parents to meet with teachers and discuss curriculum and student progress, in addition to the November and March Parent Teacher Conferences. School-Parent Compact Section II: School-Parent Compact School-Parent Compact (SPC) PS/MS 498X, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: 2018-19 CEP 54 ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● celebrating and respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing and revising an existing curriculum aligned to CCLS; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; and ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting a minimum of 4 parent-teacher conferences each year during which curriculum and/or the individual child’s progress will be discussed; ● convening a Title I Parent Annual Meeting (prior to February 1 st of each school year) for all parents to inform them of the school’s Title I status, funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times to collaborate on a plan of action for student performance improvement and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities to parents of participating children in a format, and to the extent practicable, in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; and ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; ● providing updated calendar events, staff and class HW information and resources to parents via the VNA school website www.498vannestacademy.org Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● Ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to communicate with limited English speaking parents effectively; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; and ● planning monthly activities, school-wide or grade-wide, for parents during the school year (e.g. Open School Week, Family Math, ELA, SS and Science Nights, Mommy, Daddy and Me Book Club, Family Multicultural Night, ETM Concerts, Family Movie Nights, Talent Show, Columbus Day Parade, VNA is Ready to Read Week, VNA Honor Society Ceremonies, U/A Expo, Field trips, Halloween March of Dimes Parade, End Of year Awards Ceremonies, VNA Thanksgiving Dinner, Bake and Take, Dancing Classrooms Performances, Science Fair, Mother and Father’s Day Breakfasts, Plant Sales, Have Lunch With Your Child days, etc.); Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents 2018-19 CEP 55  ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents/guardians and families; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing parent workshops. Times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend; ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; and ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; Parent/Guardian Responsibilities: II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time, as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent and provide a note upon the child’s return; ● ensure that my child comes to school appropriately groomed and well rested, (set a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age); ● ensure my child comes to school prepared with necessary supplies, materials, and dressed in the required uniform, etc. ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks; ● actively monitor and encourage student use of Iready, Skedula and the VNA website ● read to/with my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television, plays video games and uses the computer for non-educational purposes and monitor the content in my child’s participation in social media (e.g. Facebook, Twitter, texting, Instagram); ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, Saturday and February learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations, the expectations of VNA HEROES and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by promptly reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies, whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent/Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups (e.g., school or district Title I Parent Advisory Councils, School or District Leadership Teams); ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; and ● participate in Parent/Teacher Conferences at least four times yearly. Student Responsibilities : III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete all homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the VNA expectations of HEROES and be responsible for my actions; ● always show respect for myself, other people and all property; ● submit all written communication between parents and the school; ● resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully, with adult assistance when needed; ● always do my best to learn and work hard towards achieving the goals set with teachers; 2018-19 CEP 56  ● come to school prepared with all necessary materials, supplies, etc.; ● wear all required uniform items on the appropriate day and NONE of the prohibited items; ● accept responsibility for all actions and consequences: ● regularly log in and use your IReady, Skedula and VNA website accounts 2018-19 CEP 57  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP 58  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: The priority of our supplemental programs for the lower grades is to enhance vocabulary and perfect reading skills for newcomers. Our rationale for choosing these students is that they make up the largest bulk of our English as a New Language Learner population and all of these students are below grade level in reading, as per the analysis of each child's Independent Reading Level Assessment (IRLA level) and observations during last school year. Our Title III group will consist of seven 1st graders, five 2nd graders, and four 3rd graders who scored mostly at entering and emerging on the NYSITELL Fall of 2017 /NYSESLAT 2017 and who performed below grade level in Math and ELA. Our former kindergarteners scored at mostly the entering and emerging levels on the NYSITELL in the fall. We also had two students who were new to the country in January 2018 and are absolute beginners. During the Spring of 2017 all of our former first graders showed growth scoring at the transitioning and expanding levels. Our two new admits this year, scored at a entering and emerging levels and require extensive assistance with vocabulary building. Our former second graders who will be in the program, scored at the transitioning level on the NYSESLAT 2017 , along with a transfer student who scored at the emerging level. The focus for these students will be phonics to strengthen reading and writing. The focus for the entire group will be strengthening students' vocabulary and phonics which will in turn enhance all four modalities (listening, speaking, reading, and writing) in all content areas (ELA/Math). In Math, we will focus primarily on problem solving strategies for understanding the academic vocabulary in word problems, utilizing math manipulatives, technology and scaffolds. We plan on using Beginning Reader's Collection (Rourke Publishing) which will help in building reading comprehension, decoding, and phonics, as well as developing academic vocabulary. The materials also include discussion practice and writing activities. Additionally, we will be using the American Reading Program (IRLA) to develop individual reading skills. Supplemental educational games with a phonics focus will also be incorporated into the lessons to make the program even more enjoyable. Through the use of promising practices in second language acquisition and targeted intervention materials, our ENL TESOL certified pedagogue and content area teacher will help build self-esteem and academic language proficiency in each student through the four modalities. Students receive instruction in a holistic, enjoyable, and comfortable environment. Moreover, content-based experiential learning activities aid in facilitating acquisition of academic language proficiency. Native Language support will be given through texts and NYU bilingual dictionaries when needed . The ratio per group is 1 teacher to 8 students. The 2 groups will be co-taught by the ENL and 2 content area teachers with the ENL teacher providing an Hour co-teaching each. The after school program will run Wednesdays(2:30-4:30) for 2 hours each from November -May. The program will be operational for a minimum of 23 sessions. Attendance will be kept on file, along with evidence of student progress. 2018-19 CEP 59  Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: This past year pedagogues from the Van Nest Academy were able to attend several professional development sessions specific to English as a New Language students. The ENL Teachers, along with classroom teachers they work closely and co-teach with, attended an ENL Summit which focused on useful strategies and resources for our ELLs. The teachers then met to discuss how this content would be helpful to strengthen progress in our ELLs. The rationale was to be able to develop a common instructional focus and a coherent school culture both during school hours and during supplemental programs. Another opportunity was provided by CEI Consultant, Marcia Charles, who hosted an ENL PD on strategies for ELLs and teaching vocabulary. Our Universal Literacy Coach, Lonna Bartosik, facilitated a PD specifically for our lower grades, on the new components of Fundations, the phonics program we will be using. Lastly, the American Reading Company has provided continuous support to all teachers on their IRLA reading program. The knowledge and strategies gained through these pds will be used throughout the program. Next year, one of our ENL teachers will be attending the monthly ELL Liaison Meetings for District 11. These workshops will be facilitated by Juan Otero and Michelle Bunay, ELL Services Coordinators and will teach best strategies for ELLs. The attending teacher will continue to turn-key the information to the other ENL teacher and fellow pedagogues who may benefit from the information. These professional developments are at no cost to the program. Several professional development single sessions will be provided by licensed pedagogues and administrators within the school during our Monday after school sessions and will each last about 60 to 75 minutes. They will be at no cost to the program. Records of agendas for professional developments and attendance sheets will be kept in the ELL Compliance Binder found in the main office and in each teacher's personal ELL binder located in the ESL classroom. We believe these will assist in the progress of our ELLs since they are strategies which maximize engagement for all students' needs. The professional developments will be used to drive instruction and improve student outcomes. We also feel that they will aid in assisting ENL students to become more proficient and fluent readers and writers. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered 2018-19 CEP 60  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Begin description here: TITLE III funds will be used to help enrich our School Wide Parent Outreach Program. We will be hosting monthly sessions on Tuesdays from 3:00pm to 3:45pm in the school library or in room 206. Sessions will run from November to May, for a total of seven workshops throughout the year. All workshops, meetings, and events will be conducted by our ENL TESOL certified teachers and will have a different monthly focus. These teachers each have a substantial amount of experience in working with ELLs and their parents. Parents will be notified in writing with a flyer, through our VNA school website, Pupilpath, and school monthly calendars. Our ENL teachers will inform and provide our parents with the correct resources needed to support our ELLs at home. The rationale for these sessions is to show parents how they may assist their children at home when school is out of session, as well as throughout the school year; aid them in being confident enough to be involved in their child’s academic progress; and help them become more aware of what is expected from their child. These will be at no extra cost to the program. The names/subjects of our workshops are as follows: • How to use computers, websites, and apps (November & February) • Helping children become better readers (December) • How health and nutrition play a role in learning(January) • Expectations and Preparing your child for the ELA/Math exams (March) • Expectations and preparing your child for the NYSESLAT(April) • Helping children transition from elementary to middle school/middle school to high school(May) We will also hold individual question and answer sessions during Parent Engagement Time to discuss any concerns regarding their child's academic progress. Parents of Title III students, as well as other parents of ELLs will be given the opportunity to participate in all sessions, by actively being engaged in discussions. Records of agendas, attendance sheets and invitations in preferred languages will be maintained in our ENL compliance binder, which will be kept in the main office and ESL classroom binders. There will be a section in the binder dedicated to parental involvement activities. Translation needs for parent will be met according to their chosen language on the Language Preference Sheet filled out during registration or parent’s current choice of communication. This is used to keep a record of our parents who will need translation services. Any correspondence between the school and the home will be made in the parent’s chosen language. Our full-time staff consists of those who will be able to translate in Italian, Spanish, Albanian, and Russian, when requested. In case our parents speak another language not mentioned, a translator will be hired from an outside agency to provide services or the translation and interpretation line will be used. Moreover, the school will provide free ESL classes to parents of our ELLs once a week in the afternoon. These classes will provide our parents with the necessary language survival skills and the ability to support their children academically. They will be taught by an ESL certified teacher and parents will have their own materials to use in class and study from at home. 2018-19 CEP 61 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 2018-19 CEP 62  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 11 School Name The Van Nest Academy Borough Bronx School Number 498 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Carol Ann Gilligan Coach ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Luciana Basile Teacher/Subject Area Guarinelly Hernandez ENL Teacher/Subject Area Related-Service Provider Yeseny Ferrer Superintendent Assistant Principal Megan Gundogdu Coach School Counselor Parent Tricia Madsen Parent Coordinator Vanessa Vallecillo Field Support Center Staff Member Other (Name and Title) C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 2 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics 2018-19 CEP 63  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 620 Total number of ELLs 40 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 6.45% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-Lang. K 1 3 4 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 14) Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? At The Van Nest Academy, the ENL teachers as well as the classroom teachers use TCRWP, I-Ready, and Sound Reading regularly, as tools to assess the early literacy skills of our ELLs. The TCRWP is administered every three months for each child. However, for our at-risk students, including ELLs, this assessment is done more regularly to monitor progress. The data from this assessment, as well as the information gained from I-Ready, provides reading levels as well as comprehension startegies which can be utilized by the students. This data is then used to create a plan of action to help students improve in reading, fluency, language acquisition, and comprehension skills. The most current data, from the end of the 2014-15 school year shows that our ELLs have made tremendous progress in the lower grades by advancing about three to six levels in reading and at least two levels for our middle school ELLs. 2018-19 CEP 64  PS/MS 498 also incorporates listening centers into all of our ELA and ENL classrooms. ELLs have priority in the use of listening centers, which helps them to build their listening skills. One example, is the incorporation of read along books on tape and cd at a student's reading level, which are used individually or in guided reading groups. The success of the ENL program for ELLs at the Van Nest Academy is also evaluated using several methods of collecting qualitative and quantitative data. For instance, the ESL teachers meet on a bi-monthly basis to assess how students are performing on the curriculum and the types of modifications needed to ensure that students can be successful in their tasks. In addition, ELA and math unit test scores are assessed on a quarterly basis to ensure that students are meeting benchmarks, which will put them on the road to success on state exams. Those students who are not on target are placed into our small group instruction periods, Saturday Academy, and February Academy. Also the ENL teachers give students a practice NYSESLAT test three times a year to monitor their progress in the four modalities. Furthermore, teacher created quizzes, rubrics, checklists, exit slips, and other authentic assessments, are used to assess students' understanding of lessons, with an emphasis on language skills taught, such as grammar and vocabulary. Self-assessments are also useful in helping students to gauge whether they understand concepts and build metacognitive skills. Finally, the ENL teachers assist the former ELLs through Integrated ENL by providing at least 90 minutes weekly in ELA or content area of need and periodic assessments to monitor growth. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? to be determined 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? To evaluate the success of our program for ELLs, the school leadership team and teachers meet on a regular basis and use the results from the quarterly assessments for the following purposes: -Appropriate grouping for all students -Developing & improving school-wide systems & curriculum that will target instruction effectively and meet the needs of all learners -Reflecting and analyzing upon authentic and alternative assessments -Providing all ELLs with hands-on, authentic and technology based learning, thus, preparing our students to become critical thinkers, problem solvers, and college and career ready. PS/MS 498 also uses the findings from our quarterly unit assessments and the previous years’ NYSESLAT, ELA, Math scores and the ELL Periodic Assessments to plan regular classroom instruction and group the ELLs according to the data results, such as listening activities in the listening center for students who show that they need assistance in this modality. Qualitative data is also used to evaluate the success of our program as needed, such as i-Ready, exit slips, teacher created assessments, observations/conferencing notes, and running records. Our primary goal is to produce public-health-minded citizens who reflect the values of our “Learn and Serve” philosophy and to provide a world-class education for every child, every day. Our mission is to graduate students who have acquired the knowledge, skills, and attitudes necessary to achieve significant career, educational, civic, and personal goals, which will enrich our society. We believe that it is critical for all students to acquire academic English and also recognize and value the importance of nurturing one of the most important resources of our district: the languages and cultures of our diverse student population. We know that a student cannot learn what he/she cannot understand. English Proficient ELLs who were mostly Spanish dominant significantly increased their level of English proficiency. Success for our program is evaluated not only through the results of the assessments such as NYSESLAT, ELA, and Math, but also through continuous authentic assessments. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? to be determined 2018-19 CEP 65  5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] We will continue to use Response to Intervention (RTI) to address students who are not making adequate language and/or academic progress and foster school improvement. RTI for ELLs will be provided by an ENL. Here at the Van Nest Academy we use student assessment data to designate reading placement for each student in the elementary school and all content area placement for middle school students. To determine a student's need for RTI, there are several factors that are taken into consideration, such as: • the number of years a student has received ENL services • English and home language literacy • ELL subgroup status - SIFE, LTE, Former ELL • Teacher or parent request/recommendation • Possibility of a disibility Using the writing prompts from Measures Of Student Learning, TCRWP, and i-Ready reading/math assessment results, we will set up reading intervention groups, or RTI tier placements, for elementary students. All students will receive Tier 1, or core, instruction. Students scoring “some risk” will be placed in Tier 2 and will receive additional targeted instruction to supplement the core instruction. Students scoring “at risk” will be placed in Tier 3, where they will receive small-group or one-on-one intensive interventions in addition to core instruction once a week. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. In analyzing the NYSITELL and NYSESLAT scores, by comparing the students' scores from the previous year, it is difficult to see whether the students have made progress since the exams and scale scores are completely different. However, we have several students who scored at a higher proficiency level from the previous year. Of our 28 1 st - 8 th grade ENL students, 18 of them are at an expanding level this year. Whereas, many of them were at an intermediate level the previous year. Moreover, five of our students reached proficiency by scoring at a commanding level. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? to be determined Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. The Van Nest Academy has a rather small ENL program due to the fact that we are a fairly new school. However, with the addition of new grades yearly, our program has expanded, and we now currently have 40 English as New Language students. The 2014-2015 school year was the first year in which we housed each grade from K-8. Students who are identified as English as a New Language Learners receive services throughout the academic year by two full time ENL teachers. Both Stand-alone and integrated instruction are implemented in our school, based on student proficiency level. Students who are at the entering, emerging, and transitioning(if needed) levels are partially serviced through stand alone instruction by an ENL teacher, in order to ensure the development of English language skills. They are also provided with integrated ENL to build English language skills through the content area in the classroom through 2018-19 CEP 66  an ENL teacher and certified content area or classroom teacher. Instructional minutes for each proficiency level are provided as per CR-Part 154.2. Students at the expanding level are only provided with integrated ENL in the content area for a total of 180 minutes per week. Former ELLs are also serviced for a minimum of 90 minutes weekly. The majority of our instruction consists of the push-in model, in order to decrease in-class instruction time lost and to promote cohesion between ENL and content instruction. These ELLs are usually grouped in heterogeneous groups and at times with native English speakers to help strengthen their English language skills. When students are pulled out, there is a possibility that they may be grouped in ungraded, heterogenous, or homogenous groups. These groups are created based on students' needs and flexibility in scheduling. Whether a push-in or pull-out model is being used, ENL Instruction is aligned to instruction in the classroom, as well as the Common Core Learning Standards and content standards. A mixture of ELA and ENL methodologies are used. Conventions of language and language needs are also applied depending on student requirements. b. TBE program. If applicable. n/a c. DL program. If applicable. n/a 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? As per CR-Part 154.2, entering and emerging ELLs are programmed for 360 minutes per week with one of the ENL teachers, 180 of those minutes being integrated ENL. Transitioning students are provided with 180 minutes of ENL weekly, with at least 90 of those minutes being done through integrated ENL, while expanding students are provided with 180 minutes of integrated ESL instruction weekly. Additionally, former ELLs are provided with a minimum of 90 minutes of either integrated or stand-alone English language instruction to assist them in transitioning. Both ENL teachers provide explicit instruction. Lessons are modeled and guided, and feedback is provided throughout. Students are then provided time to apply the newly learned skill to new situations. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. The previous year's assessments are analyzed to determine whether students are deficient in specific content areas and during scheduling this is taken into consideration. Moreover, a student's English proficiency level is taken into consideration to determine how many minutes of integrated and stand-alone ENL instruction will be given. Whether servicing during Math, Social Studies, or Science, ENL teachers collaborate with classroom/content area teachers by following content and CCLS standards. However, instruction is modified using a variety of instructional scaffolding techniques which assist the child in acquiring language, cognitive skills, and content. Using the SIOP model, TPR, cooperative learning groups, Into Through & Beyond, vocabulary building, Document Based Questions tiered by student level, visuals, repetition, activating prior knowledge, schema building, and modeling can assist teachers in the content areas to boost confidence during an ELL's second language acquisition process. Several other ways of differentiating and scaffolding in the content areas are the use of manipulatives and arrays in math, hands-on projects and experiments in science, and timelines, graphic organizer, video clips in Social Studies. These methods especially assist our visual and kinesthetic learners. ENL teachers also include language targets to their lessons to strengthen academic language acquistion. Ultimately our ENL pedagogues teach strategies to ensure success that can be applied across all content areas, in order to assist students in being prepared for exams. Native Language Support: If possible key concepts (words or phrases) are clarified in the child's L1. Currently, most of our beginner ELLs are Native Spanish speakers. They are provided with Spanish/English glossaries and are encouraged to use them when needed. We also assist English Language Learners to find native language and bilingual websites which they can use on their own when needed. Our school library also houses bilingual children's books, novels, boxed sets of books in several different languages, which ELLs are encouraged to take-out. All ENL students are taught skills which will assist them when 2018-19 CEP 67  they are not with an ENL teacher, such as, identifying cognates and using context clues for meaning. Students, and parents alike, are also provided with bilingual internet resources. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? If it is determined that a child must be tested with the NYSITELL during the first ten days of school, and a Spanish speaking child does not test proficient then they are assessed with the Spanish LAB. For beginner and intermediate ENL students, teachers may translate authentic assessments into a native language, when content knowledge is being measured. Moreover, The MOSL or Measures Of Student Learning baselines, state Math, Science, or Social Studies formal assessments may be provided in a child's native language if he/she feels stronger in that language. Since our program model is Freestanding English as a Second Language, we do not monitor Native Language Arts skills. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a. We currently have one SIFE student who has entered The Van Nest Academy from Ghana last year. Our newest enrollee tested at the advanced level on the NYSITELL in February 2015 and at emerging level on the 2015 NYSESLAT. This student has reading and math scores which are at least two years below grade level. As per her beginner level, she is receiving 360 minutes of ENL instruction weekly. The instructional plan for SIFE students consists of intensive English language development teaching social and academic language, creating a curriculum for SIFE students based on the CCSS, and concentrating on essential knowledge and skills with the collaboration of the teachers. Additionaly, we provide the following for mainstream teachers; training in ENL scaffolding techniques, common planning, and discussions to present content in ways to enable students to learn the academic material as they 'learn how to learn' and work on English proficiency. Most SIFE ELLs will need additional time and practice to learn to hear and produce sounds in English, to learn the meanings of the words used in phonics instruction, to learn the multiple combinations of letters that make the same sound, and to learn many more sight words than native English speakers need. Additional time for phonics instruction will be built into reading programs for SIFE ELLs in order to build metalinguistic foundations. We use the Rosetta Stone program in English, to increase literacy development and for English language acquisition. Sound Reading which is rooted from speech therapy and helps students develop auditory processing skills, is another web based program which may be used with SIFE students. Other programs which our SIFE students may benefit from are those which support the development of spelling, decoding, and encoding skills in a multisensory fashion such as Wilson and Just Words. SIFE students are also receiving extra support through i-Ready from ENL and content area teachers. Several intensive scaffolding strategies we use for SIFE are; visual aids, Total Physical Response, Into Through & Beyond strategy, bridging and schema building in order for students to link prior knowledge to what is being taught and to weave new information into pre-existing knowledge. Each SIFE is also paired up with a responsible classmate, with whom they could converse in their native language. This classmate will serve as an interpreter and will assist the student during times of need if the ENL teacher is not there at the time. b. Our 32 Newcomers make up the largest bulk of our ENL population. All of our k-5 students fall into this category, along with 1 student in 7 th grade. For those who have been in English as a New Language students for less than three years, we will focus on English language development and building a strong foundation through thematic units aligned to classroom curricula and visuals such as pictures, charts, graphs, timelines, Venn diagrams, and other graphic organizers. Activities revolve around vocabulary acquisition, explaining, demonstrating, drawing, repeating, rephrasing, reading, writing, and 2018-19 CEP 68  manipulating words throughout every aspect of instruction so that they may better understand the content which is being taught. The meaning of words are acquired through multiple opportunities to hear, say, read, and write the words in slightly different meaningful contexts through the contents taught in their classrooms. Teachers create these opportunties in the classroom, in order to allow for the students to effectively develop their vocabulary and grammar. Moreover, in order to reinforce the second language aquistion of newcomer ELLs, several computer based programs are used, such as Rosetta Stone, MyOn, and Sound Reading, based on their level and ability, in order to develop language, vocabulary, and content. To learn to decode words, systematic phonics instruction can be very effective in helping newcomer ELLs, even those at fairly low levels of language proficiency. Similar to SIFE students, absolute beginners may also be paired with a responsible student who will assist in interpreting. For newcomers, the constructivist and natural approaches are used in order to lower student anxiety. The use of small groups is also used to assist students in feeling more comfortable with their Basic Interpersonal Communication Skills (BICS) and begin to develop their Cognitive Academic Language Proficiency (CALP) through accountable talk. Depending on their English proficiency level, students will receive the allotted amount of minutes in stand-alone and integrated ENL as per CR-Part 154.2. c. We currently have six students who are at the developing level since they have been ELLs for 4 to 6 years. With the exception of 1 emerging level student, all of the ELLs in this group are at the expanding level. (We are awaiting to hear back from the scan center as to why one student's 2015 NYSESLAT scores did not post, even though they have record of her taking the exam.) Also, four of these students are SWDs in ICT settings and one is in a 12 to 1 to 1 setting. These students have two teachers in their classrooms at all times as well as an ENL Teacher servicing for the allotted amount of minutes. These developing ELLs receiving extension of services, are instructed through the ENL Program and those who are reading below grade levels are pulled out for Academic Intervention Services(AIS). For these students the focus is building Cognitive Academic Language Proficiency. Some hindrances amongst these students seems to be lack of comprehension skills and acquistion of Tier 2 and Tier 3 vocabulary. The ESL teacher working with this population will be teaching the same Tier 2 academic vocabulary words from the Code X reading programs that are being used across each grade. This will help the ENL students succeed in ELA and all content areas such as; Math, Science, and Social Studies. These students are also eligible to attend Saturday and February Academy. d. We currently have two Long Term ELLs who have both been receiving services for seven years. One student has tested expanding and the other is a NYSAA student who tested at the beginner level in 2014. (There was an error with this student's NYSESLAT 2015 scores) Our focus for Long Term ELLs is strengthening Tier 2 and 3 vocabulary (Code X), academic discourse, and metacognition skills so that they may learn to be aware of their mental processes which they can use to succeed. These students are also eligible to attend February and Saturday Academy. e. Former ELLs of up to two years still receive time and a half on city/state exams for the first two years after becoming proficient. They are also tested in smaller groups in separate locations. While they are in class, they also receive testing modifications and teacher created assessments across the content areas. Throughout the year, these students also receive services from an ENL Teacher for a minimum of 90 minutes weekly through either an integrated or stand-alone program, to assist them in areas of difficulty. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Seven of our LEP students are also SWDs, with four at the expanding level and three at the entering and emerging levels. Of these seven students only one is in the elementary grades. All SpEd ELLs receive special education accomodations and ENL instruction as per CR-Part 154. Our new ELA programs Ready Gen(elementary) and Code X (middle school) are grade specific and used with all subgroups. Explicit instruction is not only delivered through ELA, but also through each content that is being taught. While ESL 2018-19 CEP 69  teachers are teaching academic content and Tier 3 vocabulary, they are following content standards so that students may attain subject specific knowledge and skills. Through the use of Ready Gen and Code X, students are being immersed in the reading of fiction and nonfiction stories with teacher guidance and modeling of flow charts, graphic organizers, and writing narratives following the writing process. Every step of the way, teachers are scaffolding each lesson based on student needs and proficiency levels. By using i-Ready at least three times a week, students show improvement in reading levels by the end of the year. The results have shown that if students log in to the program for at least 5 hours a week, the students reading level improves by an entire grade. Other options of differentiation and scaffolding are also being implemented while instruction is being delivered such as; the use of graphic organizers to gather and organize ideas, talk/think alouds to build cognitive/metacognitive skills, deconstruct/recontrust to break down text for understanding, bridging and schema building by using prior knowledge to understand and make connections to new concepts and close reading strategies to help them understand the text as they read. To ensure that all ELLs with an IEP receive service, the IEPs are reviewed by the ENL teachers to make sure these students receive appropriate ENL instruction as well as an extra 90 minutes a week of ENL instruction which is given to all our former ELLs. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? At TheVan Nest Academy, ENL teachers collaborate or constantly communicate with classroom teachers for not only ELLs with disabilites, but all ELLs, to ensure IEP goals are met and English proficiency is attained within the least restrictive environment. While servicing LEP SWDs, the common core standards being taught in the classroom are also being taught whether through integrated or stand-alone services. ENL teachers have a vast instructional repertoire to assist each student's specific needs based on the CCLS and content standards as well as, data analysis, and IEP goals. Additional support for our ELLs with disabilities is provided through the use of Fundations, Wilson, and Just Words Programs, depending of age/level, to assist them with the understanding and spelling of high frequency words through phonemic awareness and repetition. We try to provide push-in services as often as possible. However, at times we must pull-out students for stand alone ESL, especially when there are conflicts in scheduling or students could benefit from a smaller setting in a different location. We are sure that all students are receiving the mandated amount of minutes based on proficiency level through stand-alone and integrated settings, as per CR-Part 153.2. Through each program, we focus on specific IEP goals for SWDs and personal goals for general ed ELLs within the least restrictive environment, whether in general ed, ICT, or 12 to 1 to1 settings. The strategies we use not only help students develop English as a second language. They also help them learn words that are not part of everyday language or Tier 3 vocabulary. The first of the six key strategies is vocabulary and language development, through which teachers introduce new concepts by discussing vocabulary words key to that concept. Exploring specific academic terms like algorithm starts a sequence of lessons on larger math concepts and builds the student’s background knowledge. The second strategy is guided interaction. With this method, teachers structure lessons so students work together to understand what they read—by listening, speaking, reading, and writing collaboratively about the academic concepts in the text. The third strategy is metacognition and authentic assessment. Rather than having students simply memorize information, teachers model and explicitly teach thinking skills (metacognition) crucial to learning new concepts. Research shows that metacognition is a critical skill for learning a second language and a skill used by highly proficient readers of any language. With authentic assessments, teachers use a variety of activities to check students’ understanding, acknowledging that students learning a second language need a variety of ways to demonstrate their understanding of concepts that are not wholly reliant on advanced language skills. The fourth strategy is explicit instruction, or direct teaching of concepts, academic language, and reading comprehension strategies needed to complete classroom tasks. 2018-19 CEP 70  The fifth strategy is the use of meaning-based context and universal themes, referring to taking something meaningful from the students’ everyday lives and using it as a springboard to interest them in academic concepts. Research shows that when students are interested in something and can connect it to their lives or cultural backgrounds they are more highly motivated and learn at a better rate. The final strategy is the use of modeling, graphic organizers, and visuals. The use of a variety of visual aids, including pictures, diagrams, and charts, helps all students—and especially ELL students—easily recognize essential information and its relationship to supporting ideas. Visuals make both the language and the content more accessible to students. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. A majority of instruction for ELLs is devoted to integrated ENL in order to build English language skills through content area instruction. Either through different co-teaching models or working in small groups within the classroom, students receive different instructional aides to support language development and retention. Listening centers, word walls, pictures with translations, graphic organizers, technology support, concept maps, glossaries, dictionaries, one to one, field trips, assessments, and native language books are used to scaffold the content area instruction of the classroom teacher as ways to increase motivation, vocabulary, and language for our ENL students. Depending on a student’s proficiency level, a portion of instruction for ELLs is devoted to stand-alone English either through pull-out or push-in services. This is in order to target language acquisition skills and vocabulary support, so that students may build the language they need to succeed in core content courses. ENL teachers use the additional materials that are provided with the programs used in Social Studies, Math, and Science specifically targeted for ELL intervention. Academic Intervention Services or RTI are also offered for our struggling ELLs to support them in their content(s) of need and in academic growth. Some SWD ELLs also receive extra assistance through a SETSS teacher as per IEP. Every week our proficient ELLs receive 90 minutes of English language support in order o help them transition into the commanding level. Also, the creation of a packet of beginning activities like colors, numbers, shapes, body parts, and survival vocabulary to increase motivation and reduce anxiety is provided to our newcomer ENL students. In the middle of the year, the ENL teachers conduct a practice test very similar to the NYSELAT in order to assess growth and develop instructional plans for the students. During the entire school year, students participate in advisories as well as clubs with the monolingual students in order to immerse them in activities that are enjoyable, yet provide them with the means to communicate in English (natural approach). ELA Test-prep is aligned to NYSESLAT Test sophistication. Also, on Thursdays and Fridays all ELLs are encouraged to participate in the math or science clubs from 2:30pm to 4:00pm to assist them in developing their skills in the subject. The ESL teacher provides individualized programs for newcomers, SIFE, long-term, and SWD ELLs, while having them work together in cooperative learning groups to provide time for meaningful interactions and assist in the development of listening, speaking, reading and writing skills needed for ELA and the content areas. Every effort is made to minimize the anxieties and lower the affective filter of interacting in a new language and culture by strengthening the students’ self-esteem and cultural identity. Current and Former ELLs who have reached the commanding level on the NYSESLAT, will receive time and a half on state and city exams, and will receive location and group size accommodations. Special consideration is also given to current and former ELLs by classroom teachers who will give them as much time as they need in the classroom to complete classroom tests or quizzes. During state exams, ELLs have the option of choosing to take the New York State Math, Science, or Social Studies in English or their native language, if available. If the ENL student feels more comfortable taking an exam in their native language and it is not available in that language, there is the option of having a translator during the exam. All intervention is provided to ELLs and former ELLs in English. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? 2018-19 CEP 71  One of the improvements in place for the upcoming school year is the use of Skedula.com. This school management system will assist to better drive instruction and learning, and allows teachers to instantly provide feedback to parents and students. Another improvement which will be implemented in the 2015-2016 school year is The Framework for Great Schools. The framework consists of six elements: Effective Leadership, Rigorous Instruction, Supportive Environment, Collaborative Teachers, Strong Family-Community Ties, and Trust. This can be used to assist our school in understanding students' strengths and weaknesses and improve in areas that matter most for boosting academic achievement for ELLs and all students. Throughout the 2014-2015 school year in both elementary and middle schools, teachers participated in math lesson studies and implemented strategies learned to accommodate struggling students, especially ELLs and SWDs. Also, in the lower grades we will better align the current math word games and problems to the math curricula for the 2015-2016 school year. Another addition for the upcoming 2015-2016 school year, will be for the middle school to continue to create project based learning units of study for the CODE-X reading program In the elementary school, we felt that our current reading program was lacking a strong writing portion, therefore, we will be using Zaner-Bloser's Strategies for Writers writing program, this coming school year. We believe that this CCSS aligned program, which teaches students the writing process and uses the six writing traits, will help strengthen our students' overall writing. This will especially assist ENL students who often struggle with the foundations of writing. Furthermore, we will be able to align the program to our current reading program, Ready Gen. During last school year we became a Title III school and have received extra funding for the amount of ELLs we now have. We are planning on opening two intensive after-school ENL programs for two of the largest elementary and middle school groups. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? None of our current ELL programs will be discontinued for the 2015-16 at this time. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All English Language Learners are encouraged to join and participate in extra-curricular activities, sports programs, and special evenings which are held in the school. They are also allowed to attend Directions For Our Youth, our after school programs and Saturday Academy. This year we have many former and current ELLs participating in different after school programs which will enhance their social skills and help with English acquisition such as, the boys and girls basketball team, cheerleading, chess, math club, science club, flag football, VNA Voices, band, movie club, art club , and ballroom dancing. As stated above, we are planning two open two after school ENL intensive language programs, one in middle school and another in elementary. We plan to focus on all four modalities in both programs. For the elementary group, students need the most assistance with language development and reading fundamentals. The middle school group on the other hand, needs assistance in academic language and vocabulary through the content areas. Assisting the students to strengthen these areas will be our goals for the programs. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. The utilization of technology such as Smart Boards, Computers, Elmos, Independent Learning Centers, Listening Centers etc. assist classroom teachers in eliciting ENL students' prior knowledge in order to prepare them to learn more about the topics taught in class. The utilization of graphic organizers, roleplay, and post reading activities are utilized to support students. The utilization of listening centers (books on tape) is available in each classroom. There are books for the different reading levels as well. In addition, teachers take into account student’s interests, experiences and culture to furnish the library. Some examples that show this are the selection of folktales, myths and legends, short stories and poems written in different languages and availabe in our school library. Teachers utilize Smart Boards and computers to provide students with visual aides in interactive activities to promote learning and understanding across the content areas. Programs such as Rosetta Stone English (especially entering, emerging, and SIFE 2018-19 CEP 72  ELLs) and Spanish, Sound Reading Solutions(entering, emerging, SIFE, SPed ELLs), Khan Academy(transitioning, expanding, commanding), I-Ready (all levels). Several of the following websites are also used to provide scaffolding to ELLs; Teacher Tube, Learnzillion, Discovery Education, IXL Math, Brain Pop, Brain Pop Jr., Starfall, and United Streaming are only several of the programs which are used throughout the school. These instruments assist teachers with scaffolding instruction by allowing teachers to support our ELLs through modeling, questioning, and receiving feedback. Assessing progress occurs on an ongoing basis by the ESL teacher and content area teachers during both push-in and pull-out sessions. The instructional materials we are using are aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards in order to guarantee college readiness. The materials are as follows: Elementary: • Ready Gen -ELA • Ready Gen Phonics and Scaffolding Strategies • Strategies for Writers • Envision Math • Foss Science Middle School: • Code X - ELA • CMP3 - Math • Glencoe Science • Holt Social Studies 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Since we do not have a bilingual program, we offer native language support to our ELLs by having a Spanish language library in each classroom along with Spanish content texts in the middle school. Also, bilingual and foreign language texts of several different languages are found in the library. Bilingual glossaries are also provided to ELLs who have a strong native language. Moreover, Students are provided with bilingual and foreign language websites which can be used independently, when they do not have assistance from teachers. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Regardless of level, ELLs are serviced and provided with various resources that correspond to their ages. The resources in the classrooms include a leveled library with books to correspond to age, grade level, and reading levels. We are also using I-Ready, a literacy reading program, which allows for each student to be placed on the correct reading level based on assesments to match their reading abilities. Teachers then use these levels to make instructional decisions and differentiate instruction for the students. We are also using Ready Gen for elementary grades and Code X for middle school literacy programs, which have scaffolding techniques for different types of learners. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? The utilization of technology such as Smart Boards, Computers, Elmos, Independent Learning Centers, Listening Centers etc. assist classroom teachers in eliciting ENL students' prior knowledge in order to prepare them to learn more about the topics taught in class. The utilization of graphic organizers, roleplay, and post reading activities are utilized to support students. The utilization of listening centers (books on tape) is available in each classroom. There are books for the different reading levels as well. In addition, teachers take into account student’s interests, experiences and culture to furnish the library. Some examples that show this are the selection of folktales, myths and legends, short stories and poems written in different languages and availabe in our school library. Teachers utilize Smart Boards and computers to provide students with visual aides in interactive activities to promote learning and understanding across the content areas. Programs such as Rosetta Stone English (especially entering, emerging, and SIFE ELLs) and Spanish, Sound Reading Solutions(entering, emerging, SIFE, SPed ELLs), Khan Academy(transitioning, expanding, commanding), I-Ready (all levels). Several of the following websites are also used to provide scaffolding to ELLs; Teacher Tube, 2018-19 CEP 73  Learnzillion, Discovery Education, IXL Math, Brain Pop, Brain Pop Jr., Starfall, and United Streaming are only several of the programs which are used throughout the school. These instruments assist teachers with scaffolding instruction by allowing teachers to support our ELLs through modeling, questioning, and receiving feedback. Assessing progress occurs on an ongoing basis by the ESL teacher and content area teachers during both push-in and pull-out sessions. The instructional materials we are using are aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards in order to guarantee college readiness. The materials are as follows: Elementary: • Ready Gen -ELA • Ready Gen Phonics and Scaffolding Strategies • Strategies for Writers • Envision Math • Foss Science Middle School: • Code X - ELA • CMP3 - Math • Glencoe Science • Holt Social Studies 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Some activities offered to our newly enrolled ELL students are to take part in orientation where the ESL teachers, parent coordinator, and administrators will introduce themselves to the students and parents, conduct a learning style survey, and use it as a form of assessment to drive instruction and meet their individual learning needs. Also, a packet of beginning activities like colors, numbers, shapes, body parts, and survival vocabulary to increase motivation and reduce anxiety for our lower grade and entering ELLs. In the middle of the year, the ESL teachers conduct a practice test very similar to the NYSELAT in order to assess growth and develop instructional plans for the students. During the entire school year, students participate in advisories as well as clubs with the monolingual students in order to immerse them in activities that are engaging, but yet provide them with a means to communicate in English (natural approach). ELA Test-prep is aligned to NYSESLAT Test sophistication. Also, as mentioned before, a Parent Orientation is held in early September, as well as an open school night for parents to get to know the teachers, administrators, and the curriculum their child will be learning for the year. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? The language elective that is offered at the Van Nest Academy is for all students in grades 7 and 8 who receive Spanish as a foreign language. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? n/a 2018-19 CEP 74  Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Our entire school staff is required to attend workshops to suit the needs of our English Language Learners and to learn research based instructional strategies. The Van Nest Academy provides the resources and professional development to aid staff who work directly with our English Language Learners such as our principal, assistant principals, pedagogues, and paraprofessionals. The Parent Coordinator attends meetings monthly and secretaries are asked to attend as needed. Guidance Counselors attend monthly PDs through the network and also centrally offered to assist in youth development. Teachers who are sent out of the building to attend professional development turn-key what they have learned to all teachers during our Professional Learning Team meeting or PLT. 15% of workshops for non-ENL Teachers will be towards helping English Language Learners. Whereas, at least 50% of workshops for ENL Teachers consist of strategies to assist ELLs. Additionally, one of our ENL Teachers is a member of our Professional Development Committee. Along with the administration, several teachers make-up this this team, which is responsible for deciding which workshops which will be provided to the staff. This will help in choosing PDs which promote the infusion of strategies that could relate to ELLs. The majority of our workshops are done in-house on Mondays after our students are dismissed. We will be hosting PDs from CEI, our former network, which has become a professional development group. Brian Green and Nicora Placa will also continue to host workshops to assist teachers in ELA and Math strategies. Additionally, teachers will be able to choose from the PDs listed in the Bronx Borough Field Support Center catalog. For teachers who attend workshops outside of the building and through webinars, the information will be shared or turn-keyed during either lunch and learns, grade planning meetings, PLT team meetings or differentiated PD sessions. The latter workshops will be an assortment of best practices workshops, held on a monthly basis, which teachers can choose from and will be facilitated by administrators and teachers. The purpose of these PDs is to enhance teachers’ abilities to understand and use instructional strategies to support language, literacy development, and content area learning for all students, including English Language Learners and students with disabilities. Staff development will be differentiated to address diverse students with different interests, strengths and needs. Areas targeted for focus include: •Integrated Teaching Planning and implementing standards-based instructional programs •Using a variety of assessment techniques to effectively evaluate the strengths, needs and progress of English language learners to drive instruction • Creation of student rubrics and self assessmnet checklists • Scaffolding strategies for reading and writing across the Curricula •Using Bloom’s Taxonomy/Depths of Knowledge to create literature based questions and to expand Accountable Talk •Creation of Varied Assessments •Interdepartmental Collaboration •Literacy Training in the Content Areas •Vocabulary Enhancement •Creating and Responding to essay questions Our 2015-16 Workshop calendar is as follows: • Summer Institute (all encouraged to attend) • Data Dive (all) • Skedula Training (all) • Integrated Teaching to Support Language Acquisition in the Content Areas (series of 3 workshops) - BFSC • Math Lesson Studies - with Nicora Placa • Differentiated PDs – (monthly, all) 2018-19 CEP 75  • Professional Learning Teams – (monthly, departmental and grade) • CEI Workshop – Co-Teaching Partnerships for Success • Urban Advantage (ongoing, Science teachers) • CEI Workshop – STEAM on site and off site • New Teachers Mentoring (ongoing) • Intervisitations –within school and outside of school (Coordinated by Brian Green and Nicora Placa) • Conflict of Interest Training • Paraprofessionals PLT – with Assistant Principal Melanie Marino • Special Education PDs – with Assistant Principal Melanie Marino • Strategies for Writers (elementary) • Ready Gen (ongoing) elementary • Envision elementary • CMP3 - middle school • Code X (ongoing) middle scshool - teachers/ assistant principals • Creative School Services - monthly - assistant principals/teachers/paras • i-Ready - (ongoing) Elementary / Middle School/assistant principals • Response to Intervention - (RTI Team) This year the BFSC is conducting a series of 3 workshops in our school on Integrating Teaching to Support Language Acquistion in the Content Areas. The ENL Teachers will attend with the co-teachers they work most closely with and work on implementing co-teaching models, to ensure that students are learning the CCLS in an integrated setting. Our teachers of English as a new language learners are also offered professional development to support their students as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards. Teachers have also received training in simplifying and clarifying the CCLS into “I Can” statements for all students, including Limited English Proficient students, in order for them to clearly understand learning objectives. Furthermore, language objectives are also created to go along with the content learning targets. Our ELA and Math materials are aligned to the CCLS. Therefore, the workshops provide our English as a New Language teachers with useful methods of mastering the standards. ESL Teachers attend workshops throughout the year. One of our ESL Teachers has attended two series of SIOP trainings, for teachers and coaches, which will be turn-keyed to the entire staff. Our ESL teachers attend workshops which focus on second language acquisition, academic conversation, and other best practices. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Workshops which showcase exemplary strategies, curricula, and academic interventions across the content areas and grade levels are offered to teachers of ELLs, to assist their children in transitioning between grades. Ready Gen, Envision, Code X, and I-Ready are all programs in which we have received professional development. These programs offer strategies and approaches for differentiating instruction that is aligned to the Commom Core Learning Standards and assist students in transtitioning between levels and grades. As the students become more advanced in English, less scaffolding will be done. In order to assist ELLs as they transition, guidance counselors attend monthly PDs on youth development. Moreover, 5th grade teachers were grouped with middle school teachers during our PLT sessions throughout the year, in order to vertically align assessments and comprehend what students' expectations will be in the upper grades. Several trainings are ongoing such as our collaboration with Brian Green from Creative School Services, Nicora Placa for math, monthly PLT meetings, our Inquiry Team meetings, our Differentiated PDs which will address the needs of different students. As per the new CR Part 154.2: 15% of total workshop hours for all non-ELL teachers and 50% for ENL teachers will address English language learners. The majority will be done during our Monday PD sessions, half days, and on Chancellor's PD days. Records are maintained via agendas, PD binders, and sign in sheets. Teachers of ENL students will meet regularly with classroom teachers to collaborate and share information that will best suit 2018-19 CEP 76  the needs of ELLs. There will also be periodic BFSC workshops for teachers of ELLs, as well as the ENL Integrated Teaching to Support Language Acquisition in the Content Areas (3 part series). These will focus on strengthening ELL’s language acquisition in the classrooms and aligning it with core content area instruction. Our ENL teachers will share information learned with classroom teachers who are working with ELLs. Moreover, classroom teachers are provided with charts and data highlighting their ELLs’ Areas of Strength and Areas of Concern according to the 2015 NYSESLAT and other forms of assessments. The ENL teachers will share their expertise on strategies for improving students’ vocabulary comprehension through the use of student glossaries and visuals. In another professional development ENL teachers discuss identifying and tracking the language development needs of ELLs in monolingual classrooms using the AMAO. The ENL teachers will share their experience on the use of conferencing and strategies to inform and assess ELLs. In addition, all teachers and paraprofessionals, will receive professional development on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for ELLs. The list provided above, showcases professional development sessions which will take place during school and afterschool. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? At the beginning of the school year the ENL teachers provide an orientation for parents of new English as a new language students. During this time we discuss the three programs available in the NYC DOE; Freestanding English as a New Language, Dual Language, and Transitional Bilingual. During this time parents view the parent video and are provided with the necessary forms in which they must choose one of the programs. Other information covered during this time is student exam scores, expectations and goals of ENL students, curricula, and standards. Parents are encouraged to attend all four Parent Teacher Conferences held yearly, as well as to set up meetings during parent engagement time. These meetings can be held weekly, on Tuesdays. The ENL teachers schedule meetings during these times with individual parents to address any areas of concern and to discuss academic progress. During conferences and meetings, we have translators ready to assist parents and teachers from within the staff. If a specific language is needed and is not spoken by anyone in our staff, translators are hired from the DOE. A teacher created progress report with 4 point rubric system, is created and discussed with parents at three of the parent teacher conferences throughout the year. These progress reports mention improvement in language development progress in the four modalities. Teachers' and students' reflections and comments are also written on these sheets. Once it is discussed with parents, we recommend that they also include their comments on how they intend to assist students in the home. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. 2. Records are kept in an ENL compliance binder in the main office and also on our Parent Engagement logs. This binder includes copies of emails or letters sent and received to and from parents, parent program choice, orientation agendas, phone logs, and any other type of communication between ELL parents and the school. Also, during our Parent Engagement block on Tuesdays, we have the flexibility of communicating with parents in person, via email, via phone calls, and by hosting parent meetings to inform parents of student academic progress as mentioned above. 3. PS/MS 498X welcomes all parents and values their input. They are the school’s partners in building a learning community. The school reaches out to all parents through the school’s Parents Coordinator. In addition, the scheduled Parent-Teacher conferences will make this connection stronger. During the parents’ orientation at the beginning of the year, the parents are informed of the state standards, school assessments, expectations, and programs that the school has for students. Parents were and continue to be surveyed as to their needs in the school community. Our parent coordinator reaches out to parents to ascertain what services and resources should be deployed to meet those needs. The ENL teachers who work closely with the ELL students in differentiating instruction, the classroom teachers, the social worker and the AIS coordinator work together to 2018-19 CEP 77  meet the students’ required needs. The Parent Association is also an additional avenue for parents to be involved in their students’ education. The Parent Coordinator organizes parental activities in the school such as: • Cultural celebrations • Fundraisers • Parent volunteers • Halloween March of Dimes Parade • Content Based Learning~math/ELA • Monthly PTA meetings ENL Teachers are in the process of creating a series of workshops where parents receive information and orientations on how to help their children with academics and school life regardless of language, social class, or race. These workshops are offered in both English and Spanish, and can be translated into other languages if needed. Parents receive valuable information and an introduction to technology and getting themselves and their children college and work force ready. The parents or guardians of English as a New Language students are informed of their child’s participation in the ENL push-in or pullout with letters and progress reports. Letters and progress reports will include the results of predictive, diagnostic, and interim assessments administered to the students and program entrance and exit. Progress reports are provided in both English and the native language whenever possible to ensure and maintain great communication with the parents. Workshops for parents of ELLs will be conducted by the ENL teachers to ensure that parents know the expectations for the students in each grade level and as a way to keep communication open between the school and the parents. One workshop offered to parents in a NYSESLAT workshop, where we discuss expectations and a breakdown of the exam. Another workshop is for the parents to learn how to navigate the web and become familiarized with its components and where to find information to help their children. Multilingual staff members are readily available if needed for translation services. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. 2018-19 CEP 78 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Carol ann Gilligan, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 79  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: The Van Nest Academy School DBN: 11X498 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Carol Ann Gilligan Title Principal Megan Gundogdu Assistant Principal Vaness Vallecillo Parent Coordinator Luciana Basile ENL/Bilingual Teacher Carmen Lucia Parent Guarinelly Hernandez Teacher/Subject Area Deneke Kelly Diana Yurek Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other parent Other Related Service Prov Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 10/27/15 10/27/15 1/1/01 10/27/15 10/27/15 10/27/15 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 10/27/15 10/27/15 1/1/01 2018-19 CEP 80  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 11X498 School Name: The Van Nest Academy Superintendent: The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. The Van Nest Academy has aggressive policies to ensure all parents can receive school information in the language of their choice. Upon enrollment, all parents complete a home language survey and preferred language of choice form. They also engage in a one-on-one meeting with the Pupil Accounting Secretary and the ENL Teacher. This information is continually updated throughout the year as new students enter our school. We use home language surveys, NYSITELL/Spanish LAB-R exams, and PTA surveys to assess our language and interpretation needs. Our school provides all official correspondence and telephone messages in English, Spanish, and Albanian. In addition we have speakers of other languages on staff who translate when necessary. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 2018-19 CEP 81 Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Language The most common preferred language of communication for parents is English, followed by Spanish. We also have a handful of parents who have chosen Albanian. Furthermore, one parent has chosen Russian and another has chosen Arabic. 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. PS/MS 498X provides Spanish translation of all major documents and communication home to families. When needed, translations will also be provided in additional languages, once language preference is obtained. Staff is required to distribute PTA letters, parent-teacher conference letters, and changes to school calendar, to be sent home in English and Spanish. Written translation to Spanish and Albanian is provided in-house by staff, whereas, additional language translations are sought by the Translation and Interpretation Unit, or when required, an outside contracted agency will be employed to translate into a language other than the 9 covered by the T and I unit. 2018-19 CEP 82  When the Translation and Interpretation Unit or PS/MS 498X is temporarily unable to provide required translation into one or more covered languages, a cover letter or notice on the face of the English document in the appropriate covered language(s) will be provided, indicating how a parent can request free translation or interpretation of such document. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? For the year 2015/2016, we will have four Parent Teacher Conferences, two of which are to familiarize parents with students' classes and the school during open school night. We will have the chance to meet with parents to discuss the students' academic progress. We will also have the opportunity to meet with the parents every Tuesday during our Parent Engagement block to communicate either via email, face to face or phone call with parents. Since we take every opportunity we have to talk to our parents, we also speak to them during morning drop off and afternoon dismissal if needed. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure 2018-19 CEP 83  Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Parents are notified at every meeting that translation services are available. Parents are also notified at every PTA meeting of these services and of their rights regarding translation. In addition, a school mailing regarding these services was provided, and information was provided in the student and school handbooks. All parents are notified annually of their rights regarding translation and interpretation services. There have been no barriers to addressing language translation and interpretation at The Van Nest Academy. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? At the end of the year, the parent coordinator will survey the parents via email on the quality and availability of services. This feedback will be used to make changes on the way we communicate with parents and translation services. 2018-19 CEP 84 
