2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 11X513 School Name: NEW WORLD HIGH SCHOOL Principal: MITHAT GASHI 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: NEW WORLD HIGH SCHOOL 11X513 321100011513 9 – 12 School Number (DBN): 921 EAST 228 TH STREET – 4 TH FLOOR, BRONX, NY 10466 718-696-3800 718-696-3801 Phone Number: Fax: CATHERINE KAVANAGH CKAVANA@SCHOOLS.NYC.GOV School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Email Address: MITHATGASHI JEFFREY BRIGGS JUANA GONZALEZ MITHATGASHI MAHAMMADBHATTI MELANIE BERMUDEZ KERENEMAS N/A District Information Geographical District: 11 CARRON STAPLE Superintendent: ONE FORDHAM PLAZA, BRONX, NY 10458 Superintendent’s Office Address: CSTAPLE@SCHOOLS.NYC.GOV Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-741-5852 Phone Number: 718-741-7098 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 CEP 3  FSC: 2 Executive Director’s Office Address: JOSE RUIZ Executive Director: 1230 ZEREGA AVENUE, BRONX, NY 10462 JRUIZ2@SCHOOLS.NYC.GOV Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-828-7776 Phone Number: 718-828-3113 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) MITHATGASHI JEFFREY BRIGGS JUANA GONZALEZ MAHAMMAD BHATTI MELANIE BERMUDEZ KERENEMAS HASSANTMIMI TIMONMUNTING NICOLETTEGEORGIADES *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ STAFF (CSA) Member/ STAFF (CSA) Member/ STAFF (UFT) 2018-19 CEP 5  Name SELINAPAULINO YVONNE EDWARDS MARILYN VILLAGRANA ROCIO MOREIRA MAMADOUDIA KWABLANBRUCE ISSA ALDAYLAM Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/ STAFF (UFT) Member/STAFF (DC-37) Member/ Member/ PARENT Member/ PARENT Member/ PARENT Member/ PARENT Member/PARENT Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? New World High School’s mission is to apply a variety of research-based strategies to teach and prepare ELLs for college. 2018-19 CEP 9  2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. New World High School was founded in September 2004 with the goal of establishing a small learning community that addresses the needs of students with limited English Language proficiency. For example, students at different grade levels receive extra instructional time in English as a New Language (ENL), Mathematics, Science, and Social Studies. Advanced ELLs are challenged to take more rigorous classes such as Pre- Calculus, College Writing, Chemistry, Physics, College Now classes and Advanced Placement classes in Spanish and French. Our teachers consistently use different entry points and scaffolding to support content and language acquisition. They use the SIOP (Sheltered Instruction Observation Protocol) to plan lessons and deliver instruction. The SIOP model provides coherence as teachers ascertain the agreed upon elements of a unit and lesson plan, such as content and language objectives, vocabulary instruction, as well as building connections to real-life situations. In addition to the regular instructional program during the school day, after school programs such as PM school and Saturday Academy are designed to support students in need of improvement in different subject areas. New World High School also offers a variety of extracurricular activities and opportunities for students to do community service. The extracurricular activities include visual arts and performing arts, as well as PSAL teams (volleyball, soccer, basketball, lacrosse, and track and field). In addition to after school programs such as PM school and Saturday Academy, designed to support students in need of improvement in different subject areas, New World High School offers a variety of extracurricular activities and opportunities for students to do community service. The extracurricular activities include visual arts and performing arts, as well as PSAL teams (volleyball, soccer, basketball, lacrosse, and track and field). We have established strong collaborations and partnerships with different organizations and initiated new ones. Some of the organizations and partnerships include, Fordham University PSO, PENCIL, YPI, Mid-Hudson Review, Bronx Institute, Morris Heights, College Now, Hostos Community College, Lehman College and School of Professional Studies. These collaborations and partnerships have played a significant role in supporting the school vision and mission, and provide additional support in areas of teacher development inside and outside the classroom and student advancement. Through our PENCIL partnership, we have established a science webinar series to expose students to the work that scientists do in the field. We are forging a partnership with a school district in Kentucky who will participate along with our students in the science webinars this coming year. The YPI program permits students to conduct research with Bronx based not-for-profit organizations. They work in teams to identify social issues in the community. Each team selects a charity that is working on addressing a social issue. To gain a deeper understanding of the work that the charity is doing, the team conducts personal interviews with the workers of the organization. Each team is referred to multiple sources of evidence to show the impact of the charity they have selected. The students integrate research and analysis and produce a multidimensional presentation to the faculty and student body. Also, our teachers participate in a series of professional developments in common core ELA and mathematics, Science, ELL strategies such as scaffolding and utilizing SIOP and QTEL, which is provided by Fordham University. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Our student population consists of recent immigrants to New York City as well as ELL students attending various Middle schools in District 10, 11, and 12 in the Bronx. Like most comprehensive high schools, we offer a wide range of general academic courses, with equal emphasis on developing language acquisition skills and content knowledge. Our students come from 23 countries and speak 40 different dialects/languages with different levels of English language proficiency and a wide range of literacy competency in their native language. As a result, we have developed several structures to provide extra support for all students 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. 2018-19 CEP 10  School’s strengths: Based on the Data presented in the School Quality Guide Summary, New World High School is in good standing. This achievement is particularly reflected in the measures of student progress, college and career readiness, and closing the achievement gap in which the school exceeded the New York City and Peer set target. Additionally, New World High School was selected as one the top ten High Schools in the country that is best serving the ELL population according to an independent study conducted by Stanford University this past Spring. The key areas of focus for the upcoming academic year are: ● Enhance teacher instructional best practices to increase students’ overall academic performance in all subject areas. Teacher teams will be directed within and across all disciplines to increase inter-visitation/lesson study, utilize data analysis with the focus of increasing student-to-student interaction/discussion, and student self-assessment. ● Increase the level of rigor in all subject areas. Teachers will implement targeted instructional strategies to develop students’ content knowledge, skills and language acquisition. Curricula and academic tasks will be refined using student work and driven by data that teacher teams collate so that individuals and groups of students, including the lowest and highest achieving students, ELLs, and students with special needs, will be provided multiple access to the curriculum. ● Develop students’ verbal, written, and analytical skill sets. Teachers will use a variety of instructional approaches, such as engaging in inquiry-based learning, using evidence to support an argument in a clear coherent written form as well as in discussions across all disciplines, deducing an explanation of the results of an experiment, developing observation skills during the inquiry process, analyzing and interpreting data, and using reasoning and computational skills. Strengthening these skills will drive the communication and collaboration abilities necessary for college and career readiness, while meeting some of the tenets of the Common Core Learning Standards. 2018-19 CEP 11  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 11X513 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 403 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 3 3 7 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 29 27 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 97.0% % Attendance Rate 94.0% % Reduced Lunch 65.8% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 2.5% 65.5% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 9.9% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 1 4% 8% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 89% 86% 84.1% 32.9% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A NO N/A N/A YSH Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES N/A N/A YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES N/A N/A YES No N/A 5 5 91.5% 2.7% 4.5% 12.2% 9.9% 2.5% 4 8% 5.8 N/A N/A 95% 90% 93.8% 41% N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A YSH N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A YES YES 2018-19 CEP 12  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. School’s strengths: Based on the Data presented in the School Quality Guide Summary, New World High School is in good standing. This achievement is particularly reflected in the following areas: measures of student progress, college and career readiness, and closing the achievement gap, where the school exceeded the New York City and Peer set target. In addition, New World High School was selected as one the top ten High Schools in the country that best serves ELLs by an independent study conducted by Stanford University this past Spring. Further analysis from the school's June/August Regents analysis on students’ outcome indicates that the average percent passing rate in Algebra was 84% and in ELA was 69%. School’s needs: According to last year’s data analysis of summative assessments, Common Core Mock Regents and Common Core Regents results, it is clear that we need to enhance our teaching practices to show more improvement in the passing rate in the Common Core Regents Integrated Algebra and ELA.. Priority needs that will be addressed in the goal and action plan identify the areas in need of improvement based on data analysis of Common Core Regents Exams, midterms, finals, quizzes, and formative assessment trends to inform instruction by implementing targeted instructional strategies based on students need. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all teachers instructing English Language Learners will implement targeted instructional strategies that will result in a Regents passing rate of 85% in ELA and 70% in Math as measured by the NYS Assessments 2018-19 CEP 13  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? ● Refine units of study that are aligned to the common core All teachers Ongoing ● Enhance lesson plan coherence through lesson study using the SIOP model to include language objective, scaffolding, vocabulary instruction, connections to real life situation. All students until June 2019 Teachers and school administration Guidance Professional development committee ● Lesson delivery reflection checklist ● Use of Data analysis of past common core assessment and mock exams in both CC ELA and CC Integrated Algebra to identify the areas in need of improvement to adjust pacing and inform instruction. ● Engage all teachers in a series of hands on professional development sessions such as Lesson Plan Study followed by inter-visitation to focus on lesson planning, delivery of instruction and assessment. ● Inquiry team/ SIFE team to assess the progress through grade level, examining student work and Data Analysis sessions. ● Use of electronic platform (Google docs ) and protocols assigned to each teacher team meeting to focus on the work and share notes. ● Provide a series of parent workshops to address cultural & linguistic needs of newly arrived immigrant families; introduction to content curricula; computer workshops to show parents how to access school and grade data; overview of formal & informal assessments. ● Increase families involvement in school events such as multicultural show, PA meetings, open school nights. ● Activities among teachers such as collaborative discussions and sharing best practices will build trust ● Establish rapport and informative discussions that keep a network tie between students-parents and school staff to ensure they are in line with all curricular decisions, assessments and Parents of students Ongoing until June 2019 Teachers Guidance Administration June 2018 through August 2019 Support staff in office Teachers All students, parents, members of the community and staff 2018-19 CEP 14 programming rationale. (ex: Parent meetings where they are able to discuss and provide input on choices the school is making on curriculum decisions such as course offerings, etc.) ● Create a more involved system of checks to ensure uniform policy, increased attendance rate, lower truancy, etc., which will all create stronger trust between students and a more serious learning environment. ● Create after school programs, non-academic activities, clubs, teams, culture clubs, etc., to motivate students, build trusts, and bolster a strong school community. Counselors Principal Assistant Principals 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We will provide an ongoing series of parent workshops to address cultural and linguistic needs of newly arrived immigrant families; introduction to content curricula; computer workshops to show parents how to access school and grade data and an overview of formal and informal assessments. These workshops will be facilitated by administration, guidance counselors and selected teachers. We will aim to increase families' involvement in school events such as multicultural shows, PA meetings and open school nights. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Provide SIOP workshops to all teachers. Purchase the SIOP books for each teachers for professional growth. Offer time after school for Inquiry team/SIFE team to examine the progress of student work. Provide for teachers to learn best strategies to work with special needs students. Offer PM school for special needs students. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A X C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2019, data analysis of students’ final exam performance will show an increase of .25% in both ELA and Math.. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Class quizzes and class exams, midterms, and final exams, will be used to measure progress. Teachers will meet frequently to analyze data and make necessary adjustments to their curriculum and lessons. 2018-19 CEP 15  Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 16  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Strengths: Our student population consists of newly arrived ELLs and students coming from middle schools. Based on the school quality guide summary and the New York State report card, the average attendance in 2016-2017 was 94 percent and the measure of student progress, college and career readiness, and closing the achievement gap exceeded the NYC peer schools target. Needs: Based on the summary data analysis and the AMO status estimator, 266 out of 389 students are classified as ELLs, of which 58 students are designated entering. 32 of them are in the 9th grade, 13 in the 10th grade and 12 in the 11th grade. Additionally, there are 60 students ranked as emerging (22 in the 9th grade; 26 in the 10th, 11 in the 11th grade, and 1 in the 12th grade). Furthermore, there are 74 students classified as SIFE. Although the English language presents a barrier, our students are continually showing overall improvement. It is necessary to provide additional support to help students with language acquisition and content knowledge. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all teachers will provide supportive environment to help students with language acquisition and content knowledge resulting in a 2% overall increase from entering to emerging as measured by the NYSESLAT. 2018-19 CEP 17  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Lesson activities in entering and emerging classes in all content areas will be designed to increase students content vocabulary and conceptual understanding. Professional development will be provided to content area teachers on using best strategies to work with ELLs. All general education teachers will meet with administration and special education teachers to discuss the needs and accommodations of students with IEPs. Additionally, teachers will work collaboratively to examine student work to analyze data to understand student progress and make further modifications to instruction. Entering and emerging students. Content area teachers. All teachers, students, guidance counselors, SIFE, and students with IEPs. September2018-June 2019 Administration and teachers. September 2018- June 2019 Teachers, guidance counselors, administrators A SIFE inquiry team will consist of teachers from all departments and a guidance counselor. The team will use the data analysis results, the findings from classroom action research, and research-based programs to make recommendations to each department on how to best help SIFE. Provide a series of parent workshops to address cultural and linguistic needs of newly arrived immigrant families; introduction to content curricula; computer workshops to show parents how to access school and grade data; overview of formal & informal assessments. Increase families involvement in school events such as multicultural show, PA meetings, open school nights. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Parents Ongoing Teachers, guidance, administration How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. We will provide an ongoing series of parent workshops to address cultural and linguistic needs of newly arrived immigrant families; introduction to content curricula; computer workshops to show parents how to access school and grade data and an overview of formal and informal assessments. These workshops will be facilitated by 2018-19 CEP 18  administration, guidance counselors and some teachers. We will aim to increase families' involvement in school events such as multicultural shows, PA meetings and open school nights. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Provide professional development to all content area teachers on the effective implementation of the SIOP strategies. Provide per session for inquiry team Offer PM and Saturday classes to SIFE/entering and emerging students Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2019, all teachers will provide supportive environment to help students with language acquisition and content knowledge resulting in a 1% overall increase from entering to emerging as measured by the NYSESLAT. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Class quizzes and class exams, midterms, and final exams, will be used to measure progress. Teachers will meet frequently to analyze data and make necessary adjustments to their curriculum and lessons. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 19  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. School’s strengths: Teacher teams include grade level teams, content teams, interdisciplinary teams, data inquiry teams, SIFE and Former ELLs team and PD teams who meet weekly. According to the quality review findings, the teachers at New World High School meet regularly in grade level teams, content area teams, interdisciplinary teams, or data inquiry teams. Protocols are utilized to focus teachers on the work and notes are shared on an electronic platform accessible to all staff and administration. Interdisciplinary teams and content teams develop units of study that support the instructional coherence across grades and among grades. Teachers analyze data regularly. For example, after each Regents administration, an item analysis is performed, looking for trends and areas of improvement. Additionally, teachers gave a mock English Regents, where the item analysis revealed that students needed more intense support with vocabulary and reading comprehension. As a result, teachers revised curricula for students’ specific needs for identifying context clues, direct/indirect vocabulary instruction and read strategies. Preliminary data shows increased achievement in academic vocabulary use across subjects. Teachers use NYSESLAT data for classroom placement, and Individual Education Plan (IEP) data for students with disabilities. School’s needs: Additional analysis from the MOTP indicates that New World High School overall teacher observation report shows a need to improve from effective to highly effective the categories under the Danielson Framework for Teaching 3b, 3c, and 3d. Priority needs that will be addressed in the goal and action plan are to strengthen questioning and discussion techniques and approaches to assessment through collaborative teacher meetings in examining student work sessions, data analysis, and lesson study/inter-visitations. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all teachers instructing English Language Learners will work collaboratively to examine student work and to conduct data analysis resulting in at least 80% overall passing rate 2018-19 CEP 20  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Promote collaboration between teachers through: All students September 2018 Administration and teachers. New teachers through Data specialist June 2019 Teachers with three or more years of experience ● Examining student work: Teachers will meet in teams to examine and evaluate student work and to use data from assessments to make adjustments to instruction. Each teacher team will discuss the work’s strengths and weaknesses, and the work’s connection to the standards. Based on the team's diagnosis of the students’ performance, teachers will discuss what further steps and strategies are needed to improve the student's academic performance. ● Marking Period Analysis: At the end of each marking period, teachers conduct an analysis of the marking period data on student performance and progress. They discuss areas of student success and the reasons for their success. Teachers also identify root causes for the successes and strategies and possible interventions to address challenge areas. ● Curriculum meeting sessions to ensure attainable progression and assessments are aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards. ● Interdisciplinary grade level team meetings ● Weekly professional development meetings ● Inquiry team/ SIFE team to review the progress of underperforming students and conduct interviews with both students and teachers to design targeted academic intervention plan. ● Use of electronic platform (Google docs ) and protocols assigned to each teacher team meeting to focus on the work and share notes. ● Data analysis team meetings to examine student performance and progress using past common core and mock exam assessments in both CC ELA and CC Integrated Algebra to identify 2018-19 CEP 21  the areas in need of improvement and adjust pacing schedule and/or modify instruction. ● Incorporate ELL strategies in content areas. All students September ● Work closely with the special education teacher, guidance counselors and paraprofessionals. ● Heterogeneous meaningful grouping of students.  Open communication among teachers in the same department as well as across content areas. 2018 through June 2019 ● Work with guidance counselors to create an outreach plan All students September ● Implement specific translators for outreach plan ● Inform parents of new app replacing ARIS in the 2016-2017 school year where parents can check student grades, attendance records, and standardized test scores ● Monthly parent newsletter that includes curriculum information, home enrichment questions, important dates, honor roll students, and staff highlights. ● Monthly parent workshops ● By working together, teachers build trust between one another through shared lessons, student work and data. They can then derive recommendations from one another to improve instruction and classroom environment ● Teachers will meet on a weekly basis in order to discuss culturally responsive pedagogy. We will discuss particular concepts that can be elucidated in a culturally relevant manner for particular groups of students. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Teachers, guidance counselors and paraprofessionals Teachers, guidance counselors, paraprofessionals, administrators, translators, parents, office support staff 2018 through June 2019 All students September 2018 through June 2019 Teachers, guidance counselors and administration How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. The staff, including administration and support staff such as school secretaries, paraprofessionals and school aides, will work together to create a successful outreach plan which will include language specific translators for families whose home language is other than English. We will work to inform parents of ways to access student grades, attendance records and standardized test scores. We will issue a monthly parent newsletter that includes curriculum information, home enrichment questions, important dates, honor roll students and staff highlights. Monthly parent workshops will be offered on various relevant topics. 2018-19 CEP 22  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. For this goal no additional resources will be required as it is already embedded in the Professional Development blocks. Parent outreach will require funds for translation services in addition to producing the newsletter. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2019, teacher teams will have developed and applied two strategies to improve student questioning and discussion techniques. We use end of term grades and the January Regents exams. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Frequent classroom observations, both formal and informal will focus on questioning techniques. Specific feedback will be provided and classroom visits will be coordinated to measure impact of feedback on teacher questioning techniques. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 23  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. School’s strengths: Teacher teams include grade level teams, content teams interdisciplinary teams, data inquiry teams, SIFE and Former ELLs teams, and PD teams which meet weekly. Based on the past three years, MOTP 2015-2016 and 2016- 2017 there is evidence of increase in the area of delivery of instruction. This is mainly due to existing teacher team structures that have been put in place. Our teacher teams and staff establish a culture for learning that systematically communicates a unified set of high expectations for all students. This set of expectations enables clear, focused, and effective feedback for students and is further supported by guidance/advisement to ensure that students, including high-need subgroups, own their educational experience and are prepared for the next level. School’s needs: After examining the current structures of teacher teams, we recognize the need to strengthen the team by further assigning leadership roles to teachers to facilitate teacher meetings in order to maximize student productivity. Priority needs that will be addressed in the goal and action plan are to further empower teacher teams by assigning leadership roles during teacher team meetings. The action plan will be for teachers to take a leadership role in each of the teams through a rotation process. This will establish a structure where each teacher will have an opportunity to lead the team. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Empower teacher teams within and across all disciplines to enhance inter-visitation/ lesson study with the focus of increasing student-to-student interactions/ discussions and student self-assessment. This will result in an increase of 1% overall passing rate of Entering and Emergency ELLs in all subject areas by June 2019. 2018-19 CEP 24  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? ● Establish structures where each teacher will have an opportunity to lead the lesson study team, the inter-visitation, and the inter-visitation debriefing session. All teachers September 2018 through June 2019 Teacher teams, administration and guidance ● Prepare a schedule in advance with teachers’ names and dates indicating when they will take the lead roles in facilitating meetings and leading team discussions. ● Examine best practices to increase student-to-student interaction/discussion, and student self-assessment through lesson study and inter-visitations. ● Utilize the Danielson Framework for Teaching for 1e, 3b, and 3d during the Lesson Study and Inter-visitation sessions. ● Increase opportunities for self-reflection and implementation of best practices in the area of 3b and 3d. ● Smart Technology Seminar ● Using Test-maker Wizard Programs ● Google Products in Classroom activities ● Professional development on IEP annual measurable goals All teachers ● Professional development on differentiating instruction for ELLs and SWDs ● Grade level meetings and interdisciplinary meetings to discuss strategies to improve student learning. ● Rotate between grade-level meetings to discuss the needs of particular students. September 2018 through June 2019 Teacher teams, administration and guidance Invite parents/guardians into the classroom to follow their child’s schedule, twice a semester. Empower teachers to use feedback from parents to adjust instruction and interaction between teachers, parents and students. All teachers and parents. September 2018 through June 2019 Teacher teams, administration and guidance 2018-19 CEP 25 ● Teachers collaborate during meetings to gain a deeper understanding of each-others’ instructional styles and goals, and find common visions to support students. All teachers September 2018 through June 2019 Teacher teams, administration and guidance 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We will invite parents/guardians into the classrooms to follow their child's schedule twice a semester. We will then use feedback from the parents to adjust instruction and interaction between teachers, parents and students. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. This goal will require funding for instructional technology training to more effectively use all technology available at New World High School. The training will be provided by Tequipment. Send teachers to workshops to learn new strategies on increasing student-to-student interactions and discussions. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2019, we will show an increase of .5% overall passing rate of Entering and Emergency ELLs in all subject areas by June 2019. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Meetings will be scheduled throughout the year to get feedback from teachers and make necessary adjustments to the program. A survey will also be developed in order to get more specific data as to the effectiveness of the program and also as to how to improve it. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 26  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strength: Based on the quality review feedback, parents have stated that New World High School teachers and administrators motivate their children, pushing them to reach higher academic levels. They have also stated that teachers and administrators are responsive and that they receive calls and e mails from them about their child’s progress. Additionally, parents have also stated that teachers and administrators provide families with ongoing support around the college process. Needs: Although we provide ongoing support to students and their families with the college process, more college workshops and trips are needed to include parents and their children in the 9th and 10th grade to visit different colleges and universities. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all ninth and tenth grade students and their parents will be offered at least two college awareness workshops and offered at least two college trips resulting in an increase in knowledge of specific colleges and career paths as well as research methods of independent college searches. This will be measured through student surveys completed via NAVIANCE. 2018-19 CEP 27  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Guidance counselors, administration, and teachers are trained in college awareness workshop techniques. Parents and students September to June Handouts are provided in 5 languages. Students are given pathway to college handouts that detail the college admission process as well as the high school graduation process. Parents and students September to November Parents can opt to take the workshop during the day or after school and their feedback preferences will be incorporated in upcoming workshops. Parents and students September to October Invite parents to chaperone field trips. The school will host a Family College Fun Fair in which administrators will host and participate in college-themed games. Parents and families September to June Guidance counselors, teachers, administrators Guidance counselors, teachers, administrators Guidance counselors, teachers, administrators Guidance counselors, teachers, administrators 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Guidance counselors, administration and teachers are trained in college awareness workshops techniques. Workshops will be offered to parents during the day and after school during which they will receive handouts (available in 5 languages) that detail the college admission process as well as the high school graduation process. Feedback from the parents after these workshops will then be incorporated into future workshops. Parents will be invited to chaperone field trips. The school will host a Family College Fun Fair. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. To achieve this goal, the resources needed to implement this action plan are: Buses, translators, materials for workshops, per session for personnel chaperoning students beyond the school hours and for personnel providing workshops to families after school hours. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 2018-19 CEP 28  X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2019, ninth and tenth grade students and their parents will attend at least one college awareness workshop and one college trip resulting in an increase of a 1% overall passing rate in all subject areas. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Attendance will be taken and feedback will be gathered during the meetings to measure impact of the program. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 29  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Grades 9 to 12 Regents results NYSESLAT Marking Period results Mock Regents results Teacher and parent recommendation Grades 9 to 12 Regents results NYSESLAT Marking Period results Mock Regents results Teacher and parent recommendation Grades 9 to 12 Regents results NYSESLAT Marking Period results Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Targeted support based on individual student's need through one-to-one tutoring, small group instruction during and after school. Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) One-to-one tutoring and small group instruction When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) During school hours through circular 6 assignment and after school during PM School and Saturday Academy. Targeted support based on individual student's need through one-to-one tutoring, small group instruction during and after school. One-to-one tutoring and small group instruction During school hours through circular 6 assignment and after school during PM School and Saturday Academy. Targeted support based on individual student's need through one-to-one tutoring, small group instruction during and after school. One-to-one tutoring and small group instruction During school hours through circular 6 assignment and after school during PM School and Saturday Academy. 2018-19 CEP 30 Mock Regents results Teacher and parent recommendation Grades 9 to 12 Regents results NYSESLAT Marking Period results Mock Regents results Teacher and parent recommendation Referral by teachers and parents Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Targeted support based on individual student's need through one-to-one tutoring, small group instruction during and after school. One-to-one tutoring and small group instruction During school hours through circular 6 assignment and after school during PM School and Saturday Academy. One-to-one or small group sessions During lunch period or advisory Group sessions and individual counseling by guidance counselors and/or psychological/social work services. 2018-19 CEP 31  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 4 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Work with families to refer them to appropriate non-profit organizations. Assisting them with getting necessary services to which they may be entitled to. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 32  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 CEP 33  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. To recruit highly qualified teachers, New World High School works with different colleges to identify student teachers to be assigned to our school for their internships. We then identify potential candidates to work in our school. We also work with Teach for America and other teaching placement providers to identify and recruit the best candidates for our school. At the same time, we work very closely with our HR director to ensure that our staffing needs are fulfilled with the highest qualified candidates for our school. Once hired by New World High School, we create a professional development program that will support the teacher to develop and improve his/her instructional techniques beginning with a mentor with whom the teacher meets every week and gets feedback after the mentor observes him/her. The new teachers work together with all staff members and collaborate through formal and informal interaction by being a part of our different PD activities such as grade level meetings, subject level meetings, case conferences and IEP meetings. The administrators also work with the teacher to monitor and guide teacher’s progress. New World also hires outside consultants to offer extra guidance as they develop in their new profession. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Our professional development activities include: Mentoring Curriculum Development Curriculum Planning Looking at Student Work meetings Lesson Study meetings 2018-19 CEP 34  Inter-visitations Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. At the high school level, students must take and pass regents exams as prescribed by the state. Results are obtained and teachers meet by department to analyze the results looking for specific patterns that will then dictate the adjustments to future instruction. The findings are shared with all staff members starting with a faculty meeting where the results are presented and explained. Also presented are the next steps to improve student achievement through adjusted instructional activities. Following that, we also have grade level meetings in which teachers further brainstorm and plan for specific grade level needs in a collaborative manner. For instance, the ENL teacher may suggest specific activities for the Social Studies teacher to implement in his/her classroom. Before the regents exams, the same activities are used after mid-terms, mock regents and final exams. At the end of the school year teachers make decisions about planning and developing goals for the CEP based on these findings. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide 2018-19 CEP 35  plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) 5A, 5C, 5D 5A, 5C 5A, 5C, 5D Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 368,632.00 0 28,136.00 0 2,663,745.00 X X X 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2018-19 CEP 36  2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 37  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. New World High School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act (ESEA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students New World High School will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 2018-19 CEP 38  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESEA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 2018-19 CEP 39  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESEA; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) New World High School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act (ESEA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum 2018-19 CEP 40  Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Elementary and Secondary Education Act; Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; 2018-19 CEP 41  ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the ESEA Title I requirement for Elementary Secondary Education Act (ESEA) and Title I programs; ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; 2018-19 CEP 42  ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; III. Student Responsibilities Student Responsibilities: ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 43  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): K 6 1 7 2 8 3 9 4 10 5 11 12 165 2018-19 CEP 44  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: After School Program Based on Regents analysis and NYSESLAT results, we have determined a need to offer extra support to our students especially in the area of literacy and math in the core subjects. Based on the data analysis of Regents results for the 2017-2018 school year, we found the following: 88 tenth grade students took the Global History exam; 40 students passed. 48 students need extra support. Out of the 48 students who failed, 8 students are SIFE. The English proficiency distribution of the 48 students who failed is: 1 entering; 19 emerging; 17 transitioning, 10 expanding and 1 commanding. 36 eleventh grade students took the Global History exam; 14 students passed; 22 students failed. Out of the 22 students who failed, 4 were entering; 8 emerging; 7 transitioning; and 2 expanding. 76 eleventh grade students took the US History Regents; 4 students failed. Out of the 4 students that failed, 2 were SIFE. One student was emerging; another student was transitioning; and two students were expanding. 253 students took the Algebra Regents; 74 failed. Out of the 74 who failed, 11 were SIFE. 6 students were entering; 16 emerging; 21 transitioning, 23 expanding; and 6 commanding. Out of the 82 students who took the ELA, 43 failed. Out of those who failed, 9 were SIFE. 1 student was entering; 4 emerging; 24 transitioning; 12 expanding and 1 student was commanding. 94 students took the Living Environment Regents; 71 students failed. Out of the 71 students who failed, 20 were SIFE. 5 students were entering; 30 emerging; 27 transitioning; and 8 students were expanding. 86 students took the Earth Science Regents; 48 students failed. Out of the students who failed, 8 were SIFE. 3 students were emerging; 16 transitioning; and 29 were expanding. In addition to the students who have to retake the Regents exams, we will provide extra support to the ELLs who will sit for the regents for the first time. The students to be served in this program range from ninth to twelfth grade ENL students who are struggling to meet the state standards as they relate to promotion and college-readiness. For this reason, we are offering additional writing/literacy classes with emphasis on writing techniques as students prepare to become college ready. The classes will be Regents Prep using different strategies to help ELLs acquire content through language acquisition. The materials will be adopted by content area teachers with help from ENL teachers. Content area teachers are all trained in working with ELLs. Teachers speak slowly and clearly, modeling the language they want students to use and providing samples of student work. Teachers will provide students with skills and vocabulary to talk about what they are learning. 2018-19 CEP 45  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Activities will include note taking, studying techniques, vocabulary development, and strategies to help students self-assess. In addition, the instructional approach will help students connect new concepts with students’ prior knowledge and experiences. Activities will include, think-pair-share, quick writes, and anticipatory charts. Visuals will be integrated to help students build conceptual understanding of content. Students will also create drawings, videos, and games to demonstrate their understanding of text. Students at New World HS come from 23 different countries and speak 40 different languages. Teachers who speak another language help the students on an individual or small group basis within the class. We also have teachers certified in Arabic, French and Spanish who work with our students to get language credits as well as to prepare them for the LOTE and AP language exams. The Title III funds for the direct instruction component will be used to partially fund teacher per session for the three (3) ENL teachers in the program as well as supplementary materials for the program. These funds will allow the students to receive instruction that is above and beyond the mandated ENL required minutes by attending after-school and Saturday programs. Teachers of ENL and content areas will meet to discuss student needs and classroom activities. Also, one ENL teacher will push into the math content classrooms (Algebra and Geometry) for 45 minutes in the after school program to provide language support to students. One teacher (Global) is dually certified (ENL/Global) and two teachers (Living Environment & Earth Science) are completing ENL certification. These classes will meet on Tuesdays and Thursdays for one and a half hours each day, for a total of 26 sessions. Tuesday/Thursday After School Program Subject: Global Teacher: Ms. Kim License: Social Studies Day(s): Tues/Thurs Time: 3:00 – 4:30 Students: 30 Subject: Earth Science Teacher: Ms. Georgiades (Completing ENL Cert.) License: Earth Science Day(s): Tues/Thurs Time: 3:00 – 4:30 Students: 20 Subject: Living Environment Teacher: Ms. Paulino (Completing ENL Cert.) License: Living Environment Day(s): Tues/Thurs Time: 3:00 – 4:30 Students: 20 Subject: Algebra I Teacher: Ms. Callaghan (Completing ENL Cert.) License: Math 2018-19 CEP 46  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Day(s): Tues/Thurs Time: 3:00 – 4:30 Students: 25 Subject: Geometry Teacher: Ms. Kramer License: Math Day(s): Tues/Thurs Time: 3:00 – 4:30 Students: 20 Subject: ENL Teacher: Mr. Ehrlich License: TESOL Days: Tues/Thurs Time: 3:00 – 4:30 Students: 15 Subject: ENL/ELA Teacher: Ms. Greca License: TESOL Days: Tues/Thurs Time: 3:00 – 4:30 Students: ALL Saturday Program The Saturday Program will meet every Saturday for three hours for the entire school year, beginning October 2018 and continuing through June 2019, for a total of 13 sessions. All content area teachers hold a ENL/Bilingual Certification or are completing ENL certification. The Saturday program will offer content area instruction in ENL classes. This will prepare students to meet Regents requirements. Subject: Global/US Teacher: Ms. Kim License: Social Studies Day: Saturday Time: 9:00 – 12:00 Students: 40 Subject: Living Environment Teacher: Ms. Paulino (Completing ENL Cert.) Day: Saturday Time: 9:00 – 12:00 Students: 40 Subject: Algebra I/Geometry Teacher: Ms. Callaghan (Completing ENL Cert.) License: Math Day: Saturday Time: 9:00 – 12:00 2018-19 CEP 47  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Students: 40 Subject: Online/Global/US History Teacher: Mr. Benarafa (Bilingual Extension & ENL Certification pending) License: Social Studies Day: Saturday Time: 9:00 – 12:00 Students: 20 Subject: Spanish Teacher: Ms. Guzman License: Spanish Day: Saturday Time: 9:00 – 12:00 Students: 25 Subject: ENL/ELA Teacher: Ms. Greca License: TESOL Day: Saturday Time: 9:00 – 12:00 Students: ALL All attendance and payroll records are kept on file in the main office. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Rationale: To develop Common Core units of study for different English Language proficiency levels, PD will be provided as follows at no cost. PD sessions will be facilitated by New World Highs School administration, specialists from the BFSC and Lehman College, and faculty members for all teachers. These sessions will tentatively be held as follows: 3/4/19 - Developing Strategies and Activities to Engage Students 4/8/19 - Developing Questioning Techniques to Guide Students to a Deeper Understanding 5/6/19 - Giving Appropriate and Effective Feedback to Ensure Mastery 6/3/19 - Developing Activities that Engage Students in Communicating Concepts and Processes in Writing 2018-19 CEP 48  Part C: Professional Development PD session agendas, sign-in sheets and related documents (handouts, notification flyers, newsletters, etc.) are kept on file in the Principal's Office. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Upon interviewing the families, it is determined that families need to be informed about their rights as well as understanding the structures, resources, and potential obstacles in helping their child to succeed and obtain a high school diploma, as well as to prepare them for life after high school. For this reason, we schedule monthly workshops for parents to continue to develop strong relationships and to provide information needed, and to gather concerns and suggestions from parents. Topics range from health and nutrition, internet safety, cyberbullying, suicide signs and prevention, how to read and understand school documents such as report cards and transcripts, how to apply for financial aid, and how to help their child make the best choices after high school. In addition, we will provide workshops to parents on the IEP process so that they get a deeper understanding on the programs and resources to help a students who has an IEP. Facilitators for these workshops include the principal, guidance counselors, teachers, and outside agencies such as Morris Heights Health Clinic, College representatives, etc. Parents are notified of meetings and workshops through newsletters, backpacked flyers, and telephone calls, emails and text messages in both English as well as their native language. The workshops are presented in both English and Spanish. If parents request translation in a language other than English or Spanish, we will provide translation for them. Workshop agendas, sign-in sheets and related documents (handouts, notification flyers, newsletters, etc.) are kept on file in the Principal's Office. The tentative schedule for the workshops is as follows: Date Time Topic Presenter 9/26/2018 6:00 PM How Can Your Child Prepare For His/Her Future Ms. Alicea Ms. DeJesus 2018-19 CEP 49  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities 10/22/2018 6:00 PM The College Process Ms. Alicea Ms. DeJesus 11/05/2018 6:00 PM Understanding Transcripts/Report Cards Ms. Alicea Ms. DeJesus 12/10/2018 6:00 PM Common Core Mathematics Ms. Callaghan 1/7/2019 6:00 PM How to Help Your Child Prepare for the Regents Ms. Callaghan Ms. Lawyer 2/4/2019 6:00 PM Financial Aid - How to Apply for Financial Aid Ms. Alicea & Ms. De Jesus 3/26/2019 6:00 PM Common Core for ELA Ms. Tackett 4/8/2019 6:00 PM 2018-19 CEP 50  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Health and Nutrition Mr. McNerney Ms. Sheridan 5/6/2019 6:00 PM Cyberbullying Mr. Munting Guidance Dept. 6/5/2019 6:00 PM Summer Opportunities for Students Ms. Alicea & Ms. DeJesus Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) N/A  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials. N/A N/A Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 51  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 52  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 11 School Name New World High School Borough Bronx School Number 513 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Fausto Salazar Coach ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Jeremy Ehrlich Teacher/Subject Area Jeff Briggs/Mathematics Teacher/Subject Area Alison Johnson/SS Related-Service Provider Superintendent Carron Staple Assistant Principal Mithat Gashi Coach School Counselor Erica DeJesus Parent Julieta Martinez Parent Coordinator Field Support Center Staff Member Other (Name and Title) C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 2 6 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 3 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 3 2018-19 CEP 53 Total number of ELLs 235 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 7833.33%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 2 4 3 K Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 0 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Upon registration, staff from New World High School (Principal, Guidance Counselors, ESL teachers) interview families to determine not only SIFE status, but also to understand the proficiency level of each student both in English and in their native language. The students are administered the New York State Identification Test for English Language Learners (NYSITELL) , and when appropriate, the Spanish LAB to test student literacy level in their native language. For non-Spanish speaking students, a writing assignment and oral informal interview are administered. Based upon these interviews and exams, the student is placed in the appropriate ESL level and adjustments are made based upon teacher recommendations. Students who do well in their native language are challenged to be mainstreamed as soon as possible, and those who require extra support are offered in-class and after-school support services. Furthermore, assessment of student learning at New World HS is ongoing. Assessments are aligned to the standards. Rubrics are integrated in class work / presentations and projects and assessments Grading policy captures students’ progress and understanding of standards 2018-19 CEP 54  2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Through common planing time, examining student work collaboratively, intervisitations, lesson study, teachers discuss and identify effective approaches to assess student learning. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? New World High School is a school in the category of "In Good Standing" in the state; our four year graduation rate exceeded city and state expectations this past academic year, and our attendance rate continues to be over 90%. Based on these results, and the fact that we are an all ELL school, we can evidently say that the program has been successful. In terms of college readiness, we are ranked above our peer group in the program. Overall, we are ranked in the 95th percentile of all schools in the city. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? After each marking period, teachers and administration, and guidance conduct a thorough data analysis. Teachers analyze trends in student performance and discuss next steps. Some of the questions that teachers discuss are: In what areas were students successful, and why? In what areas were students not successful and why? Identify root causes of student success: List some possible reasons / hypotheses to explain student success in these areas. List some strategies/interventions you may utilize to address the challenge areas? 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] N/A 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Based on the analysis of multiple sources of data such as NYSITELL, NYSESLAT, Regents resutls and grades, students at New World High School are progressing appropriately in reading and writing, but not as well in listening and speaking. This affects instruction in the kind of classroom activities used on a daily basis. Activities will include reading aloud, teacher model reading, student reading aloud, student presentations with audience responses , student interviewing student, and cooperative learning activities that include active listening and speaking among different members of the group. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Teams of teachers meet and discuss student performance and progress and based on that make recommendations for curricular adoptation, program changes, professional development, etc. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. In our freestanding ENL program, all students receive the required minutes of ESL instruction in compliance with CR Part 154 via homogeneous proficiency-level block scheduling. An example of a block: In 9 th grade, students take standalone ESL/ELA for 90 minutes per day with a teacher who holds dual certification in ELA and ESL. Students take social studies with a teacher who holds dual certification in Social Studies and ESL. Four of our teachers hold dual 2018-19 CEP 55  certifications. The classes travel together throughout the day. Only on rare cases, when we need to customize a schedule, the student may be out of a block for a period or two. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. NA 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? ENTERING: A dual-certified ENL/ELA teacher provides 450 minutes/week instruction, and an ENL teacher teacher 90 min/wk. EMERGING: A dual-certified ENL/ELA teacher provides 450 minutes/week instruction, and an ENL teacher teacher 90 min/wk. TRANSITIONING: A dual-certified ENL/social studies teacher provides 225 min/wk, and an ENL teacher provides 450 min/wk.EXPANDING: A dual-certified ENL/social studies teacher provides 225 min/wk, and an ENL teacher provides 450 min/wk.COMMANDING: A dual-certified ENL/social studies teacher provides 225 min/wk, and an ENL teacher provides 450 min/wk. ■Occasionally, an co-teaching model will supplement a single-certified social studies teacher. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. We are an English immersion school; students receive instruction in all subject areas in English, and are required to speak English in all their in-school and extra curricular activities to support their English language acquisition. Instruction in all classes is modified to support students’ learning at and above the New York State standards for those disciplines, while also supporting students’ mastery of English skills. All teachers are working on developing units addressing the new NYS Common Core standards. Our staff receives training in the use of ESL techniques through the Office of ELLs, and through our partner organizations such as Lehman College, Fordham University, and others. Teachers adapt lessons to make the best use of these techniques in order to make information and concepts accessible to all of our students regardless of English skills level. Content area teachers are trained in implementing ESL strategies in the delivery of instruction. In beginner and intermediate ESL classes, all teachers use more audio visuals, video clips, and scaffolding to differentiate instruction. In addition to books -to maximize opportunities for student learning- teachers use numerous web-based software programs such as PASCO, hands-on activities in science classes, Eduware (exam prep educational software), Discovery Learning for all subject areas, Brainpops for all subjects, Gizmo for math and science, Power Speak, and Boardworks for all subject areas. Also, teachers use graphic organizers, thematic unit of study, maps, charts, and word walls. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? N/A 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status We are an English immersion school; students receive instruction in all subject areas in English, and are required to speak English in all their in-school and extra curricular activities to support their English language acquisition. Instruction in all classes is modified to support students’ learning at and above the New York State standards for those disciplines, while also supporting students’ mastery of English skills. All teachers are working on developing units addressing the new NYS Common Core standards. Our staff receives training in the use of ESL techniques through the Office of ELLs, and through our partner organizations such as Lehman College, Fordham University, and others. Teachers adapt lessons to make the best use of these techniques in order to make information and concepts accessible to all of our students regardless of English skills level. 2018-19 CEP 56  Content area teachers are trained in implementing ESL strategies in the delivery of instruction. In beginner and intermediate ESL classes, all teachers use more audio visuals, video clips, and scaffolding to differentiate instruction. In addition to books -to maximize opportunities for student learning- teachers use numerous web-based software programs such as PASCO, hands-on activities in science classes, Eduware (exam prep educational software), Discovery Learning for all subject areas, Brainpops for all subjects, Gizmo for math and science, Power Speak, and Boardworks for all subject areas. Also, teachers use graphic organizers, thematic unit of study, maps, charts, and word walls. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? All of our ELL/SWD students are placed in mainstream classes with full ESL accomodations as prescribed by the IEP and CR Part 154. Some students have the assistance of IEP Paraprofessionals and certified Special Education teachers, and all students are in a resource room run by licensed Special Education and content area teachers. Students are given the accomodations specified in their IEP and counselors monitor their progress and provide individual counseling. Teachers of these students are given information about each of the students concerning strengths, limitations, necessary accomodations, and long term plans. Common planning time is used for Special Education and content area teachers to co-plan lessons and to review student work. Based upon this information, teachers make modifications to instruction and assessment. Modifications to instruction may include special grouping, scaffolding, extra time to complete tasks, specified seating, etc. In terms of materials, teachers are required to give students access to different Reading levels of the same textbook material. The use of Discovery Education and Brain Pop enable students to gain understanding of concepts through a more audio-visual approach. The use of Gizmos and PASCO Learning equipment enable students to understand by using a more hands-on, problem solving approach. In terms of assessment, all staff follow IEP accomodations as they pertain to school developed materials and standardized tests.The administration, guidance counselor, and special education teacher works with the parents of students with an IEP mandating bilingual instruction on a decision to enroll in an ESL emersion progam, as described in this document, or to find a school placement with bilingual special education programs. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? As explained in answer #8, curricular and instructional flexibility are based upon student assessment and needs. In terms of scheduling, we also offer after-school tutoring, and Regents prep classes to help students master the skills that could not be acquired during regular classes. We also provide academic support every Saturday for both group and individual tutoring sessions. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. All instruction is delivered in English. In order to ensure success in ELA, Mathematics, and other core content areas, we provide a Regents prep class after school and on Saturdays, in-class peer tutoring, additional classes in Math, English literacy, the Sciences, and Global Studies, after-school peer tutoring, Saturday Academy, mock Regents exams, and targeted intervention. All of these are constantly being analyzed and adjustments to instruction continues to be modified to align to student needs.Despite being an English emersion program, interventions are offered via extended use of bilingual dictionaries, translators, and dual-language teachers and support staff. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? We will continue to develop our existing program with a focus on long-term ELLs and SIFE students. In addition, we are implementing an on-line tutoring program to further support our struggling students. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? None of our programs or services will be discontinued. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. 2018-19 CEP 57  ELLs are afforded equal access to all school programs not only because of a highly qualified staff, but also due to the partnerships that we have established with outside organizations and institutions of higher learning. With the help of the Office of ELLs, we have been able to expand our support system to include all content areas. This support system is a combination of in-class peer tutoring, after-school peer tutoring, mock Regents exams, item analysis of these exams, and planning instruction based upon these results. After-school programs include Regents prep classes, drama, theater, computers, music, and sport activities. We encourage our students to not only succeed academically, but to broaden their abilities through extracurricular activities. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Our teachers use several different modes and materials to support the learning of ELL students. In the classroom, charts and graphs are used to help students organize the rules of the English language. Also, photographs, pictures, internet sites, and other visual aids are employed to assist with understanding word meaning. Extra time is given for scaffolding and guided reading to ensure that students can grasp text meaning. Audio materials are used to help students to improve their listening comprehension skills. The use of supplemental texts, including dictionaries/translators, and copies of short stories are available for students to improve reading skills. Subject class teachers use downloaded movies from united streaming, incorporate the use of the LCD projector, use graphic organizers, enhance lessons with the use of Smart boards, have students involved in hands-on projects using the computer lab, use pull-down maps to display locations, and use posters of different countries, cultures, etc.. to further motivate students. Hands-on activities using PASCO materials in Science classes, Eduware software (exam prep educational software) is used by teachers to prepare effective assessment and instruction, and students use a remote controlled hand-held answering device (clicker) for in-class assessment to provide immediate feedback. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? taff members speak 11 different languages (Spanish, Arabic, French, Albanian, Urdu, Bengali, Dutch, Korean, Italian, Chinese, German) and can provide assistance individually or in groups. We also have peer tutoring where students are grouped according to native language and additional support is given by other students who speak the same language. Our school population consists of students who speak more than twenty different languages with the main sub-groups being Spanish, Arabic, French and Albanian. During AIS, staff members work with students on a one-to-one basis. The online tutoring program is also conducted in individual native languages. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Required services are provided based upon NYSITELL and NYSESLAT results. Students’ block program is designed to ensure that our students follow a program appropriate for grade level that will allow them to graduate in four years with their corresponding class. We are a freestanding ESL high school and all resources are aligned and allocated to meet the requirements of CR Part 154. For those students who are older when admitted to our school, we support them with extra courses to accelerate their credit accumulation, and additonal preparation to support the literacy needs necessary to be successful on the Regents exams. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Our teachers use several different modes and materials to support the learning of ELL students. In the classroom, charts and graphs are used to help students organize the rules of the English language. Also, photographs, pictures, internet sites, and other visual aids are employed to assist with understanding word meaning. Extra time is given for scaffolding and guided reading to ensure that students can grasp text meaning. Audio materials are used to help students to improve their listening comprehension skills. The use of supplemental texts, including dictionaries/translators, and copies of short stories are available for students to improve reading skills. Subject class teachers use downloaded movies from united streaming, incorporate the use of the LCD projector, use graphic organizers, enhance lessons with the use of Smart boards, have students involved in hands-on projects using the computer lab, use pull-down maps to display locations, and use posters of different countries, cultures, etc.. to further motivate students. Hands-on activities using PASCO materials in Science classes, Eduware software (exam prep educational software) is used by teachers to prepare effective assessment and instruction, and students use a remote controlled hand-held answering device (clicker) for in-class assessment to provide immediate feedback. 2018-19 CEP 58  16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). We offer the Bridge Program during the summer which is a combination of in-class instruction and enrichment excursions throughout the city. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? We offer advanced placement exams in French and Spanish, as well as credit accumulating online courses. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Our staff members benefit from a wide range of professional development opportunities, both in school and outside of the school through Department of Education and private resources. Professional development activities involve formal and informal processes. Some activities include: intervisitation to other teachers’ classrooms; sharing best practices informally and also during staff meetings; attending workshops outside the school and sharing what was learned at department and staff meetings; learning walks done at different times and observing specific practices; staff self-reflections to set goals for the year; case conferences to help staff do thorough examinations of student struggles and develop action plans; collection of data which is analyzed in an effort to assess students and also interventions; involved in action research activities; formal and informal observations in order for administration to continue to support staff as assessments of practices are made and techniques are developed; goal setting meetings are used for staff members to reflect on their strengths and weaknesses and to develop a plan to help them achieve their desired goal along with meetings that follow to assess progress towards meeting the goal; mentoring is offered to new teachers as they begin their career; buddy teachers volunteer to work with new teachers in order to share experiences, web-based instructional and informative sessions to ensure that secretaries are kept abreast of the latest regulations and practices, workshops sponsored by the Department of Education and by our partner organizations to train secretaries in modifications and additions to existing programs, Our parent coordinator is actively involved in all school-based professional development as well as attends workshops focusing on the needs of parents and students, getting more parents involved with the school community, and practices to assure parents of student safety in school, among others. Guidance counselors attend all professional development sessions in-house and also attend outside workshops that focus on the college entry process, student safety, and dealing with the issues that students face not only as tenagers, but as new young adults in our country. Our paraprofessionals attend workshops offered by the Office of ELLs. We currently do not have occupational/physical therapists or speech therapists. Staff members at New World High School have attended professional development workshops on: SIOP, PASCO, Boardworks, classroom action research, Common Core, RTI, IEP Writing, Co-teaching, technology workshops, scaffolding instruction for English language learners, and many more. Professional development at New World High School is ongoing. Teachers are provided with time to meet and (1) examine student work collaboratively; (2) conduct lesson study that is integrated with inter-visitation and debriefing; (3) in grade level teams, identify common themes across curriculum to create common projects; (4) share findings of classroom action research, et. Also, the assistant principals and teachers meet regularly to discuss lesson planning that addresses the Common Core Standards as 2018-19 CEP 59  students progress in their English language development. In addition, teachers attend workshops offered by the Office of ELLs and our partner organizations such as Lehman College and Fordham Univeristy. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Staff at New World High School is provided is provided professional developmetn in SIOP. Teachers integrate a variety of SIOP strategies to help students transition to high school. In addition, the Principal and the Guidance department have prepared grade-level assemblies, in-class workshops, and an advisory program for the 9 th grade to create a smooth transition to high school. Special focus is placed on parent outreach for early year Open School day and night, as well as regular Parent Association meetings. Professional development at New World High School is ongoing. Teachers (1) examine student work collaboratively; (2) conduct lesson study that is integrated with inter-visitation and debriefing; (3) in grade level teams, teachers identify common themes across curriculum to create common projects; (4) share findings of classroom action research, et. Also, the assistant principals and teachers meet regularly to discuss lesson planning that addresses the Common Core Standards as students progress in their English language development. In addition, teachers attend workshops offered by the Office of ELLs and our partner organizations such as Lehman College and Fordham Univeristy. Teacher professional development include: Literacy in the conent area for ELLs, SIOP, literacy development for ELLs, professional studies teams, language acquisition techniques, helping students recognize cognates, text annotation, writing strategies for ELLs, etc. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Parents attend regular workshops in the evening, parent association meetings, and they volunteer for different cultural events that take place throughout the year. When necessary, we provide translation services for parents who do not understand English. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. In addition to our parents’ participation on the required committees, they also attend regular workshops in the evening, parent association meetings, and they volunteer for different cultural events that take place throughout the year. Translations services to parents are provided on a needs basis. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. 2018-19 CEP 60 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Fausto Salazar, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 61  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: New World High School School DBN: 11X513 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Fausto Salazar Title Principal Mithat Gashi Assistant Principal Parent Coordinator Jeremy Ehrlich ENL/Bilingual Teacher Julieta Martinez Parent Jeffrey Briggs Teacher/Subject Area Alison Johnson Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Erica DeJesus School Counselor Carron Staple Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 06/30/2017 06/30/2017 06/30/2017 06/30/2017 06/30/2017 06/30/2017 06/30/2017 06/30/2017 2018-19 CEP 62  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 11x513 School Name: New World High School Superintendent: The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Erica Jeremy Ruby DeJesus Ehrlich Alicea Guidance Counselor No/Trained in 2016-17 ENL Teacher November 2018 Guidance Counselor November 2018 Yes Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. New World High School collects data from several sources to ascertain the language preferences of all our parents. This begins with Freshman Orientation and continues throughout the school year as students arrive over the counter as new admits. Protocols have been established to have families fill out the Language Preference Survey when registering their student. New students who enroll throughout the school year must meet with administration together with their parent/guardian. During this meeting the school collects data for Part III of the HLIS as well as other data pertinent to language preference. Additional information is gathered through surveys during Parent/teacher conferences and ongoing face-to-face meetings. Parent meeting take place on an ongoing basis as we have an open-door policy. Additionally, we use ATS reports to download language preferences when sending out mailings to parents and families. Information is sent in both English and the language of preference. 2018-19 CEP 63  Furthermore, we survey the blue cards yearly to determine the preferred language which is entered into ATS by the pupil accounting secretary. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Albanian Arabic Bengali Chinese (any) French Fulani Haitian Creole Hindi Hausa Italian English Pashto Slovak Spanish Urdu Ukrainian Vietnamese Wolof 4 49 16 2 26 1 1 1 1 3 90 1 0 349 9 2 2 1 .72 8.78 2.87 .36 4.66 .18 .18 .18 .18 .54 16.13 .18 0 62.54 1.61 .36 .36 .18 4 50 16 2 22 4 1 1 1 3 89 1 1 349 9 2 2 1 .72 8.96 2.87 .36 3.94 .72 .18 .18 .18 .54 15.95 .18 .18 62.54 1.61 .36 .36 .18 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. 2018-19 CEP 64  Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to Families Parent-teacher conference announcements September 26 November 29 & 30 March 7 & 8 May 9 Information about after-school programs September FAFSA October/November Workshops for parents/SLT Ongoing How do you plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Documents will be translated into the preferred languages of the families we service. This will be done through the DOE's translation unit, eligible staff and/or a DOE vendor. Eligible staff in the school as of October 15, 2018 include the following: Albanian=3 Arabic=2 Dutch=1 French=2 German=1 Italian=2 Korean=1 Spanish=9 All documents will be translated into the preferred languages of the families we service. This will be done through the DOE's translation unit, eligible staff and/or a DOE vendor. Documents will be translated into the preferred languages of the families we service. This will be done through the DOE's translation unit, eligible staff and/or a DOE vendor. Documents will be translated into the preferred languages of the families we service. This will be done through the DOE's translation unit, eligible staff and/or a DOE vendor. Promotion in Doubt Letters December and May Translated by the DOE 2018-19 CEP 65  Awards Night for Parents/Students April and May Welcome to School Letter Early September Meal Forms/ Vaccination Letters September Intake Documents for Freshmen and new students including over-the-counter new admits: Emergency Blue Cards, Parent Survey, Residency Questionnaire, Home Language Identification Survey, etc. These documents are distributed and completed during Freshman Orientation which starts at the end of May and continues through mid-June (2-3 Saturday sessions). Theses documents are also distributed throughout the school year as new students enroll over-the-counter. Compliance forms such as Title III letter, parent selection and notification forms, NYSITELL letters, NYSESLAT letters Ongoing Documents will be translated into the preferred languages of the families we service. This will be done through the DOE's translation unit, eligible staff and/or a DOE vendor. Documents will be translated into the preferred languages of the families we service. This will be done through the DOE's translation unit, eligible staff and/or a DOE vendor. These forms have been translated by the DOE and can be found on the intranet. These forms have been translated by the DOE and can be found on the intranet. These forms have been translated by the DOE and can be found on the intranet. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Awards Night for Parents/Students April and May IEP Meetings Ongoing interpretation service(s)?  over the phone  eligible staff can translate in the school - as of 10/15/18, languages spoken by staff include: Albanian=3; Arabic=2; Dutch=1; French=2; German=1; Italian=2; Korean=1; Russian=1; Spanish=9  over the phone  eligible staff can translate in the school - as of 10/15/18, languages spoken by staff include: Albanian=3; Arabic=2; Dutch=1; French=2; German=1; 2018-19 CEP 66  Parent Conferences Ongoing Incoming 9th grade Orientation May and June Parent Association Meetings Monthly SLT Meetings Monthly Face-to-face letters, disciplinary letters, tax letters, student attendance verification letters Ongoing Italian=2; Korean=1; Russian=1; Spanish=9  over the phone  eligible staff can translate in the school - as of 10/15/18, languages spoken by staff include: Albanian=3; Arabic=2; Dutch=1; French=2; German=1; Italian=2; Korean=1; Russian=1; Spanish=9  over the phone  eligible staff can translate in the school - as of 10/15/18, languages spoken by staff include: Albanian=3; Arabic=2; Dutch=1; French=2; German=1; Italian=2; Korean=1; Russian=1; Spanish=9  over the phone  eligible staff can translate in the school - as of 10/15/18, languages spoken by staff include: Albanian=3; Arabic=2; Dutch=1; French=2; German=1; Italian=2; Korean=1; Russian=1; Spanish=9  over the phone  eligible staff can translate in the school - as of 10/15/18, languages spoken by staff include: Albanian=3; Arabic=2; Dutch=1; French=2; German=1; Italian=2; Korean=1; Russian=1; Spanish=9  over the phone  eligible staff can translate in the school - as of 10/15/18, languages spoken by staff include: Albanian=3; Arabic=2; Dutch=1; French=2; German=1; Italian=2; Korean=1; Russian=1; Spanish=9 2018-19 CEP 67  Shows/Celebrations Monthly  over the phone notifications in home language using staff and/or School Messenger  eligible staff can translate in the school - as of 10/15/18, languages spoken by staff include: Albanian=3; Arabic=2; Dutch=1; French=2; German=1; Italian=2; Korean=1; Russian=1; Spanish=9 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. In the event of a school emergency, the Language Access Coordinator will assist in translation for any information that needs to be sent, emailed or telephoned home. This will be done by the use of staff versed in several different languages in the school, through the DOE translation and interpretation unit when applicable and the language line. Also, the school staff will be utilized to make personal phone call home as well as calls made from the guidance department. We also use communication systems such as School Messenger to help deliver important information to all families in their home language. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Information is shared during staff and parent association meetings by the LAC and guidance counselors. A copy of the Chancellor's Regulations was also given to staff at the start of the school year. Additionally, the Language Access Coordinator will turnkey valuable information and train staff on how to use the language line. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..)  Our bilingual guidance counselors and other staff will provide verbal interpretation and written translation services to families.  Our staff will interpret NCLB communications not available from the DOE as well as students' academic performance and approaches to increasing achievement; for example, information shared during open school night. 2018-19 CEP 68  Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? The school learning environment survey is reviewed yearly during staff professional development and discussions take place to improve parent communication during parent/teacher conferences and parent association meetings. Ongoing communication between all constituents will take place including the PA, SLT and staff. Additionally, we gather qualitative and quantitative data from parents through interviews and surveys to make informed decisions based on the language needs in our school. 2018-19 CEP 69 
