2018-19 SCHOOL COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (SCEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 12X550 School Name: HIGH SCHOOL OF WORLD CULTURES Principal: RAMON NAMNUN 2018-19 SCEP-P 1  School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Section 4: SCEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) Section 7: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 8: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 9: Title I Program Information Section 10: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 SCEP-P 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information High School of World Cultures 321200011550 9-12 School Number (DBN): 12X550 1300 Boynton Avenue Bronx, N.Y. 10472 1718-860-8120 1718-893-7152 Phone Number: Dr. Ramon Namnun Fax: Email Address: rnamnun@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: Dr. Ramon Namnun Mr. AladjiSow Ms. CarolinaCanales Ms. AdalgisaDiaz SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: BismarckLantigua Patricia Gonzalez Wilmer Hernandez N/A District Information Geographical District: 12 Superintendent’s Office Address: Michael Alcoff Superintendent: 2 MetrotechCenter, Brooklyn, New York 11201 malcoff@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-935-3074 Phone Number: 718-935-5780 Fax: FSC: Bronx Field Support Center (FSC) Executive Director: Jose Ruiz 2018-19 SCEP-P 3  Executive Director’s Office Address: 1230 Zerega Avenue, Bronx, NY 10462/ One Fordham Plaza, Bronx, NY 10458 jruiz2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: Phone Number: Fax: 718-828-7776/(718) 741-8895 (718) 828-6280 2018-19 SCEP-P 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the SCEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Ramon Namnun AladjiSow Erika Reyes MilagrosaVega EligioPeralta SamaaSaleh Enrique Munoz Aurora Concepcion Carolina Canales AdalgisaDiaz *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Member/Parent PTA Co- President Member/UFT/ Chair 2018-19 SCEP-P 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Mariana Morales RemigioEscalante Claudia Pimentel Member/UFT/Time Keeper Member/Parent/Treasurer Member/ Teacher Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 SCEP-P 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) is a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. The process of developing and implementing the SCEP is aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding SCEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department has established programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students supports to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and SCEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint for continuous improvement that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to increase student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five (5) goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 SCEP-P 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. Accountability Tools and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is informed by the New York State Education Department’s (NYSED) Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) Tenets, the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Rubric, School Quality Guide and other quantitative and qualitative data tools. NYSED’s Six DTSDE Tenets To strengthen the existing system, the NYSED has developed a tool that captures the best practices from each of the current tools called the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness. This new tool encompasses multiple instruments such as interviews, classroom observations and surveys. The protocol will begin with a clear and cogent statement of the optimal conditions of an effective school and the instruments comprising the protocol will measure how close or far away a particular school is to the optimal conditions identified. Once reviewed, the school and district will create a strategic plan to address the areas in need of improvement. All current Priority and Focus Schools and Focus Districts must use the tool; districts that are required to submit District Comprehensive Improvement Plans and Comprehensive Educational Plans also will use the tool. The DTSDE protocol includes a rubric, which identifies clear and coherent expectations of the optimal conditions of an effective school and school district across the following six tenets:  Tenet 1: District Leadership and Capacity  Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions  Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support  Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions  Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health, and  Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 2017-18 Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: 2018-19 SCEP-P 8  Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) I. II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Structures for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the SCEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the SCEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. Next Steps for SCEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: In Part 1A of the Section 5: Needs Assessment indicate the Statement of Practice (SOP) from the DTSDE Tenets that will be addressed in the action plan. Schools that received an Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) School Review should use the recommendations from the review to select their SOPs. Schools that did not undergo an IIT review should select SOPs informed by the major findings/recommendations from your most recent Quality Review (QR) or Central-led Review (CLR), and other qualitative and quantitative data.  Step 4: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you 2018-19 SCEP-P 9  monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 5: Build consensus around activities, strategies and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 6: Step 6: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 7: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 2018-19 SCEP-P 10  Section 4: SCEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? The mission at the High School of World Cultures is to prepare our students to be multilingual and multicultural citizens through personal and civic excellence. We encourage each student to value multiple perspectives, individual creativity, and be lifelong learners. Through our programs and partnerships, we hope to give students a high school learning experience that will positively impact their futures and drive their curiosity to always be open to learning. Cultural awareness and maintaining a global mindset are qualities that we embed into our curricula and planned learning experiences. Our motto, “Children First, No Excuses, High Standards,” encompasses our mission and values. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. The High School of World Cultures is located at the James Monroe Campus in the Soundview section of the Bronx. The school serves approximately 493 students in grades 9-12, from thirty different countries, representing approximately 13 different languages. 100 percent of the student population is eligible for free and reduced lunch. The annual attendance rate for 2017-2018, by the end of June 2018, was 83% percent. The most current available data from the 2017-2018 School Data Summary Report (RSDS) reflects the following demographic information: 41 students Asian; 44 Black students; 376 Hispanic students; 23 White students; 3 Native Hawaiian or other Pacific Islander students; 6 American Indian or Alaskan Native. The school implements the following strategic collaborations and partnerships: In 2015, a Culinary Arts Career and Technical (CTE) program was introduced with the intention of increasing attendance and graduation, as a result of interest in the program. Two certified chefs teach preparation classes in the day, introducing skills that student are then able to apply in the after school culinary Lab. These classes were designed to increase content and language proficiency while giving the students a taste of the industry. Students who complete the requirements of the program will qualify for the New York State CTE Culinary Seal. This program continues into 2018-2019. In 2016, we introduced a partnership with Business United in Investing, Lending, & Development (BUILD). BUILD is an entrepreneurial-based, experiential learning program for students in under-resourced communities. The program enables students to develop critical skills and mindsets to improve graduation rates, increase college enrollment, and prepare for post-secondary careers. These skills are built over a four year curriculum, in which students create a product, make a pitch, develop the product, market the product, and manage funds. Ideally, students have the opportunity to actually develop and sell a product. We currently have half of our ninth graders enrolled in the BUILD program. Those not enrolled have chosen to participate in the Culinary CTE program.This program continues into 2018-2019. In 2017, our school was selected as a Progressive Redesign Opportunity Schools of Excellence (PROSE) school. As a PROSE school we will extend instructional time for our students and we will provide college and career readiness opportunities on a weekly basis. The school will continue its PROSE status for the 2018-2019 school year. To prepare our students for college and career readiness, we have AP Spanish Literature classes. We have teachers certified in AP U.S. history, biology, and will have teachers trained in AP English composition, and AP world geography for the 2018-2019 school year. Furthermore, we are looking into the prospect of our students taking the College Level Examination Program (CLEP) exams. This will allow our students even more options for obtaining college credit and secondary advancement. The High School of World Cultures collaborates with the following CBOs as a result of our 21st Century Grant; Innovative Designs for Education (IDE), OmniLearn, SoBRO, and Stella Adler. 2018-19 SCEP-P 11  Innovative Designs for Education (IDE) provides customized professional development with our teachers. OmniLearn’s mission is to ensure STEM based learning opportunities. SoBRO (South Bronx) organization provides workshops for the parents of our students that focus on improving computer literacy and other experiential learning opportunities. The Stella Adler partnership aims to increase the verbal skills of our students. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. The High School of World Cultures serves English Language Learners (ELLs) in grades 9-12 who have recently arrived from non-English speaking countries. According to data from the 2017-2018 New York State English as a Second Language Achievement Test (NYSESLAT) and New York State Identification Test for English Language Learners (NYSITELL), approximately 444 students are entitled to English as a New Language (ENL) services from a certified pedagogue. Although the ENL population is ninety percent, approximately additional three percent are recent non-ELLs and require an additional two years of ENL instruction as per PART 154 of the Commissioner’s Regulations for Pupils with Limited English Proficiency. Out of the 444 ELL students with scores, based on 2017-2018 NYSESLAT and September 2018 NYSITELL proficency levels, reflect the following distribution: Entering-317; Emerging-23; Transitioning-15; Expanding-5 students; Commanding-0 students. Given the large number of students who are recent arrivals, challenges for the teachers and staff include preparing such ELL students for the rigorous expectations of passing Regents exams and meeting on-track graduation. The learning needs of these entering students are complex and multi-dimensional, including linguistic issues; cultural issues; skill, content, and background knowledge gaps with the additional layer of social-emotional issues of adolescents in our society and our community. Out of the total number of ELL students, 221 students (approximately 50%) are SIFE, whose interrupted educational experience presents unique challenges to teaching and learning, as these students have limited language proficiency levels and low levels of academic skills. There are currently 17 students with IEPs, spanning the following range of disabilities: Emotionally Disturbed; Learning Disabled; Speech or Language Impaired. These students receive IEP-driven services within the Integrated Co-Teaching classroom setting. Dual Language (DL) programs reinforce literacy skills in students home languages while also acting as a catalyst for learning English and/or Spanish. As determined by the home Language Survey, 78% percent of our students come from Spanish speaking countries and/or households. With these data in mind, benefiting students are offered a one-way DL program, receiving home language instruction in the content areas of mathematics, science, and Native Language Arts (NLA). To accommodate our non-native Spanish speaking population, a two-way DL program offers commanding and expanding ELLs the opportunities to learn Spanish alongside English. This program follows the more traditional language models, with a class population comprised of fifty percent English and/or Spanish dominant. In the two way DL program, the language of instruction in social studies and science alternate daily, strengthening their dominate language while increasing proficiency in the target language. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. The element of the Framework for Great Schools in which the school made the most progress was Collaborative Teachers. The school's collaborative decision during the 2017-2018 school year to become a PROSE school energized the teachers and school leaders to strengthen their collaborative and professional efforts as a unified staff on behalf of the students. 2018-19 SCEP-P 12  The element of the Framework for Great Schools which will be the key area of focus for the upcoming year will continue to be Rigorous Instruction. This area was cited as "Developing or Ineffective," based on feedback and next steps in the Superintendent and Principal Leadership Facilitator-Deputy Superintendent's PPOs conducted during the 2017-2018 school year. 2018-19 SCEP-P 13  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 12X550 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 448 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language YES Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 2 2 12 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 1 1 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 95.0% % Attendance Rate 98.0% % Reduced Lunch 80.1% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 1.6% 77.0% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 4.7% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 15.08 0% 17% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 41% 35% 38.5% 1.3% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No No Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District Yes Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A NO N/A N/A NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A N/A NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A N/A NO No N/A N/A N/A 6 83.7% 0.4% 1.6% 7.6% 9.2% 1.6% 2 26% 4 N/A N/A 53% 55% 67.0% 4% N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A NO NO 2018-19 SCEP-P 14  2018-19 SCEP-P 15  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 3 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 3.2 The school leader ensures and supports the quality implementation of a systematic plan of rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of students. Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction (DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and address student achievement needs. The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. 3.3 3.4 3.5 SOP(s) Addressed n/a n/a n/a X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. According to the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide, the School Survey reflects a score for Rigorous Instruction of 2.72, an increase from 2016-2017 of score 2.29. According to the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide, the Framework Element score for Rigorous Instruction reflects a score of 2.56, an increase from 2016-2017 of score 2.45. According to the 2017-2018 School Survey in the Academic Press section, the NYC School Survey Measures score is 3.89 (+5% compared to borough average and +5% compared to city average. According to the 2017-2018 School Survey, for Rigorous Instruction, "83% of students responded that teachers want students to become better thinkers, not just memorize things. (Q5e)" This response reflects 6% above borough average and city average. According to the 2017-2018 School Survey, for Rigorous Instruction, "55% of teachers responded that a lot or all of the students in their classes respond to challenging questions in class. (Q20g)" This response reflects an equal percent to borough average and 4% below city average. 2018-19 SCEP-P 16  According to the 2017-2018 School Survey, for Rigorous Instruction, "70% of students say that they are challenged in their classes. (Q5a)." This response reflects 13% above borough average and city average. According to the 2017-2018 School Survey, for Rigorous Instruction, "93% of teachers responded that students have to work hard to do well. (Q20c)" This response reflects 14% above borough average and city average. According to the MOTP score tracker data from 2017-2018, who have Advance ratings and will return for 2018-2019, all teachers were rated overall effective, as per the Danielson Framework for Teaching. According to the Superintendent's PPO dated March 23, 2018, the school needs to, "Develop teacher pedagogy from a coherent set of beliefs about how students learn best that is informed by the instructional shifts and Danielson's Framework for Teaching, aligned to the curricula, engaging, and meets the needs of all learners so that all students produce meaningful work products." (QR 1.1, 1.2) According to the Principal Leadership Facilitator-Deputy Superintendent's PPO dated November 1, 2017, the school needs to, "Provide professional development to address improving teacher practices in Danielson components 3B, 3C, and 3D. Professional Development should include strategies to engage all levels of learners in the class, higher order thinking questions/tasks to promote student thinking and student to student discussions, and ways for teachers to assess student understanding throughout the lesson." (QR 1.2) Additionally, in this same PPO feedback, the next steps recommendation was, "Identify a school wide strategy for assessing student understanding at the end of each lesson." (QR 2.2) The June 2018 Regents Item Skills Analysis for Global History Transition school wide average was 46.05, compared to city wide average of 70.49. The percent passing was 3.26%. The June 2018 Regents Item Skills Analysis for Physical Setting Earth Science school wide average was 50.75, compared to city wide average of 67.6. The percent passing was 25.93%. The June 2018 Regents Item Skills Analysis for Physical Setting Physics school wide average was 34.50, compared to city wide average of 72.26 The percent passing was 12.50%. The June 2018 Regents Item Skills Analysis for Living Environment school wide average was 44.70, compared to city wide average of 70.03.The percent passing was 11.11%. The June 2018 Regents Item Skills Analysis for Algebra II (CC) school wide average was 55.85, compared to city wide average of 70.67. The percent passing was 27.45%. The June 2018 Regents Item Skills Analysis for Geometry (CC)school wide average was 58.56, compared to city wide average of 65.6. The percent passing was 25.00%. The June 2018 Regents Item Skills Analysis for Algebra I (CC)school wide average was 55.96, compared to city wide average of 66.33. The percent passing was 32.32%. The June 2018 Regents Item Skills Analysis for US History and Government school wide average was 68.29, compared to city wide average of 74.58. The percent passing was 65.28%. The June 2018 Regents Item Skills Analysis for English Language Arts (CC) school wide average was 40.03, compared to city wide average of 65. The percent passing was 21.01%. According to the School Year 2016-2017 Scholarship Report, term 1, the following reflects important data, relative to this Framework element of Rigorous Instruction: 2018-19 SCEP-P 17  -The average percentage of students who accumulated four core credits for the fall term was 79.72. -The average percentage of students who accumulated four core credits for spring term was 68.13. -The average percentage of students who accumulated eight core credits for the year was 73.93. A review of the STARS Admin Report 1.07 (custom report) of student marks for year/term revealed, that as of June 2018: 22 students accumulated zero (0) core credits; 15 students accumulated 1 core credit; 14 students accumulated 2 core credits; 23 students accumulated 3 core credits; 20 students accumulated 4 core credits; 51 students accumulated 5 core credits; 56 students accumulated 6 core credits; 38 students accumulated 7 core credits; 120 students accumulated 8 core credits 135 students accumulated 9 or more core credits 130 discharged from the school (moved away, dropped out, transferred to a different school) 474 total students This analysis revealed that 255 out of 344 active students who were enrolled in 8 or more core content classes ( 74%) accumulated 8 or more core credits, as of June 2018. A review of the February 2018 Scholarship reports revealed that 366 out of 412 students (91.99) achieved passing grades in Advisory class GAS81 (CCLS Benchmark 2-Academic and Personal Behaviors) and 363 of 407 students (89.19) in June 2018. A review of February 2018 Scholarship Reports covering the 1st semester (September 2017 to January 2018) revealed that: 307 students out of 344 students who participated in the ELT Program passed 2 or more core classes. (89 %). We exceeded our June progress monitoring goal of 80% of students who participate in the Expanded Learning Time Program will achieve passing grades in at least 4 out of 8 core academic subjects. Our next steps will include continued monitoring by school leaders of the ELT Program and provide actionable feedback to teachers, bother verbally and in writing, to ensure effective implementation of the ELT Program and in order to 2018-19 SCEP-P 18  exceed our June 2019 annual goal of 80% of students who participate in the ELT Program achieving passing grades in all core academic subjects, as measured by final semester grades. On February 11, 2019, we engaged parents and the community through our school receivership hearing, where the public provided feedback and developed recommendations for the improvement of the school. This year’s recommendations aligned to rigorous instruction include:  o Differentiate instruction through tiered grouping as well as the use of technology to help improve instruction. o Create additional CTE (career and technical education) classes. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 80 percent of students will accumulate 11 credits, as measured by the June 2019 scholarship reports. 2018-19 SCEP-P 19  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Benchmark assessments will be implemented in all credit-bearing courses mid-semester to ensure mastery of the Common Core Learning Standards and Bilingual Common Core Initiative (BCCI) standards, to address the needs of ELLs. Students Supervisors will use Advance/ Danielson Framework for Teaching (components 1a, 1e, 3b, 3c, 3d) to evaluate and support the teachers’ planning and implementation of the Common Core standards and BCCI in their daily lessons. Teachers September 2018-June 2019 Baseline: September and February; Benchmarks Beginning of November and April; Summative January and June September 2018-June 2019 Monthly Supervisors will meet with teachers to discuss the findings of their benchmark assessments for each level; high performers, mid performers, and low performers, to meet the needs of SIFE and SWDs. Students September 2018-June 2019 October, December, March, and May Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Teachers, Assessment Team, Discipline Leaders, Instructional Cabinet Teachers, Instructional Cabinet Teachers, Discipline Leaders, Instructional Cabinet Progress reports will be used to measure the growth of students in both their target language and the content. Teachers will report the progress of their students of the standards based on the continuum aligned to the CCLS and BCCI, to address the needs of ELLs. Students September 2018-June 2019 Teachers, Discipline Leaders, Instructional Cabinet 2018-19 SCEP-P 20  One week post progress reports (as per the HSWC calendar) Teachers will receive professional development in language proficiency levels (BCCI) and how to plan multiple entry points based on the target language of the course and the targets of measurement, to address the needs of ELLs. Students September 2018-June 2019 Teachers, Discipline Leaders, Instructional Cabinet Teachers will create and update action plans for students based on their proficiency levels in both the target language of the course and level of content knowledge. Teachers Teachers will be trained in the use of supplemental online platforms. Teachers Course accreditation binders will be created to memorialize the progression of the standards delivered each course. This includes the syllabi, scope and sequence, and pacing guides. Teachers Ensure that the CCLS are covered in the curriculum, including the use of the BCC (language progression levels; multiple entry points/scaffolds and work products). Students Students will be given ENL, numeracy, and Spanish instruction to help them gain mastery in the standards and credits in their core classes, to address the needs of ELLs, SIFE and SWD students. Students Provide new teachers (to the DoE) with a mentor to promote their growth and development. Teachers Strategic focus will target students who accumulated 3 core credits and students who accumulated 2 core credits to develop action plans, with student input to plan individualized SMART learning goals that teachers and students develop together through one on one conferencing sessions. Teachers Ongoing September 2018-June 2019 September, November, and January; February, April, and June September 2018-June 2019, ongoing September 2018-June 2019, per semester September 2018-June 2019, ongoing September 2018-June 2019, ongoing September 2018-June 2019, ongoing September 2018-June 2019, ongoing Teachers, Discipline Leaders, Instructional Cabinet Teachers, Discipline Leaders, Instructional Cabinet Teachers, Discipline Leaders, Instructional Cabinet Teachers, Discipline Leaders, Instructional Cabinet Teachers, Discipline Leaders, Instructional Cabinet Teachers, Discipline Leaders, Instructional Cabinet Teachers, Guidance Personnel, School Leaders 2018-19 SCEP-P 21  create data bases of students (by current class) for use by the students' current teachers and guidance support personnel to use to develop strategic academic plans. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. A Professional Learning Community (PLC) will be created for the parents to train them in Skedula/Pupil Path and provide resources for their children as they learn about the rigorous learning standards of New York State. The time line for this activity will be ongoing , with monthly sessions. The key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight will be the Assistant Principal. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Title I- SWP for per session training and class size reduction. Title III- for extended learning programs. 21 st Century Grant funds are used to Engage family though SOBRO partnership Tax Levy Funds are used to provide metro-cards and Snacks to parents- teacher meetings or parents meetings Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant X 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring 2018-19 SCEP-P 22  Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 80 percent of students will accumulate 6 credits as measured by the February 2019 scholarship reports. A review of the February 2019 scholarship reports and the STARS report 1.20 reflects the following credit accumulation: Credits Accumulated # of Students % of Students Range of Students % Range of Students 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 Total 3 9 4 2 4 3 27 178 165 42 10 447 1% 2% 1% 0% 1% 1% 6% 40% 37% 9% 2% 25 6% 422 94% 100% 447 100% ***Student ranges were divided 0-5 credits and 6-10 credits*** From the 25 students that did not accumulate 5 credits:  4 students were long term absent students  19 students were super seniors, who came to school to complete a course or recieve Academic Intervention to pass their regents.  1 junior student who did not receive sufficient credits  1 senior student taking AP courses, and has completed basic graduation requirements Students with less than 6 credits LTA SS At Risk Senior Total 4 19 1 1 25 2018-19 SCEP-P 23  Based on these results, we met and exceeded our February progress monitoring goal of 80% of students accumulating 6 or more credits, with 422 students out of 447 students ( 94%) accumulating between 6 to 10 credits. Our next SCEP action plan steps will include the following: Students who accumulated 0- 5 credits will be assigned to advisory classes where designated personnel will closely track and support these students' progress in accumulating required credits. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The instrument of measure that will be used to assess progress towards meeting the mid-point benchmarks includes Scholarship Reports. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-P 24  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 5 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 5.2 The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. 5.3 The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students. 5.4 All school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health supports tied to the school’s vision. 5.5 The school leader and student support staff work together with teachers to establish structures to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental health needs. SOP(s) Addressed n/a n/a x n/a Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? According to the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide, the School Survey Element score for Supportive Environment is 3.55, an increase from 2016-2017 of score 2.64. We find that, according to the 2017-2018 School Survey in the Supportive Environment section, "59% of students say that their teachers support them when they are upset." (Q3e) Although this percentage is lower than responses to other prompts, this percentage is 8% above the borough average and 7% above the city average. "78% of students say that discipline is applied fairly in their school. " (Q4h) This response is 9% above the borough average and 6% above the city average. "91% of students say that they feel safe in their classes." (Q7d) This response is 3% above the borough average and 1% above the city average. " 85% of high school students agreed or strongly agreed that adults at their school talk to them about what they plan to do after high school." (Q10a) This response reflects 3% above borough and city average. 2018-19 SCEP-P 25  " 82% of high school students agreed or strongly agreed that adults at their school inform them about the college application process." (Q10c) This response reflects 2% below the borough average and 3% below the city average. "82% of high school students agreed or strongly agreed that adults at their school help them plan for how to meet their future career goals." (Q10d) This response reflects a 5% increase from last year and is now equal to the borough and city average. 78% of high school students agreed or strongly agreed that adults at their school show them options for how to pay for college." (Q11b) This response reflects a 14% increase from last year but is still 2% below the borough and city average. A review of the OORS report from September 2017 to May 2018 revealed that there was a a total of 26 incidents, compared to a total of 64 incidents, according to the OORS report from 2016-2017 (38 fewer incidents). A review of the OORS report from September 2017 to May 2018 revealed that there was a total of 16 principal suspensions, compared to a total of 24 principal suspensions, according to the OORS report from 2016-2017 (8 fewer principal suspensions). A review of the OORS report from September 2017 to May 2018 revealed that there was a total of 3 superintendent suspensions, compared to a total of 4 superintendent suspensions, according to the OORS report from 2016-2017 (1 less superintendent suspension). On February 11, 2019, we engaged parents and the community through our school receivership hearing, where the public provided feedback and developed recommendations for the improvement of the school. A recommendation aligned to supportive environment was to:  o Utilize additional deans to address student behavior and a “safe room” for students. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools –Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 80 percent of students will participate in restorative practices, resulting in a 10% decrease in suspensions and incidents, as measured by June 2019 OORS Report, for the period between September 2018 to June 2019, compared to OORS Report for the period September 2018 to June 2019. 2018-19 SCEP-P 26  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). All of our students will be enrolled in college and career readiness community programs that will meet each Friday. In addition, college advisory will also be offered during this time. Student town halls will be held each Friday, organized by grade team leaders and student government representatives. These will address respect for all, socio-emotional support and resources, current events, succeeding in school and beyond. Professional Development days will be used to create College and Career Readiness Community Program plans, and discuss them with staff at HSWC. College and Career Community Programs will have approximately 10-15 student participants. The staff members assigned to the students will serve as their academic advisor and adult responsible for contacting student families, communicating with the attendance team, and referring students to pupil personnel regarding social emotional services. Implement AP for all, increasing the Advanced Placement offerings for the 2018-2019 school year, to meet the needs of high performing students. Students Continue to implement the BUILD program. Within this program students will learn valuable skills that will prepare them for college and career, to meet the needs of ELLs, SIFE, and SWDs. Students Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Student government representatives, Teachers, Parents, Administration Student government representatives, Teachers, Parents, Administration Students Sept 2018-June 2019 Weekly Students September 2018-June 2019 Weekly Sept 2018-June 2019 As per NYC DOE calendar Students Teachers Teachers, Administrators Students, Teachers, Parents, Administrators Students, Teachers, Parents, Administrators Students, Teachers, Parents, Administrators Sept2018-June 2019 Ongoing September 2018-June 2019, ongoing September 2018-June 2019, ongoing 2018-19 SCEP-P 27  Continue to implement the CTE Culinary program. Within this program students will learn valuable skills that will prepare them for college and career, to meet the needs of ELLs, SIFE, and SWDs. Students Continue to build relationship with BCC and College Now through targeted enrollment and progress monitoring of enrolled students, to meet the needs of ELLs. Students Establish a community building on Fridays. This also includes the opportunity for students to attend internships and tracking the progress of students towards meeting the college and career readiness criteria. Alumni will participate as guests in the SLT meetings that involve decisions made at the school level with particular attention to how the decisions can better prepare current students for life post high school Students Students Representatives from student government will present Respect for All, socio-emotional support and resources, current events, and succeeding in school and beyond. Students The guidance counselors will periodically meet with students to discuss their academic and social needs. In addition, the guidance counselors will arrange trips for students to attend college and universities fairs and tours. Students September 2018-June 2019, ongoing September 2018-June 2019, ongoing September 2018-June 2019, ongoing September 2018-June 2019, ongoing September 2018-June 2019, monthly September 2018-June 2019, ongoing Technology and resources will be used to increase communication and the dissemination of school-wide events to students. Students ENL teachers support the linguistic and cultural development of ELL students to empower them to actively participate in discussions and Restorative practices. ENL Teachers Students September 2018-June 2019, ongoing September 2018-June 2019, ongoing Students, Teachers, Parents, Administrators Students, Teachers, Parents, Administrators Students, Teachers, Parents, Administrators Students, Teachers, Parents, Administrators Students, Teachers, Parents, Administrators Students, Teachers, Parents, Administrators Students, Teachers, Parents, Administrators Students, Teachers, Administrators 2018-19 SCEP-P 28  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will be invited to the school to participate in the College and Career Readiness Community programs at our school on Fridays and attend workshops focused on socio-emotional support and parenting, throughout the year, beginning in September 2018 and ending in June 2019. Parents will continue to participate in ENL and computer courses through So Bro, a program from 21st Century, throughout the year, beginning in September 2018 and ending in June 2019, on a monthly basis. Key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight will be the Assistant Principal. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Teachers have been given a common planning period to evaluate and support high needs students. In addition to the planning periods, the school social worker has been incorporated into two classroom teaching periods to assist in the Restorative Justice program to support classroom teachers. We also have a dean this year who spends most of his time focusing on student behavior and Restorative Justice. We prove per session for the social worker and dean to provide additional support to students when needed. -Tax Levy per session Planning during Summer and through the school year to complete unit plan -21st Century Federal Grant for the upcoming 4 years. -Title III for Enrichment programs. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) X Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant X 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 2018-19 SCEP-P 29  By February 2019, 80 percent of students will participate in restorative practices, resulting in a 10% decrease in suspensions and incidents, as measured by February 2019 OORS Report, for the period between September 2018 to February 2019, compared to OORS Report for the period September 2017 to February 2018. A review of OORS reports from September 2017-January 2018 and from September 2018-January 2019 reflects the following: Between September 2017-January 2018, there were 23 incidents. Between September 2018-January 2019, there were 21 incidents. This reflects a decrease of 2 incidents. Between September 2017-January 2018, there were 2 superintendent suspensions. Between September 2018-January 2019, there were 2 superintendent suspensions. This reflects no change in superintendent suspensions. Between September 2017-January 2018, there were 14 principal suspensions. Between September 2018-January 2019, there were zero principal suspensions. This reflects a decrease of 14 principal suspensions. Overall, there was a total combined decrease of 16 incidents and suspensions between September 2017-January 2018 and September 2018-January 2019. This reflects a 6 % decrease. Based on these results, we did not meet our February progress monitoring goal of 10% decrease in incidents and suspensions, from last year. Our next SCEP action plan steps will include the following: Guidance personnel, support personnel, and Dean will continue to monitor students' behavior during periods and in locations where data suggest incidents and behavioral violations leading to suspensions have occurred. Re-deployment of personnel will be reflected in revised supervision/monitoring assignments. School-wide spirit activities will continue to be incorporated throughout the year to enhance positive culture of respect for all. New teachers will participate in professional development related to Restorative Justice practices to strengthen their knowledge and application of effective restorative practices to prevent misbehaviors. OORS data will be analyzed to determine equity and/or disproportionality of incidents and suspensions, based on gender and ethnicity to more precisely understand and address the circumstances that either alleviate or exacerbate the conditions that lead to such incidents and suspensions. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The instrument of measure that will be used to assess progress will be the OORS report. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-P 30  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 4 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 4.2 School and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. 4.3 Teachers provide coherent, and appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. 4.4 Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences and tailored to the strengths and needs of all students. SOP(s) Addressed x n/a n/a 4.5 Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, and progress monitoring). Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. n/a 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. According to the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide, the Survey Element score, in the Collaborative Teachers section, is 3.42, reflecting an increase from 2.12 last year. According to the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide, the Framework Element score, in the Collaborative Teachers section, is 2.71 reflecting an increase from 2.06 last year. According to the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide, the 2017-2018 survey measure, in the Collaborative Teachers section reflects a score of 3.67 and the percent of positive responses for the measure of cultural awareness and inclusive classroom instruction is 91%, increased from 88% last year, and which is 2% above the borough average and 1% above city average. "89% of teacher agreed or strongly agreed that they are able to apply their knowledge of parent's various cultural backgrounds when collaborating with them regarding their child's educational progress."(Q2f) This response reflects a 29% increase from last year's percent of 60% of teachers responding to this prompt. The school's score is 3% above the borough average and 2% above the city average. 2018-19 SCEP-P 31  "38% of teachers say that they had the opportunities to work productively with teachers from other schools on professional development. ((Q10d). This response reflects a 19% increase from last year's score of 19% but which still lags behind the borough average of 57% and the city average of 58%. According to the 2017-2108 School Quality Guide, the 2017-2018 School Survey Measure in the Collaborative Teachers section reflects a score of 3.83, which is 5% above the borough average and 5% above the city average. The percent of positive responses for the measure of quality of Peer Collaboration section as 92%, reflecting a 9% increase from last year. According to the 2017-2108 School Quality Guide, the 2017-2018 School Survey Measures, in the Collaborative Teachers section, "93% of teachers agreed or strongly agreed that, at their school, teachers design instructional programs (e.g. lessons, units) together. (Q8a). This response reflects an increase from 88% last year and which is now 9% above the borough average and 8% above the city average. "100% of teachers agreed or strongly agreed that at their school teachers talk to each other about instruction."(Q8d) This response is the same as last year's response, reflecting a consistent culture of peer collaboration and focus on professional practice. According to the 2016-2017 ATS/ Graduation Cohort Report (RGCS) report the High School of World Cultures had a 39.4% (4 year) graduation rate for Cohort S. Of the 39.4%, 86.7% of students received a Regents diploma, 10% a Local Diploma, and 3.3% Advanced Regents Diploma. The PLF's PPO (November 1, 2017) cited the following as Next Steps: "Provide professional development to address the improving teacher practices in Danielson components 3B,3C, and 3D. Professional Development should include strategies to engage all levels of learners in the class, higher order thinking questions/task to promote student thinking and student to student discussions, and ways for teachers to assess student understanding throughout the lesson. The Superintendent's PPO (March 23, 2018) cited the following area as Next Steps: "When examining the progress your school is making focus on developing a system and structure that engages teachers in inquiry work that examines student work product....Engage teachers in activities that capture student work so that it may be examine as to the frequency and level of rigor. Work with teams to develop interventions where necessary and put in place a means of measuring how these teams and structures are impacting both teaching and learning within your school." The Superintendent's PPO dated March 23, 2018 cited the following as Next Steps: "When examining the progress your school is making focus on developing a system and structure that engages teachers in inquiry work that examines student work product...Work with teams to develop interventions where necessary and put into place a means of measuring how these teams and structures are impacting both teaching and learning within your school." (QR 5.1, 4.2) A mid year February progress monitoring review of the 2017-2018 STARS Progress to Graduation Tracker (PTGT) revealed that: 2018-19 SCEP-P 32  95 students were almost on track overall graduation status; 9 students were on track overall graduation status; 1 student was on track CCLS overall graduation status; no students were on track local overall graduation status. 105 out of 438 students (24%) were on track overall status in progress towards graduation. 81 out of 438 students were almost on track/exam status/progress towards graduation 138 out of 438 students were on track Regents 19 out of 438 students were on track-CCLS 2 out of 438 students were on track local 240 out of 438 students (55%) were on track exam status/progress towards graduation. The school did not meet the February progress monitoring goal of 67% of students being on track to graduate. This report is designed to reflect student results by semester, as 1 credit of the course each semester. Since High School of World Cultures offers half the courses per semester, the report does not accurately reflect the students' credit status or overall graduation status until June, due to the programming decisions of the school and the algorithm within the program. The school decision was made to support ELLs and their focus on less subject matter per semester to strategically support their growing language acquisition and content learning. Our next SCEP action steps will include continued monitoring of student progress and performance with guidance, advisory, and instructional supports in order to meet our June 2019 annual goal of 67% graduation rate, as measured by the June 2019 ATS Graduation Cohort School Report (RGCS). Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be a 67% graduation rate, as measured by the June 2019 ATS Graduation Cohort School Report (RGCS). 2018-19 SCEP-P 33  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Supervisors will use Advance/ Danielson Framework for Teaching (components 1a, 1e, 3b, 3c, 3d) to evaluate and support the teachers’ planning and implementation of the Common Core standards and BCCI in their daily lessons, to meet the needs of ELLs. Teachers Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Teachers, Department Leaders, Instructional Cabinet Teachers, Department Leaders, Instructional Cabinet Teachers, Department Leaders, Instructional Cabinet Teachers, Department Leaders, Instructional Cabinet Teachers, Department Leaders, Instructional Cabinet Teachers, Department Leaders, Instructional Cabinet Sept 2018-June 2019 Monthly Sept 2018-June 2019 Ongoing Sept 2018-June 2019 Ongoing Sept 2018-June 2019 Ongoing Sept 2018-June 2019 Ongoing Supervisors will attend department meetings to discuss unit and lesson planning aligned to the curriculum, and ensuring that the resources teachers are using meet the Common Core learning standards. Teachers Teachers will collaboratively plan for opportunities for students to prepare for and participate effectively in conversations and collaborations with diverse partners, building on each others’ ideas and be able to express themselves clearly, within an inclusive culture of mutual respect. Professional development will be provided to teachers aligned to the Danielson Framework for Teaching, based on their results on the Measures of Teacher Practice (MOTP) Report on Advance. In addition, teachers will attend their professional development sessions, with Borough Field Support staff and consultants to improve their instructional practices. Teachers will use of the BCCI (Bilingual Common Core Initiative) Standards, Data-Driven Instruction, and growth in language progression level in their lesson and unit planning. Teachers and supervisors will scaffold and differentiate their instruction using disaggregated NYSITELL/NYSESLAT data, by language strand from the EDAT document, as well as the item analysis from the regents reports, to meet the needs of ELLs. Teacher teams will focus on developing strategies to help students progress in meeting the requirements of earning an Advanced Regents Diploma, to meet the needs of high performing students. Teachers Teacher teams will collaboratively develop curriculum aligned to the BCC that supports students language development towards the biliteracy seal, to meet the needs of ELLs. Teachers Teachers Sept 2018-June 2019 Weekly Teachers 2018-19 SCEP-P 34  Collaborative teacher teams will analyze student work, with particular attention to sub group students, such as Black and Latino males, and students who have accumulated 0-3 credits per semester. To ensure equity, school and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. The accreditation committee will continue to meet to look over the active courses in the code deck, student transcripts, and students programs to ensure that students are being given the individual courses that they need in order to successfully graduate, while completing the requirements needed to be college and career ready. Students Sept 2018-June 2019 Ongoing Accreditation Committee, Teachers, Department Leaders, Instructional Cabinet A Graduation committee will be established to track the progress of senior activities and the participants in these activities, ensuring alignment between academic and social celebration. Students The School Leadership Team will be divided into subcommittees that focus on one of the five SCEP goals. Each subcommittee will be led by one SLT member who will report the progress of the committee action plan items and the overall progress of the goal during the SLT meetings. Students The hiring committee will norm and set expectations for recruiting, interviewing, retaining, and supporting highly qualified teachers. Teachers The MOSL committee will make recommendations for determining assessments that will accurately serve as evidence of students’ progress and performance towards meeting graduation requirements. The PROSE committee will ensure that instruction and student learning are maximized through effective partnerships between the UFT, CSA, NYC DOE and community schools in a culture of mutual respect. Teachers Teachers Students Continued monitoring of student progress and performance with guidance, advisory, and instructional supports in order to meet the June 2019 annual goal of 67% graduation rate, as measured by the June 2019 ATS Graduation Cohort School Report (RGCS). Teachers Students Sept 2018-June 2019 Ongoing Sept 2018-June 2019 Monthly Sept 2018-June 2019 Ongoing Sept 2018-June 2019 Ongoing Sept 2018-June 2019 Ongoing Sept 2018-June 2019 Ongoing Graduation Committee Teachers, Department Leaders, Instructional Cabinet SLT, Teachers, Department Leaders, Instructional Cabinet Hiring Committee, Teachers, Department Leaders, Instructional Cabinet MOSL Committee, Teachers, Department Leaders, Instructional Cabinet PROSE Committee, Teachers, Department Leaders, Instructional Cabinet Teachers, Guidance Personnel, School Leaders 2018-19 SCEP-P 35  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will have the opportunity to attend Professional Learning Community workshops, where teachers can discuss how to support their child’s learning, ask questions, receive resources, and build relationships that would result in academic achievement. In addition, parents attend individual meetings with the Guidance Counselor to discuss the updated graduation trackers, college and career readiness opportunities, steps to apply for colleges and financial aid. The time line for implementation will begin in September 2018 and end in June 2019, ongoing throughout the year on an as- needed basis, with a minimum of once a month. The key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight will be the Assistant Principal and Principal. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Title I- Priority Purposes Per Session for unit and lesson planning during the summer. Title I- SWP for Parent Involvement: Funding will be used based on the SLT discussion with Title 1 parents designee. 21st Century Grand funds are used in per session to teach parents English as Second Language and Computer Sciences on Saturdays. Tax Levy Funds will be used to cover SLT Stipends for Parents meetings Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant X 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 67% of students will be on track to graduate, as measured by the STARS Progress to Graduation Tracker (PTGT). 2018-19 SCEP-P 36  A mid year February progress monitoring review of the 2018-2019 STARS Progress to Graduation Tracker (PTGT) revealed that: Students on Track (College and Career Readiness): 26 Overall Graduation Status; 34 Regents Exams Students on Track (Regents): 91 Overall Graduation Status; 114 Regents Exams Students on Track (Local): 1 Overall Graduation Status; 4 Regents Exams Students on Track (Credits) : 182 Credit Accumulation Students Almost on Track: 89 Overall Graduation Status; 85 Credit Accumulation; 96 Regents Exams Students Off Track: 160 Overall Graduation Status; 99 Credit Accumulation; 119 Regents Exams * 118 out of 446 students ( 26 %) were On Track Overall Status in progress towards graduation. 89 out of 446 students ( 20%) were Almost On Track/Exam Status/progress towards graduation 152 out of 446 students (34 %) were On Track- Regents Exams 28 out of 446 students ( 6 %) were On Track -CCLS 1 out of 446 students was On Track -Local 91 out of 446 students ( 20 %) were On Track Regents Exam Status/progress towards graduation 160 out of 446 students ( 36 %) were Off Track: The school did not meet the February progress monitoring goal of 67% of students being on track to graduate. * 118 out of 446 students ( 26 %) were On Track Overall Status in progress towards graduation. Our next SCEP action plan steps will include the following: Students who are identified as Almost On Track and Off Track towards graduation will be assigned to a designated Advisor who will meet with targeted students on a weekly basis to counsel and track their ongoing progress. Documentation forms will be developed by school leaders and designated personnel to ensure monitoring of effective implementation, with impact on student outcomes. Bi-monthly meetings between school leaders and teachers will be conducted to review the progress of these targeted students (Almost On Track and Off Track), using all relevant data, including conference notations; class work products; assessments; and lesson plans that demonstrate both rigor towards Common Core Learning Standards and Regents expectations and appropriate scaffolds towards the Standards and Regents expectations. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 2018-19 SCEP-P 37  The instrument of measure that will be used to assess progress towards meeting the mid-point benchmark is STARS Progress to Graduation Tracker (PTGT). Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-P 38  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 2 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 2.2 The school leader ensures that the school community shares the Specific, Measurable, Ambitious, Results-oriented, and Timely (SMART) goals/mission and long-term vision inclusive of core values that address the priorities outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP). Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital resources. 2.3 2.4 The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district's Annual Professional Performance Review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. 2.5 Leaders effectively use evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve critical individual and school-wide practices as defined in the SCEP (student achievement, curriculum and teacher practices; leadership development; community/family engagement; and student social and emotional developmental health). SOP(s) Addressed n/a n/a X n/a Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. According to the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide, the 2017-2018 Survey Element score, in the Effective School Leadership section, is 2.99, reflecting an increase from 2.48 last year. According to the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide, the 2017-2018 Framework Element score, in the Effective School Leadership section, the score is 2.40, reflecting an increase from 2.19 last year. According to the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide in the Effective School Leadership section, the percent of positive responses for the measure of Inclusive Leadership is 97%, which is 5% above borough average and 4% above city average. According to the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide in the Effective School Leadership section, "97% of parents/guardians agreed or strongly agreed that the principal/school leader encourages feedback from parents/guardians and the community through regular meetings with parents/guardians and teacher leaders (Q2b) This response reflects an increase from 94% last year. This response reflects 6% above borough average and 5% above city average. 2018-19 SCEP-P 39  "98% of parents/guardians agreed or strongly agreed that the principal/school leader at their school is strongly committed to shared decision making."(Q3a)This response reflects an increase from 94% last year. This response reflects 6% above borough average and 6% above city average. "97% of parents/guardians agreed or strongly agreed that the principal/school leader at their school works to create a sense of community in the school."(Q3b)This response reflects an increase from 95% last year. This response reflects 4% above borough average and 3% above city average. "97% of parents/guardians agreed or strongly agreed that the principal/school leader at their school promotes family and community involvement in the school."(Q3c)This response reflects an increase from 94% last year. This response reflects 5% above borough average and 4% above city average. According to the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide, the 2017-2018 School Survey Measures, in the Effective School Leadership section, the score is 3.29 and the percent of positive responses for the measure of Teacher Influence is 82% (an increase from 72% last year) and which is now 2% below borough average and 2% below city average. According to the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide, in the Effective School Leadership section, "90% of teachers reported that they have a moderate to great deal of influence over school policy in the area of developing instructional materials."(Q12d)This response reflects 1% above borough average and 2% above city average. "79% of teachers reported that they have moderate to great deal of influence over school policy in the area of setting standards for student behavior."(Q12e)This response reflects an increase from 69% last year and which is 1% above the borough average and 2% above the city average. According to the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide, the 2017-2018 School Survey Measures, in the Effective School Leadership section, the percent of positive responses for the measure of Instructional Leadership is 70% (reflecting an increase from 64% last year and which is now 12% below borough average and 12% below city average. According to the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide, the 2017-2018 School Survey Measures, in the Effective School Leadership section, "69% of teachers agreed or strongly agreed that the principal/school leader at their school sets clear expectations for teachers about implementing what they have learned in professional development"(Q11e) This response reflects an increase from 58% last year. According to the MOTP score tracker data from 2017-2018, all teachers, who have Advance ratings and will return for 2018-2019, were rated overall Effective, as per the Danielson Framework for Teaching. A review of 2017-2018 Advance data revealed that: 15 out of 24 teachers received at least one rating of Effective/Highly Effective in component 3b. 15 out of 24 teachers received at least one rating of Effective/Highly Effective in component 3c. 13 out of 24 teachers received at least one rating of Effective/Highly Effective in component 3d. The school did not meet the February progress monitoring goal of at least 80% of teachers receiving Effective/Highly Effective ratings in at least 2 out of 3 components (3b, 3c, 3d). 2018-19 SCEP-P 40  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART– Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, at least 75% of teachers will receive Effective and/or Highly Effective ratings in 3 of 3 of the following components: 3b (Questioning and Discussion Techniques); component 3c (Student Engagement); and component 3d (Using Assessment in Instruction), as measured by end of year Advance MOTP ratings. 2018-19 SCEP-P 41  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change that address one or more USDE Turnaround Principle(s), if applicable. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). The principal and assistant principals will implement a fully functional system of observations and feedback including pre- and post-observation conferences. The principal, assistant principals and teachers will collaborate and focus on pedagogical practices, using Charlotte Danielson’s Framework for Teaching and our school’s Coherent Set of Beliefs About How Students Learn Best, aligned to the Quality Review Rubric Indicators, leading to the improvement of teachers’ practices and student learning outcomes. A minimum number of frequent classroom observations, using Charlotte Danielson’s Framework for Teaching and adhering to the guidelines of Advance Evaluation and Support System, including teacher selected options 1, 2, 3, or 4 with oral/written feedback will be provided to all teachers within 48 hours and 15 days, respectively. The principal, assistant principals, and consultants will collaborate with teachers to plan and implement professional development sessions and teacher team meetings to provide support aligned to the evidence of observation reports and to the Danielson Framework for Teaching components, leading to improved professional practices. Supervisory learning walks will be conducted once a month to deepen the common understanding about providing consistent growth looping feedback. Teachers who have a Teacher Improvement Plan (TIP) will receive an additional 2-5 observation reports as needed and relevant professional development to improve their practice. The evidence-based areas of focus will be addressed in differentiated professional development sessions, based on teachers’ differentiated needs. Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Teachers Sept 2018-June 2019 Monthly Teachers, teacher teams, administrators Teachers Sept 2018-June 2019 Weekly Teachers, teacher teams, administrators TIP Teachers TIP administrators, consultants Sept 2018-June 2019 Bi-monthly Teachers Sept 2018-June 2019 Monthly Teachers, Teacher Teams, Instructional Cabinet Teachers’ lesson plans and classroom observations will include specific strategies to address the needs of diverse learners as evidenced by student activities, tasks, assessments including work products that align to Bilingual Common Core Standards and/or IEP Teachers Teachers, Teacher Teams, Instructional Cabinet 2018-19 SCEP-P 42  goals with appropriate modifications, supports, and extensions using Sheltered Instruction Observation Protocol (SIOP), Quality Teaching for English Language Learners (QTEL), and Universal Design for Learning (UDL) strategies. Teachers and supervisors will examine student work products as part of the pre planning and post reflection observation sessions, to meet the needs of ELLs, SWDs, and SIFE students. Through classroom visits and observations, school leaders will monitor the effective use of resources and materials that the school acquired through school-wide grants and other funding streams. Sept 2018-June 2019 Monthly Students Sept 2018-June 2019 Administration, Teacher Teams School leaders will support and guide teachers in the practice of instructional rounds/ learning walks Teachers Monthly Sept 2018-June 2019 Ongoing Weekly instructional and supervisory cabinet meetings will provide the ongoing opportunities for school leaders and other instructional support personnel to share noticing about pedagogical practices and strategically plan differentiated professional development to address the noticing. Teachers and Students Sept 2018-June 2019 Ongoing 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Teachers, teacher teams, administrators Teachers, teacher teams, administrators How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Teachers will include a parental section in their syllabi. This will include how the students are being supported and what Professional Development workshops the teachers will participate in to further their practice and student supports. This will allow the parents to stay informed and give feedback as needed. In addition, teachers will inform parents of any workshops that they will be offering regarding their specific course content, expectations, and/or related skills. Parents will also be provided with ongoing resources to help them support the learning needs of their children. The time line for these activities will begin in September 2018 and end in June 2019, on an ongoing basis, with workshops occurring at least monthly. Key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight will be the Assistant Principal and Principal. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Title I Priority Focus and 21st Century Grant funds will be used to cover Educational consultant to provide training one on one to teachers and or in groups, and administrators Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA P/F Set-aside X 21st Century C4E 2018-19 SCEP-P 43  Title I 1003(a) Title III PTA Funded SIG Grant School Achievement Other Funding Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, at least 75% of teachers will receive ratings of Effective and/or Highly Effective in 2 of 3 of the following components: 3b (Questioning and Discussion Techniques); component 3c (Student Engagement); and/or component 3d (Using Assessment in Instruction) on Advance observation reports between September 2018 and February 2019. A review of September 2018-February 2019 Advance data revealed that: 18 out of 32 teachers (56%) received at least one rating of Effective/Highly Effective in component 3b. 19 out of 32 teachers (59%) received at least one rating of Effective/Highly Effective in component 3c. 12 out of 32 teachers (38%) received at least one rating of Effective/Highly Effective in component 3d. 18 teachers out of 32 teachers (56%) received ratings of Effective/Highly Effective in at least 2 out of the 3 components (3b,3c, and 3d). The school did not meet the February progress monitoring goal of at least 75% of teachers receiving Effective/Highly Effective ratings in at least 2 out of 3 components (3b, 3c, 3d). Our next SCEP action plan steps will include the following:  School leaders will continue to full implement Advance system of evaluation and support through the PROSE guidelines and supplement the official Advance classroom visits, ratings, and feedback with informal and frequent classroom visits and feedback at least 2 times per week for all teachers.  A calendar and debriefing form for such informal class visits will be developed to ensure effective implementation.  Effective teachers will be recruited to “buddy” with new teachers to provide support for meeting school expectations for classroom instruction, based on Danielson Framework for Teaching and CCLS. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The instrument of measure that will be used to assess progress towards meeting the mid-point benchmarks includes the Advance teacher observation reports. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-P 44  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 6 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 6.2 The school leader ensures that regular communication with students and families fosters their high expectations for student academic achievement. 6.3 The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders so that student strength and needs are identified and used to augment learning. 6.4 The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to support student success. 6.5 The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school community members centered on student learning and success and encourages and empowers families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their children. SOP(s) Addressed n/a n/a n/a X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. According to the 2017-20178 School Quality Guide, the 2017-2018 School Survey element score, in the area of Strong Family Community Ties section, is 3.67, reflecting an increase from last year's score of 2.66. According to the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide, the 2017-2018 School Framework element score, in the area of Strong Family Community Ties section, is 3.42, reflecting an increase from last year's score of 2.56. According to the 2017-2018 school Survey, "93% of parents/guardians agreed or strongly agreed that school staff regularly communicate with them about how they can help their child learn."(Q1a)This response reflects an increase from last year's response of 86%.This response is 5% higher than the borough average and 5% higher than the city average. "95% of parents/guardians agreed or strongly agreed that teachers work closely with them to meet their child's needs"(Q1d)This response reflects an increase from last year's response of 89%.This response is 6% higher than the borough average and 6% higher than the city average. 2018-19 SCEP-P 45  According to the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide, the 2017-2018 School Survey, in the section of Additional Survey Questions: "84% of students agreed or strongly agreed that their school offers a wide enough variety of program, classes, and activities to keep them interested in school."(Q1a)This response reflects an increase from last year's response of 77%. "73% of students agree or strongly agree that the programs, classes, and activities at their school encourage students to develop talent outside academics"(Q1b) This response reflects an increase from last year's response of 64%. The school's attendance data from 2017-2018 ATS report indicates that the annual attendance rate was 83 percent. According to ATS records from 2017-2018, there are 10 students who are chronic absentees. According to ATS records between 2017-2018, between September 2017 and January 2018, the average monthly attendance (including long term absentees) was 83.57% for all students. Special Education students achieved 90.14% average monthly attendance for this period. During the 2 months of November 2017 and December 2017, there was an 85% monthly attendance rate for all students. The school did not meet the February progress monitoring goal of reaching at least 85% monthly attendance rate. A review of February 2018 Scholarship Reports covering the 1st semester (September 2017 to January 2018) reveals that: 354 students out of 386 students who participated in the ELT Program passed 2 or more core classes. (92 %). We exceeded our February progress monitoring goal of 80% of students who participate in the Expanded Learning Time Program will achieve passing grades in at least 2 out of 4 core academic subjects. Our next steps will include continued monitoring by school leaders of the ELT Program and provide actionable feedback to teachers, bother verbally and in writing, to ensure effective implementation of the ELT Program and in order to exceed our June 2019 annual goal of 80% of students who participate in the ELT Program achieving passing grades in all core academic subjects, as measured by final semester grades. On February 11, 2019, we engaged parents and the community through our school receivership hearing, where the public provided feedback and recommendations for the improvement of the school. Several recommendations aligned to Strong Family and Community Ties include:  Allow parents to conduct various workshops to share information about careers.  Host ongoing events to solicit public feedback.  Develop additional community-based programs. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, as a result of improved communication with families, overall student attendance will reach an average monthly attendance rate of 85 percent for spring semester, as measured by the RYMA monthly ATS report. 2018-19 SCEP-P 46  2018-19 SCEP-P 47  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Weekly attendance meetings to discuss attendance awards, incentives, theater tickets, field day, trips, interventions, and plan to meet with families to discuss appropriate graduation pathways of all students, including our students with chronic or long-term absences. Students Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Sept 2018-June 2019 Weekly Guidance Counselor, Social Worker, Administrator, Grade Team Leaders, Secretary, Family Worker, and School Aides Teachers Sept 2018-June 2019 Teachers, Students, Administrators Teachers serve as academic advisors within our College and Career Community programs, motivating students to come to school, communicate with their families, and have activities where students can give back to the community. Teachers will use Kinvolved to immediately report period attendance to parents allowing two-way communication. Students The attendance team will meet with the District Attendance Coordinator to discuss procedures in place and resources to improve the attendance. In addition, teachers and administrators will receive training on how to use Kinvolved to communicate attendance with families, and be able to positively reinforce students and parents as attendance increases. Attendance Team and Teachers Weekly Sept 2018-June 2019 Daily Sept 2018-June 2019 Once a Semester The attendance team will analyze the attendance data per student to determine patterns of lateness and absences, and meet with the student and their families to correct the attendance. Attendance Team Sept 2018-June 2019 Monthly Support personnel administer a range of assessments to determine appropriate instructional plans to meet students’ needs. Students Sept 2018-June 2019 Ongoing Teachers, Students, Parents, Administrators, Parent Coordinator Teachers, Administrators, Pupil Personnel, Support Staff Guidance Counselor, Social Worker, Administrator, Grade Team Leaders, Secretary, Family Worker, and School Aides Guidance Counselor, Social Worker, Administrator, Grade Team Leaders, Secretary, Family Worker, and School Aides 2018-19 SCEP-P 48  Empower parents to be partners with school personnel and create shared focus on improving attendance and punctuality. Parents Sept 2018-June 2019 Effective Restorative Justice practices reinforce a positive school culture for students to feel safe and eager to attend school. Students Providing opportunities for students to have a voice and choice encourages them to be active participants in school-wide decision making and activities. Students Establishing awareness and providing resources and allocating support personal to address issues related to child abuse, gender identity and sexual orientation as well as other circumstances that may arise and impact student attendance, to meet the needs of subgroup students. Students Providing students with resources including transportation, and health care to ensure their attendance and well-being. Students The community building will motivate students to attend school because it will give them an outlet to explore an area of interest. Students Ongoing Sept 2018-June 2019 Ongoing Sept 2018-June 2019 Ongoing Sept 2018-June 2019 Ongoing Sept 2018-June 2019 Ongoing Sept 2018-June 2019 Weekly Guidance Counselor, Social Worker, Administrator, Grade Team Leaders, Secretary, Family Worker, and School Aides Guidance Counselor, Social Worker, Administrator, Grade Team Leaders, Secretary, Family Worker, and School Aides Guidance Counselor, Social Worker, Administrator, Grade Team Leaders, Secretary, Family Worker, and School Aides Guidance Counselor, Social Worker, Administrator, Grade Team Leaders, Secretary, Family Worker, and School Aides Guidance Counselor, Social Worker, Administrator, Grade Team Leaders, Secretary, Family Worker, and School Aides Guidance Counselor, Social Worker, Administrator, Grade Team Leaders, Secretary, Family Worker, and School Aides 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. 21st Century Schools, SoBro, Stella Adler, Innovative Designs for Education, OmniLearn 2018-19 SCEP-P 49  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Tax Levy funds will be used for attendance incentive in our Field Day and incentives Title I Priority/Focus SWP we will buy two applications Kinvolved and SKEDULA 21 st Century and Title III funds will be used to cover per sessions before and after school program as part of the school day for the students and to cover Per-Diem when teacher attend PD or Conferences Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant X 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, overall student attendance will reach an average monthly attendance rate of 85 percent for fall semester (September 2018 to February 2019), as measured by the RYMA monthly ATS report. A review of ATS RYMA reports from September 2018-January 2019 reflects an average monthly attendance percentage of 85.35%. Based on the data in this report, we met the February progress monitoring goal of 85% monthly attendance rate. Our next SCEP action steps will include the following: School leaders will meet with parent coordinator and other relevant support personnel/Manhattan Borough Office/CBOs to plan and schedule parent events and workshops to promote and emphasize improved student attendance. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The instrument of measure that will be used to assess progress will be the RYMA ATS reports. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-P 50  Section 6: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) Program Description Directions: Expanded Learning Time activities are directly aligned to the elements of the Framework for Great Schools, Rigorous Instruction, Supportive Environment, and Strong Family and Community Ties. ELT provides enriching educational experiences that happen outside of the traditional school day and blend skill acquisition, relationship-building and fun to foster academic and social-emotional growth. Summer learning, afterschool programming, and extended-day ELT models, when well-implemented, play a critical role in supporting students in all grades and ensuring that they graduate from high school, college and career ready. SED requires that Priority schools offer a minimum of 200 additional student contact hours as Expanded Learning Time in addition to the current mandated length of 900 hours of instruction per year (25 hours per week) in grades K-6 and 990 hours of instruction per year (27.5 hours per week) in grades 7-12. Effective ELT models will blend school staff with community partners, and will provide a balanced curriculum that can include ELA, Math, STEM, arts, physical activity, and leadership development. Complete the sections on this page to demonstrate how the school will meet these requirements. Part 1 – ELT Program Goal(s) Describe the summative goal(s) of the ELT program for the 2018-19 school year. Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 80% of students who participate in the Extended Learning Time program will achieve passing grades in all of their core academic subjects, as measured by final semester grades. Part 2 – ELT Program Type Is the ELT program voluntary or compulsory? Voluntary X Compulsory If the ELT program is voluntary, indicate how you will actively encourage the participation of all students, with the goal of serving at least 50% of students. Students are programmed through regular, ongoing home contact, including phone calls, text messages, and written notices, to monitor and ensure consistent participation in the program. Incentives for participation will be offered to encourage higher attendance and student achievement. Celebration activities will also highlight excellent student attendance. Parents are invited to attend Breakfast with the Principal to highlight the Extended Learning Time Program. The BUILD Mentor Partnership conducts 4 events for parents to student demonstrations and projects by the students from the ELT Program. The content teachers will monitor attendance Mondays-Thursdays, using the Kinvolved program. The teacher advisors for each student advisory group will monitor this attendance every Friday and will make appropriate outreach to families and students, through email correspondence, phone calls, letters, and Kinvolved-generated text messages. One designated assistant principal oversees the program, including the programming, attendance monitoring, and supervision of instructional delivery and activities. The supervisor will visit classes routinely and capture low inference noticings from the visits and share feedback with staff members, verbally and in writing, over a cycle of two-week periods. The feedback provided will be aligned to the Danielson Framework for Teaching components 3b, 3c, and 3d. Part 3 – ELT Program Description The ELT program will be offered to all students eligible for Academic Intervention Services (AIS), with the goal of serving a minimum of fifty percent of AIS-eligible students. Describe how the school will meet the following SED requirements for an ELT program in a Priority School:  Integrate academics, enrichment, and skill development through hands-on experiences that make learning relevant and engaging. 2018-19 SCEP-P 51   Offer a range of activities that capture student interest and strengthen student engagement in learning so as to promote higher attendance, reduce risk for retention or drop out, and increase the likelihood of graduation.  Actively address the unique learning needs and interests of all types of students, especially those who may benefit from approaches and experiences not offered in the traditional classroom setting.  Contain components designed to improve student academic, social, and emotional outcomes, including opportunities for enrichment programs such as in music and art.  Ensure instruction in any core academic subject offered in the program will be delivered under the supervision of a teacher who is NYS certified in that particular content area.  Engage in outreach activities made to families. As part of the the PROSE program, we have added 90 minute blocks on Monday through Friday to foster academic needs and Friday mornings will include the community enrichment programs geared towards College and Career Readiness. Certified teachers in academic subject areas will be offering course help from 2:36-4:00PM on Mondays through Thursdays each week to support growth in the core subject areas and will incorporate field trips and opportunities that will enhance learning and hands on activities to promote a relative and more comprehensive understanding of the subject matter. Students will be programmed based on their academic needs and support basis, using data from test scores, credit accumulation, language level, and through student self-identification. The growth will also be measured through state exams. PM school will help with growth by supporting students' learning. They will receive help with reading, writing, and test taking strategies as well as having the content they learn in class reinforced. In addition, PM school will help accelerate their language acquisition by allowing them more time with their ENL teachers and more time to participate in discussions in English, blended with the content. Improving language acquisition prepares students to pass the English Regents and thus will help them graduate. CTE Program conducts a kitchen LAB to extend students’ experiential learning in the culinary arts field. BUILD Mentorship Program develops entrepreneurial skills for college and career readiness. This caring partnership will serve to reduce the likelihood of students dropping out or being retained in grades. Part 4 – ELT Program Implementation and Oversight Part 4a. Who will implement the ELT program? Who will oversee the program? 1. Indicate the key personnel that will be responsible for implementing and overseeing the ELT program, including school-based staff and any high-quality community partners that will be involved. If applicable, describe the scope of involvement of all community partners and how the joint ELT program is structured. 2. 3. Explain how you will evaluate the program to assess impact on student achievement. Extended Learning will be overseen by the principal and/or supervising designee. Supervisors visit classes to ensure attendance and quality instruction using Advance and formative emails. Teachers will be involved in their own classes. SOBRO is providing ESOL for parents and their children, as well as computer classes on Saturdays for our parents and students. Teachers are assigned, based on their licenses and areas of expertise. Our next steps will include continued monitoring by school leaders of the ELT Program and provide actionable feedback to teachers, bother verbally and in writing, to ensure effective implementation of the ELT Program and in order to exceed our June 2019 annual goal of 80% of students who participate in the ELT Program achieving passing grades in all core academic subjects, as measured by final semester grades. June 2019 regents class pass rates will reflect improved outcomes with the goal of 10% increase of all students enrolled in the core subject. Part 4b. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. Monday through Thursday from 2:36pm to 4:00pm – ongoing Fall Semester: September 6, 2018 until January 18, 2019 Spring Semester: January 31, 2019 until June 12, 2019 2018-19 SCEP-P 52  Part 5 – ELT Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the ELT program. Teachers are paid per-session or pro-rata for their work in Extended Learning program. Supervisory per session is also funded. Teachers will also use applications such as APEX, Achieve 3000, IXL for ELA and Math skills, CPM Mathematics books, and online resources. Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support the ELT Program. Note: If the program is funded by 21st Century Community Center Learning Funds, it must be offered in conjunction with a high quality, high capacity community partner. X 21st Century Title I 1003(a) Tax Levy X X Title III Title I SWP PTA Funded Title I TA SIG Grant P/F Set-aside School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 6 – ELT Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 80% of students who participate in the Expanded Learning Time program will achieve passing grades in at least 2 out of 4 core academic subjects, as measured by the school's scholarship report covering the first semester (September 2018 to January 2019). A review of February 2018 Scholarship Reports covering the 1st semester (September 2017 to January 2018) reveals that: 354 students out of 386 students who participated in the ELT Program passed 2 or more core classes. (92 %). We exceeded our February progress monitoring goal of 80% of students who participate in the Expanded Learning Time Program will achieve passing grades in at least 2 out of 4 core academic subjects. Our next steps will include continued monitoring by school leaders of the ELT Program and provide actionable feedback to teachers, bother verbally and in writing, to ensure effective implementation of the ELT Program and in order to exceed our June 2019 annual goal of 80% of students who participate in the ELT Program achieving passing grades in all core academic subjects, as measured by final semester grades. 2018-19 SCEP-P 53  Part 6b. Indicate the instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 2018- 2019 Scholarship Report (Term 1) Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-P 54  Section 7: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) ELA regents scores, NYSESLAT and NYSITELL data to using the four modalities and language proficiency levels NYSESLAT and NYSITELL data HSWC Diagnostic Exam Regents exam scores Failed Algebra 1 Course NYSESLAT and NYSITELL data HSWC Diagnostic Exam Regents exam scores Failed Living Environment or Earth Science Course NYSESLAT and NYSITELL data HSWC Diagnostic Exam Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Saturday School, Small group When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) During the day, after-school, Saturday PM School One on one Lunch time tutorial pull out Achieve 3000 Saturday School Small group During the day, after-school, Saturday After School One on one IXL Saturday School Small group During the day, after-school, Saturday PM School One on one Castle Learning Saturday School Small group During the day, after-school, Saturday PM School One on one 2018-19 SCEP-P 55 At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Regents exam scores Lunch time tutorial pull out Failed Global History or US History Course Student attendance Rate Student class participation and motivation Abnormal Behavior Staff Referrals Guidance Counselor, Social Worker and School Psychologist conduct small groups, push-in service in classes, and individual counseling Attendance team, grade team meetings, SBST meetings. Restorative Justice Circles Small group During the day One on one 2018-19 SCEP-P 56  Section 8: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 88 students are identified as students in temporary housing, representing 22% of the student population. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. The School Leadership Team voted to use allowable funding to provide $100.00 per student for 10 items of the school uniform. Parents are paid an additional $50.00. Incentives for parents, such as metro cards, are provided to encourage parents to attend school-wide events and activities. The parent coordinator organizes monthly parent workshops and provides outreach to families in temporary housing, as well as to other parents and families. Our social worker supports students experiencing crises and restorative justice intervention. Students are registered in our on-site medical clinic, from Montefiore Hospital. Access to school services, regardless of records, transportation and food services will be provided. Students will be monitored by the social worker to determine if additional services are needed. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). n/a 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 SCEP-P 57  n/a 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. n/a 2018-19 SCEP-P 58  Section 9: Title I Program Information Directions:  All schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the strategies and activities for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, staff, and paraprofessionals that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). The school provides year-long mentors and Common Core State Standards professional development opportunities for new teachers and teachers who have Teacher Improvement Plans. The school organizes and provides differentiated PD for new teachers and PD consultants provide workshops that focus on aligning the curriculum to the Common Core State Standards., The Danielson Framework for Teaching and the school’s Coherent Set of Beliefs About How Students Learn Best within a year-long professional development plan, originally created by instructional coaches and administration. Teacher teams’ common planning incorporates the Common Core State Standards on a weekly basis. Instructional coaches provide support in the area of common core standards and lesson planning, daily. Teachers collaborate in content area teacher teams to analyze student work and during these sessions, they learn from each other, as they identify students' strengths, areas of need, discuss potential feedback to students and determine next instructional steps. Mentors and consultants also meet with teachers in small groups or in one-on-one meetings to deepen the teachers' skills in analyzing student work and determine feedback and next instructional steps. Two math teachers attend the National Conference in Mathematics and turnkey their learning with other teachers. A team of consultants from Teacher Network Training (TNT) provide professional development to math teachers to strengthen their pedagogical practices in math. Teachers attend Common Core State Standards professional development sessions provided by the district, i.e. 2018-19 SCEP-P 59  The three coaches also attend training for developing teacher capacity, SESIS and math strategies for teachers. Special Education workshops; ELL workshops; city-wide workshops Teachers attend monthly professional development sessions provided by the Bronx Support Facility Center (BSFC), based on a wide menu of content area-related topics. All teachers also participate in monthly professional development by the district, focused on English as a New Language, due to the challenges teachers must address for the high number of English Language learners at the school. The principal attends monthly professional development provided by District 12, during Principals’ meetings. The principal and assistant principal participate in monthly sessions with the District 12 Teacher Development Evaluation Coach to norm and calibrate the Danielson Framework for Teaching. The principal participates in the Learning Partners Program. The principal and assistant principal participate with the school’s consultant to strengthen their leadership and supervisory practices. The assistant principal participates in CSA's Executive Leadership Institute workshops. There are no paraprofessionals in the school. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. n/a 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). n/a Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/information, early intervention services, etc.). n/a 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. 2018-19 SCEP-P 60  Professional Development is provided to teachers to discuss the Measures of Teacher Practice (MOTP) and the Danielson Framework for Teaching. In addition, the Principal and UFT Chapter Chair collaborate to select the MOSL Committee members in accordance with the guidelines of the ADVANCE Evaluation System. The UFT Chapter Chair then meets with teachers individually to discuss how they will be rated and address any concerns. Teachers meet with administrators in small groups to discuss the grading policy, interim assessment, classroom assessments, and professional development interests based on experiences and student performance. Teachers collaborate on department teacher teams to analyze student work. During these sessions, they share and learn from each other, as they identify students' strengths, areas of need, possible feedback, and next instructional steps. Mentors and consultants also meet with teachers in small groups or in one-on-one meetings to deepen the teachers' skills in analyzing students' work, determining effective feedback to students, and identifying next instructional steps. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds enables, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (SCEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Title I Part A (Basic) Title I School Improvement 1003(a) Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funds Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal 431,232.00 0 72,212.00 0 50,254.00 Pending X n/a X n/a X X Column B Section Reference(s) 5A,5B,5C,5E 5A,5B,5C,5E n/a 5A,5B,5C,5E 5A,5B,5C,5E 2018-19 SCEP-P 61  Tax Levy (FSF) Local 3,202,548.00 X 5A,5B,5C,5E 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I School Improvement 1003(a): To support implementation of school improvement activities identified through the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) reviews or a school review with district oversight and included in the DCIP/SCEP.  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: To support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs.  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs. 2018-19 SCEP-P 62   Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan.  Title I Priority and Focus School Parent Engagement Set-aside: Additional set-aside is to enable greater and  more meaningful parent participation in the education of their children. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process, including Title I 1003(g) SIG funds: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 SCEP-P 63  Section 10: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. High School of World Cultures, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students [High School of World Cultures] will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information, training, and resources needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 2018-19 SCEP-P 64  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; the school’s parent involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● SOBRO, one of our Century 21 Grant program director works with the Parent Coordinator to survey parents and find out their interests, vocational needs, and language support that should be provided. Then this information is used to create professional development, learning communities, and community programs at our schools, improving parent attendance. ● Translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● Guidance Counselor and Social worker meet with students and their families to discuss updated graduation plans, academic needs and resources, and college and career readiness opportunities.; ● Engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● Maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office; ● Support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● Host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements and other applicable sections under the ESSA; ● Actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● Ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; 2018-19 SCEP-P 65  ● Conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● Conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; ● Provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● Schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) High School of World Cultures] in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will 2018-19 SCEP-P 66  share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments., Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● Utilizing the consultants in the content areas of math (NTN), ENL, and Instruction/Leadership; ● Teachers attend district led professional developments to further their practice and make instructional shifts; ● Aligning instruction to the CCLS and the BCCI; ● Using academic learning time efficiently; ● Respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● Implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● Offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● Providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● Using the translation and interpretation services for initial interviews, documents, Parent Teacher Conference, and other communication; ● Conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● Utilizing Kinvolve to monitor student attendance and immediately alert guardians of absence/lateness; ● Convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● Arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● Respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● Providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; 2018-19 SCEP-P 67  ● Involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● Providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● Ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● Creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● Assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● Sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; ● Supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● Ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● Advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with Title 1 and Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); 2018-19 SCEP-P 68  II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities 2018-19 SCEP-P 69  ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 SCEP-P 70  Addendum: Community School Partnerships Directions: The Community School (CS) strategy is directly aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. Community Schools bring schools and community partners together and integrate academics, health, youth development, and family engagement to provide students with the tools and opportunities they need to succeed. The Core Services in Community Schools are Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness. Part 1 – Community School Partnerships Goal(s) How is the CS strategy integrated into academic instruction at your school, and what impact has it had on student academic outcomes? Our school provides students opportunities to work with different community partners through the 21st Century federal grant. These programs include support in their content courses, theater, and health/ wellness. In addition, teachers receive professional development support to improve their practice, ensuring all students are able to access the content standards which will lead to credit accumulation and increased graduation rate. Indicate the summative goal(s) of the Community School for the 2018-19 school year. Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. By June 2019, as a result of the implementation of 21st Century programs and enrichment activity offerings, 80 percent of participating students will accumulate 8 credits as measured by the June 2018 scholarship reports. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Community School Annual Goal(s): How will achieving your Community School Goal(s)--in Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness--support your academic goals for students? There is a direct correlation between the achievement of our CS goal and our SCEP goal of rigorous instruction, particularly students' credit accumulation. Our ELT broadens our opportunities to reinforce our standard day goals and action plans with a coherent and consistent emphasis on Common Core Learning Standards, best pedagogical practices as per the Danielson Framework for Teaching, and the Tenets/Statements of Practice of the DTSDE, the New York City Quality Review Rubric, and the Framework for Great Schools Elements. Part 2 – Community School Partnerships Core Services Action Plan Part 2a. Identify the Community-based Organization (CBO) partnerships that you will develop in ELT, Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness, their target student population(s), and scope of the services provided. As well as supporting schools’ supportive environment and attendance work, CBOs should be helping to support your school’s instructional focus. CBO Partnership OmniLearn Target Population 11th and 12th Graders Scope of Service SY18-19 SMART Goal Academic By June 2019, as a result of the implementation of 21st Century programs and enrichment activity offerings, 80 percent of participating students will accumulate 8 credits as measured by the June 2018 scholarship reports. 2018-19 SCEP-P 71  Stella Adler Rugby 9th and 10th Graders Social Emotional 9th and 10th Graders Health and Wellness Innovation Design Teachers Professional Development SoBro Parents Parent Engagement and Development By June 2019, 90 percent of participating students will master 4/4 NYC DOE College and Career Readiness Benchmarks. By June 2019, participating students' attendance will reach an average monthly attendance rate of 85%, as measured by the RYMA monthly ATS report. By June 2019, 90% of participating teachers will receive Effective and/or Highly Effective ratings in 3 of 3 of the following components: 3b (Questioning and Discussion Techniques); 3c (Student Engagement); and component 3d (Using Assessment in Instruction) on Advance observation reports. By June 2019, participating students' attendance will reach an average monthly attendance rate of 85%, as measured by the RYMA monthly ATS report. Part 3 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 3a. Indicate resources your Community Partnership will leverage to achieve your summative SMART goal(s) and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Resources that we will leverage to achieve our goal will include the following: Consultants, teacher and supervisory per session for professional development workshops; schedule adjustments to provide support for teachers during the day; instructional materials used by CBO's; metrocard/ transportation costs for parents, miscellaneous expenses for parent and teacher meetings, and parent translation services. Part 3b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA P/F Set-aside X 21st Century C4E 2018-19 SCEP-P 72  Title I 1003(a) Title III PTA Funded SIG Grant Achievement Other Funding School Part 3c. Describe how the school will partner with the Lead CBO to do the following: 1. Community Schools are expected to partner with a community-based partner organization (CBO) and together with members of the School Leadership Team, hire a Community School Director. The Director will lead implementation of the asset and needs assessment process, and other critically important coordinating activities. Indicate how you will leverage this aspect of the work. Community Schools are expected to personalize the needs of all students, through strategic programming and services, as determined by the asset and needs assessment, and must also offer Expanded Learning Time (ELT) and mental health programming. In completing this section, ensure that you think about how: (1) the right services are provided to the right students and families at the right time; and (2) how you will seamlessly coordinate services with instructional programming happening throughout and outside of the school day. Indicate how you will implement this work, and describe other programming you anticipate to be in place to strengthen this initiative. Community Schools are expected to emerge as Partnership Schools, which are places where parents and families feel welcome, actively participate in the conversation and decision-making around the renewal of their schools, and have many opportunities to advocate for their children. Monthly meetings and Community School Forums engaging families and community stakeholders will be a critical part of this family engagement strategy. Describe how you will implement this aspect of the work. Community School Principals are expected to meet on a weekly basis with their Community School Director, select Assistant Principals, key staff, and other CBOs, to analyze trends in data and case manage individual students. Data tools – including the New Visions Data Sorter - and training will be available for schools to use. Indicate how you will implement this aspect of the work. 2. 3. 4. Community School Director will lead the implementation of our school’s needs assessment and action plan implementation through direct contact with school leaders on a weekly basis. The Community School Director will interface with all CBO personnel to ensure effective implementation and coordination of services. Planning and preparation for the school day and expanded learning time are seamlessly organized to ensure that the needs of all students are met. Data analysis will be shared with relevant personnel so that ongoing instructional decisions will be data driven throughout all program delivery. Monitoring and revising will occur through weekly cabinet meetings, in which relevant personnel will share progress and challenges directly related to student achievement and teacher performance. Parents and families will feel welcomed in the school and will actively participate in decision making through a variety of family engagement activities, including but not limited to monthly School Leadership Team meetings, teacher office hours twice a week to collaborate with parents and students; school newsletter, parent-student events, Principal’s breakfast, family dinners, open school events, Curriculum Night, and Parent Association meetings and events. Teachers use Kinvolved to communicate with parents regarding attendance, academic reminders, and school events. Parents and teachers use Skedula to communicate academic progress and requirements needed to graduate. School Principal, Community School Director, and Assistant Principal will meet on a weekly basis to discuss school attendance, including the attendance reports for 5 day absentees and 10 day absentees. Progress reports and school 2018-19 SCEP-P 73  scholarship reports are also analyzed to ensure students are receiving supports to meet the goals and make adjustments, as needed. School Principal, Community School Director, and Assistant Principal will meet with key staff and CBO’s on a weekly basis to monitor and revise program implementation. Part 4 – Community School Partnerships Oversight Part 4a. Key Staff and Partners 1. Name and describe the scope of involvement of all community partners working in the school (include partners supporting ELT, counseling, enrichment, etc.) 2. Name the members of your Community School Team and how meetings will be organized and structured to engage all stakeholders and be focused on results. 3. Explain data strategies including the use of the data sorter, and steps that the school will take to ensure that the appropriate interventions are provided to the right students OmniLearn: Academic - school day and after school Weekly planning with teachers Partnership meetings per semester SoBro: Parent Engagement- After school and Saturdays Weekly planning with administrators Partnership meetings per semester Rugby: Wellness- School day and after school Weekly planning with teachers Partnership meetings per semester Stella Adler: Emotional Learning- School day and after school Weekly planning with teachers Partnership meetings per semester Innovative Design Education: School day Weekly planning with teachers Partnership meetings per semester Data is collected through YouthServices.net. In addition, attendance reports, scholarship reports, and attendance from parent engagement are used to collect, analyze data to determine patterns, trends, progress, performance of all students, disaggregating the data by sub group, gender, grade, cohort, and teacher impact. Based on the data analysis, CBO’s and school personnel will collaborate to determine necessary program revisions and/or expansions. 2018-19 SCEP-P 74  Part 4b. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the Community School program. Consultants, teacher and supervisory per session for professional development workshops; schedule adjustments to provide support for teachers during the day; instructional materials used by CBO's; metrocard/ transportation costs for parents, miscellaneous expenses for parent and teacher meetings, and parent translation services. Part 4c. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. September 2018 to June 2019, ongoing and as noted in action plan descriptions. Part 4d. Mental Health Work Plan Separate from this S/CEP, schools will complete a Mental Health Work Plan that will become an addendum to this document. 2018-19 SCEP-P 75  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 SCEP-P 76  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: This grant will supplement and accompany the programs that have already been instated through Title III grant. New Arrivals will be able to continue benefiting from the academic programs after school and on Saturdays. The HSWC services grades nine through twelve through ENL programs and pedagogues. The students are given five periods 45minute periods of ENL courses every week. Classes are taught in accordance with the language allocation policy. The entire staff has been trained in ENL methodology through professional development opportunities in house and through outside sources. ENL methodologies are used in all academic areas and strategic techniques are used throughout each grade level accordingly by data analysis and grade team decisions. The minutes of instruction are in accordance with CR Part 154 mandated units of service. Students are given the NYSITELL within the first ten days of arrival and the NYSESLAT exam annually. The identification of students for the ELL begins with the entrance interview and evaluation including well-structured parent and student orientation sessions. New students are also given the Multilingual Literacy Sife Screener exam to determine their appropriate class placements. Parents and students complete the home language survey. The NYSITELL results are used to determine if a student should be placed in an ELL program. The NYSESLAT exam is used to determine the level of English language proficiency. Students are considered General Education, Entering, Emerging, Transitioning, Exiting, and Commanding as a result of the NYSITELL/ NYSESLAT Exams. There is a dual language component to our program where students are taught half their content in English and the other half in Spanish. In courses where the language of instruction is in English, there is an ENL Integrated Co-Teacher that specializes in language acquisition, differentiation, and interventions for students who have been identified as needing extra support in learning English or their content area material. The HSWC uses mock Regents and Mock NYSESLAT exams school-wide interim assessments to assess growth of students in their language acquisition as well as content. Results for these are used for planning and making curricular adjustments. One Assistant Principal, one Principal, and the School Leadership Team supervise the ELL Program paid from other funds. The Title III program is serving many ELL students. ENL teachers involved with Title III are all properly certified with bilingual or ENL licenses. The purpose of the Title III program is to supplement the regular instructional program for Ells. The title III immigrant funding will further support the programs already set in place. Teachers will help the students with core curriculum content reading and comprehension by developing their language skills and fluency in order to become a more proficient reader and speaker. Using a cross grade curriculum standard for all classes modifications and accommodations are made according to the class population but all students are receiving the 2018-19 SCEP-P 77  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information common core aligned curriculum for their subject area. Through the services in the after school program the content area teacher along with ENL/Bilingual teachers help students to build and support their vocabulary and reading skills. Students are provided individualized support to strengthen study skills through ENL teacher push in supports, and computer-assisted instruction to help monitor their progress. This will be used for the Title III program and will be supplemental instruction to our day program. Students that are invited to participate in these programs are identified in one of three ways. Their teachers, and guidance counselor either recommends them because they are struggling with the material, they self-identify, or administrators upon review of academic records recommend them. In addition, students eligible for the NYSESLAT (88 percent of our total population) will be invited to participate in our After School and Saturday Programs. We will be incorporating a career and technical training class that will be held on Wednesdays and Thursdays after school from 2:36pm-4:08pm to support the CTE Culinary Arts Program with ENL Support. Starting this March and following into the remainder of the School Year the CTE program will give students the opportunity to learn Culinary Art skills that will build the foundational skills in this field. The program started last year and continues to grow as the students enroll each year. This new opportunity provides students with real world experience of working in a kitchen and will enable the student to be professionally and culturally ready after acquiring 10-12 supplemental credits in the course of study. This After School program is a continuing supplemental instructional day of two sequential time periods that are providing an extension of the daily instruction to giving the students' added practice, support, and practice to raise the proficiency levels of the ELL learners. This program services 250 students. It runs for two hours hours on Wednesday through Thursday (Fall: September to January/ February to June) . Two sessions are given during this time (session 1= 2:36pm-3:26pm, session 2= 3:27pm-4:08pm). September to June the program lasts for a total of 54 hours. There will be 15 groups during the first session and 10 groups during the second session. There are between ten and fifteen students per group with a mix of grade level who need the added support in language acquisition and comprehension to pass the mandated assessments and become proficient speakers and writers. They are taught by four certified ENL and bilingual teachers and eleven content area teachers. The ENL teachers plan with Content Area teachers that do not have a Bilingual Extension to support the ELLs differentiation and scaffolds needed in the content area during their planning time. This program provides an opportunity for students to participate in enrichment activities in the core subject areas of Algebra, Geometry, English, ENL, Global history, U.S. History, Living Environment, Earth Science, and to further their language development. The Saturday program provides supplementary enrichment classes providing instruction helping to deepen their learning of the common core state standards and the application of the standards to their weekly instruction. It runs for 4 hours, 8:30 AM to 12:30 PM and will be run by two ENL/Bilingual certified and four content area teachers (Social Studies, Science, Math, English) and approximately 50 students in grades 9-12, (there will be two sessions, totalling 8 groups that have approximately 10 to 15 students), all students are able to take any of the sessions listed as needed (up to two) during the Saturday schedule. The program is scheduled to run 10 days in the spring (beginning on March and ending in June 2017: 10 Saturdays). There are two session periods (of two hours), which enable students to participate in two different subject areas to develop their content and literacy skills. The ENL teacher will support the Content Area teachers by co-planning and providing differentiations and scaffolds for ELL's in the classroom as well as 2018-19 SCEP-P 78  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information teach their own ENL stand alone courses. The sessions are for extra support in providing additional opportunities to enrich their learning. The activities include group activities, response to movies, instructional support in content areas, language development, and the use of technology to assess student understanding. Various modalities are used to enrich understanding of ELL students in the content area. Content/ Teacher/ License/ Program: English as a New Language/ Andrade/ TESOL K-12 After School CTE: Culinary / Cadet/ Culinary Careers 7-12 Transitional A/ After School English as a New Language/ Choi/ TESOL K-12 Transitional B/ After School Social Studies/ DeLorenzo / Social Studies 7-12 Transitional B/ After School Mathematics / Diaz / Spanish 7-12 & Math 7-12 / After School & Saturday Mathematics/ Farrell/ Math 7-12 Professional/ After School & Saturday Living Environment & Earth Science/ Garcia / Biology 7-12 / After School Program English as a New Language/ Gilbert / TESOL K-12/ After School English as a New Language & Art/ King/ TESOL K-12 Transitional B/ After School Living Environment & Earth Science/ Maldonado/ Biology 7-12 / Bilingual Extension/ After School Spanish & Art/ Mercedes/ Spanish 7-12/ After School & Saturdays English as a New Language/ Morales/ TESOL K-12/ After School & Saturday Social Studies/ Moyer / Social Studies 7-12 / After School Social Studies/ Reilly/ Social Studies 7-12 / After School Social Studies/ Lopez/ Social Studies 7-12 / After School Mathematics/ Oeckel/ Math 7-12 / Transitional B / After School English/ Richardson / ELA 7-12l/ After School English as a New Language/ Sow/ TESOL K-12/ After School English as a New Language/ Perlwitz/ TESOL K-12/ After School Special Education/ Artis/ Special Education 9-12/ After School Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: As a new arrival English Language Learner school, all of the professional development provided for staff is around scaffolds, supports, differentiation techniques, co-teaching relationships, language translation and interpretation tools that should be used in the classroom to support instruction. Professional Development are provided on Fridays from 12:36pm to 1:26pm. Topics Covered: - Cornell Note Taking Strategies - Socratic Seminars - Curriculum Planning using the Bilingual Common Core Initiative Standards (UBD) - SIOP differentiation techniques - Understanding the EDAT Tool and using it to inform instruction 2018-19 SCEP-P 79  Part C: Professional Development - Alignment between the curriculum framework and the unit planning, specifically in writing content and language objectives. Providers/ Facilitators: - Teacher Leaders - Administrators - External Consultants Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: The HSWC wishes to promote family literacy and educational experiences. To do so, we offer enrichment classes not only to our students, but parents as well. Parent ESL classes will be offered on Saturdays for 20 weeks and for four hours. The classes are taught by an outside community partner SOBRO lead by staff member Matilde Cruz. We recruited Parents through the Parent Coordinator outreach and the workshop includes 12-15 parents that continues to grow for the year long Saturday sessions from 9:00 AM-1:00PM. Parents wishing to improve or learn the English language are welcomed to attend these free classes. This will also allow parents to be more involved in our community and to get to know strategies to incorporate their language acquisition at home to support their child and family in developing their language skills. Our goal is to strengthen relationships and to promote literacy and success throughout the community. Class agenda and daily lessons will be determined by the teacher but a tentative program will be based on 4 units of 5 weeks each will include: Basic Grammar and Writing, Speaking and Conversational Language, Reading Documents and non fiction, and Writing to Communicate with Proficiency. There will be enrichment opportunities such as Broadway shows and clothing drives that will also help support our community and build relationships and literacy for our parental group. These classes will take place throughout the school year and parents are notified via meetings, mailings, and phone calls. The topics covered in class are conversational skills as well as skills needed to determine directions, gain information, and help their students with mutual learning goals. "Parent Breakfasts with the Principal" will be held in the month of February, there will be translated (French, Spanish, Bangla, Chinese, Arabic) informational sessions to advise parents of our grading system, student’s Transcript, ARIS, Discipline code of conduct, Regents and Diploma Requirements, understanding of NYC DOE system, and to meet some of the school’s faculty and staff. 2018-19 SCEP-P 80 Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Parents are welcomed to participate in the annual “World Cultures” Day that is held each year in May. All facets of the World Cultures family (students, teachers, support staff, administration and parents) are invited to spend the day engaging in fun team-building activities at an off-site venue. This successful day has proved to be a great opportunity for all to bond. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. 2018-19 SCEP-P 81  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 12 School Name High School of World Cultures Borough Bronx School Number 550 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Dr. Ramon Namnun Coach Ms. Kathryn Gilbert ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Ms. Isabel Andrade Teacher/Subject Area Ms. Caludia Pimentel/ Foreign Teacher/Subject Area Ms. Lucidenny Mercedes/ Foreig Related-Service Provider Ms. Rowena Mc Nulty Superintendent Mr. Paul Rotondo Assistant Principal Ms. Esther-Racquel Fragosa Coach Mr. Aladji Sow School Counselor Ms. Paula Plaskett Parent Ms. Carolina Canales Parent Coordinator Ms. Maria Rodon Field Support Center Staff Member Ms. Anita Bushi Other (Name and Title) Ingrid Punter/ Secretary C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 3 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 1 0 8 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 2 0 D. Student Demographics 2018-19 SCEP-P 82  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 485 Total number of ELLs 403 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 83.09% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Spanish Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) Span. K 1 2 3 4 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 75 0 0 0 0 75 75 75 50 50 50 50 Tot # 0 0 0 250 0 0 250 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? The High School of World Cultures uses several assessments to guide the instructional planning of English Language Learners. These include: 1) State assessments: NYSITELL, NYSESLAT, Multiliteracy SIFE Screener that will allow teachers and administrators to know the students' language proficiency level, numeracy, and literacy skills. These exams are offered within the allotted time by NYC Department of Education. The information is then downloaded into the EDAT tool and shared with teachers across all content area so that they can differentiate their instruction according to student proficiency level, scaffold the activities, and group students accordingly. 2018-19 SCEP-P 83  2) Classroom Assessments: Content pre and post assessments are used to demonstrate student mastery as they acquire the standards for their content as well as assessing their reading level through the assessments on Achieve 3000. Teachers also use formative assessments in class (exit tickets and diagnostic questions) to inform teaching practices throughout the week. 3) District assessments are used in-house from the Schoolnet to assess student progress in the course and prepare them for future state exams. 4) Mock regents exams are offered in content courses so that students and teachers can analyze the standards needed to be successful on the state exam as well as showing growth in their language progression level. In addition, we have a school wide Mock NYSESLAT to prepare the students and allow teachers to address particular areas of need in their classrooms. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Teachers receive professional development in the Bilingual Common Core Initiative, EDAT Tool, and assessments. Teachers are given the time to look at student work and do their inquiry based on student performance on the assessments offered in school, providing suggestions and next steps in their curriculum to evidence student growth in language acquitision as well as mastery of the content. ENL Teachers go to professional development with the Borough Field Support ELL Coach, Ms. Anita Bushi. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? Success of the programs are measured through the NYSESLAT and Regent Exam grades. We also measure the success of our programs through the credit accumulation of each student. Teachers use post assessments for every unit of study to monitor mastery of targeted standards and strategies. The ENL department has created a benchline assessment to use in each semester to better track the progress of our students in our ENL stand alone classes. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Once the benchmark assessments have been administered and scores are received, students are programmed into the courses they need, including immediately repeating courses if they have not mastered their standards. In addition, teachers meet to discuss and plan for extended learning opportunities, tutoring, Saturday Academy offerings. In addition, the instructional cabinet meets to determine and update professional development offerings, differentiated to meet the needs of the teachers and provide support as they use the learned strategies in the classroom. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] N/A 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. At the high school level, most of the courses students take are regents bearing. Therefore our outcomes assessments are also the Regents Exams, NYSESLAT exams. The results from these as well all the risk information provided on the EDAT tool, allow administrators, teachers, pupil personnel, and additional staff to evaluate the ELL programs at our school. This includes academics, extended learning, family resources, academic advising, and ensuring students have their social-emotional needs met to be successful in the classroom. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? The staff is given time during professional development and inquiry to analyze their data and make adjustments to their curriculum and lesson plans. The staff meets with administration to discuss academic advising, family support, and social-emotional learning strategies that is turn keyed to teachers as well. In addition the Instructional Cabinet and Accreditation 2018-19 SCEP-P 84  teams meet to discuss credit accumulation and regents passing rate, and then based on the data make informed decisions in programming and professional development. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Students in this program are given integrated Social Studies with an ENL teacher. Students are homogeneously grouped according to proficiency levels in English as determined by their assessment scores on the NYSITELL and NYSESLAT when applicable. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. Students are given instruction in Spanish for both Mathematics and Science along with integrated Social Studies with an ENL teacher. Students are grouped homogeneously according to their Spanish proficiency assessment scores. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? All Mandated time allocations are followed according to the state mandate. Students receive 180 minutes of ENL stand alone instruction per week. This is addition to their Integrated Content classes. HSWC offers integrated courses for all English Language Learners. With the focus on students learning the Common Core standards and Targets of Measurements assessed in the NYSESLAT, our students' ENL course addresses content area vocabulary, levels of language proficiency, and literacy. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Teachers use the language progression levels Bilingual Common Core Initiative and language progression level to scaffold and within each content area the department has established a scope and sequence from grades 9-12 that give a structured schedule to the delivery of common core learning standards. Across grade levels the teachers have worked together to develop thematic units to deliver instruction in a way that is more comprehensible for ELL students. For example, this structure allows for teachers to assess and teach common vocabulary and concepts. The instructors approach is to infuse ENL strategies within each content area. Each room in the school is outfitted with a smartboard to allow the teachers more access to displaying visuals throughout the instructional process. As mentioned in previous questions, the Freestanding English program delivers instruction in English whereas, the Dual Language program has content area courses taught in Spanish for the areas of Math and Science. The scope and sequence developed by the disciplines aligns to the common core learning standards and teachers design learning outcomes based on these. Departmental supervisors oversee the delivery of instructional outcomes and ensure that these are met in the most efficient way possible. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? When students are enrolled in the school, they are given the Multilingual SIFE Assessment to determine the proficiency level of their Home Language. We re administer the Multilingual SIFE Assessment at the end of their first year to assess the growth of 2018-19 SCEP-P 85  Home Language. Currently we are using standards based assessments and Regent exam grades to monitor the growth and needs of the students during the course of the school year to determine their growth in content areas as well. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a. SIFE: Teacher differentiates instruction for SIFE students by using graphic organizers, word walls, and other visual aides. Teachers take additional time in teaching particular unit material if the goals are not being met or achieved within the groups. Teachers also plan interdisciplinary units and trips to assist in the achievement of unit standards and unit goals. Furthermore, there is an additional 90 minutes of instruction per day for SIFE who have been identified as needing additional foundational support in English and Home language skills. b. Newcomer: Teaching is differentiated through the use of ENL strategies as needed according to their needs and the content being delivered. Teachers have chosen, according to content are, a specific method to use and they are uniformly delivering the strategy in order to scaffold the learning. c. Developing: Teachers will use grouping within all of their lessons, both heterogeneous and homogeneous depending on the task. The students who are developing will be challenged enough so they may be able to be pushed up to the next level.d. Long term: Along with the methods used for developing additional instructional time is used in small group instruction. e. Former ELL up to two years after existing ELL status: Our school challenges former ELLs so they may be prepared for college. We do this by offering or former ELLs College Now Classes, and A.P. Classes. Within the regular classroom content areas, our teachers will also assess our students using higher level materials. On the Regents tests, students are afforded extended time and also provided other resources such as translators and glossaries for two years after being tested out. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Teachers are given access to IEPS through SESIS so that teachers are able to align their instruction to their students goals. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? At this time we have one student with an IEPs enrolled in our Freestanding ENL program. This student has entered the Dual Language Program at the request of the parent and student to provide the least restrictive and optimal instructional advantage for the student. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. The targeted intervention program is designed to select students from cohort U 2019 and cohort V 2020 in an effort to gain additional credits for graduation and for preparing the students to take the Regent level exam for the specific content area. Students are tutored the core content areas for SIFE students we have also a modified curriculum that allows the support of the ELL student to acquire Language skills. PM school is also offered to support their home work tasks, and content area instruction from daily lessons. In addition to these supports we offer a two session Saturday school for the students in the cohort R in five major content areas. For example, in Science we have been using Castle learning and data analysis to support their content, in ELA we are using data from Regent scores to target the students skills in writing for purpose, Social Studies is tailoring their instruction after an item analysis of Regent level answers, Math has incorporated data analysis and have modified instruction based on the Regents scores, and in Native Language we are utilizing a HSWC Diagnostic test to place the student in the appropriate grade levels. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? 2018-19 SCEP-P 86  CTE continues this school year to target career and technical education needs. In addition, we have the BUILD, entrepreneurship program and the two-way Dual Language programs are expanding to service more ELL students. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? In the past, we discontinued the SIFE Bridges program and integrate the students into the classrooms, instead of keeping them as isolated as the former year had modeled. In the future, we would like to create elective courses geared towards acculturation and introduction to High School for new arrivals. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. The extended learning time on Mondays through Thursday include academic support for students. This includes additional credit accumulation, regents preparation, ENL support services, and College Now programs. On Friday 100% of ours students participate in community based programs, with ELL support, such Stella Adler, OmniLearn, Art programs, hydroponics, sports programs, internships, college and career readiness courses where they can complete college application and requirements, and additional enrichment activities. Saturday Academy will continue to include the literacy programs and additional regents preparation support. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. We offer Castle learning as a support to our students in Science and Math. Achieve 3000 and IXL are used in Math, ELA and ENL classes. Math uses instructional ENL approaches that help deliver the econtent material. Teachers have SMARTboards in every classroom so that students are able to make their thinking visible to the entire class. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Students are supported through the use of Spanish centered classes led by Native speakers and reading materials such as the aligned text used in dual languages. We plan to expand the Home Language support to include classes in French, Arabic and Bangla. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Through the use of leveled libraries and lexile level measuring, students reading levels are accommodated. We use the BCCI standards in all content areas to scaffold and differentiate instruction. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? We will work together with PanAmerican High School for Professional Development as we both serve similar populations and they are an International Consortium School. We plan to learn alongside them as we implement student portfolios in our instruction as a way to measure growth in content standards and language proficiency. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Newcomer students participate in the Saturday Academy literacy program where they take courses in Home Language Arts (Spanish), ENL Literacy and Numeracy classes. Extended Leaning time will also include focused Literacy classes for these students. Ms. Gilbert, Mr. Sow, Ms. Andrade, Ms. Morales, Ms. Diaz are the teachers for the program. In addition we have support from Ms. Rondon the Parent Coordinator and Ms. Plaskett the Guidance counselor. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? We currently have Spanish and plan to include classes in French and Arabic. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. 2018-19 SCEP-P 87  In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? a. 225 minutes of integrated content area learning per week and additional 135 minutes per week for newcomers and beginning students. An additional 90 minutes per week are given to the intermediate and advanced students. b. Core content areas are taught in both Spanish and English according to the needs of the students.c. Language is separated through the content areas being taught.d. Both languages are taught at the same time depending on the content area class being taught. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? All of our professional development is 100% ELL driven to meet the needs of our student population. We have weekly meetings on Fridays in addition to common planning time. Our professional development mainly focuses on: integrated co-teaching, language access for parents, the BCCI and Language Progression Levels and ToMs in content areas. Addition support in Q-TEL is available for all of our teachers. Effectiveness is measured through evaluating student work in Inquiry session and classroom observations. In addition, new teachers receive mentoring sessions to support their instruction and department leads serve as coaches for their departments particular needs. Teachers are also encouraged to attend the Bronx Field Support Professional Development for ELL teachers as well ENL focused conferences. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Being that 100% of our student population is ELL, we meet and exceed the amount of hours required for Professional Development for ELL students. The records are kept in a binder with agendas, attendance sheets and any resources. ESL and other Teachers are given training and professional development during the summer through the ELL summer institute. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? High School of World Cultures provides multiple opportunities for parents to come in and discuss student progress in both the content and English language progression. This includes enrollment, parent teacher conferences, parent learning workshops, and principal breakfast. In each of these meetings, parents speak to the student's content and ENL teachers to receive orientation about credit accumulation requirements, support for homework help and State Exam preparation, strategies to support both English and Home Language progression, and college programs with information on scholarship opportunities and majors based on student interest. We survey our parents at the beginning and mid-year to ensure we have up to date information to provide necessary translation and interpretation services at our meetings. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Through So Bro, century 21 community based program, we currently have ENL and computer courses for parents. We look forward to adding culinary classes (in English) where parents and students can come together and practice their ENL skills. We 2018-19 SCEP-P 88  plan to have parent volunteers to come into the school to support in the classroom, translation and to foster a greater sense of community among our families. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 2018-19 SCEP-P 89 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Dr. Ramon Namnun, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 SCEP-P 90  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: High School of World Cultures School DBN: 12X550 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Dr. Ramon Namnun Title Principal Ms. Esther-Racquel Fragosa Assistant Principal Ms. Maria Rondon Parent Coordinator Ms. Isabel Andrade ENL/Bilingual Teacher Ms. Carolina Canales Parent Ms. Claudia Pimentel Teacher/Subject Area Ms. Lucidenny Mercedes Teacher/Subject Area Ms. Kathryn Gilbert Mr. Aladji Sow Coach Coach Ms. Paula Plaskett School Counselor Mr. Paul Rotondo Ms. Anita Bushi Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Ms. Anita Bushi Senior ELL Compliance Other Mr. Wladimir Pierre Assistant Principal Other Ms. Ingrid Punter N/A Other N/A Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 06/27/18 06/27/18 06/27/18 06/27/18 06/27/18 06/27/18 06/27/18 06/27/18 06/27/18 06/27/18 07/02/18 07/02/18 07/02/18 06/27/18 N/A 2018-19 SCEP-P 91  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 12X550 School Name: High School of World Cultures Superintendent: Paul Rotundo The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Esther-Racquel Fragosa Assistant Principal Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. The High School of World Cultures provides parents with translations and interpretation needs through the utilization of multilingual staff members and DoE translators. First off, we offer to parent orientation classes in September and in April. These orientations include breakfast with the principal where he explains the schools policies regarding Regents diploma requirements, discipline code, uniform, and opportunities for students to attend after school, College Now, and other extracurricular activities. 2018-19 SCEP-P 92  For parent and teacher conferences, DoE translators are hired to relay important information to parents. In addition, parents are encouraged to attend Saturday school where they can learn English. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral ARABIC BENGALI (BANGLA IN BANGLADESH) ESTONIAN FRENCH MANDINKA (AKA MANDINGO) ENGLISH SLOVAK SPANISH WOLOF 43 33 1 13 1 39 1 373 11 8.35 6.41 0.19 2.52 0.19 7.57 0.19 72.43 2.14 42 31 1 13 1 42 1 373 2.14 8.16 6.02 0.19 2.52 0.19 8.16 0.19 72.43 2.14 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A - Preferred languages are mentioned above. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. English Language Learner Bilingual Program Letters. Parent Conferences September 30th,2018 NYC DOE Website September, November, March, May (As per NYC DOE Calendar) Interpreters and Language Line Culinary Events (Example: Night in Asia) October 28th, 2018 Translation Services, Language Line, and spreading the word at the School 2018-19 SCEP-P 93  Teacher Resources for parents Semester Leadership Team and Parent Association meetings. Translation Services and in-house translation from parent volunteers. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Freshmen and other student orientation meetings August, September, June interpretation service(s)? In-house interpretation and language line Parent Engagement and Outreach On going weekly, as per NYCDOE Teacher contract In-house interpretation and language line HSWC Field Day June Parent-Teacher Conferences including Curriculum Night As scheduled by NYCDOE Calendar In-house interpretation and language line In-house interpretation and language line Meetings (SLT and PA) Ongoing September through June In-house interpretation College and Career Readiness Workshops Ongoing October through March In-house interpretation and language line Meeting the Principal February Translators 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. In the case of an emergency, the Parent Coordinator is contacted. In addition the staff members look for the students’ blue card and/or updated information on Kinvolved and contact the parent using in-house translation or the language line. Through the Kinvolved application, staff is able to text a message to the parents or guardians in their language. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Staff is provided with Professional Development to discuss the Chancellor’s Regulation A-663. In addition, teachers are modeled how to use the language line and translation services. Teachers are given a copy of the Parent’s Guide to Language access, so that they can use them when meeting with a parent. Various emails are sent out with the information regarding language line for staff. The school has designated a teacher that can support the staff in making phone calls. 2018-19 SCEP-P 94  Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) The students are assigned and Academic Advisor who then reaches out to parents. In these conversations, the teachers confirm the parent’s preferred written and spoken languages, ensuring that they are informed of their right to receive information in this preferred language. NYC DOE Translated resources are also used in the two way communication with parents. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Parent Surveys that are distributed during Parent Association meetings and are then discussed with the School Leadership Team. This information is then used to revise the action plan from the school’s SCEP goals. In addition, school staff is also surveyed to find out what languages they speak, experiences using the language line and translation services, to make adjustments in communication with parents. 2018-19 SCEP-P 95 
