2018-19 SCHOOL COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (SCEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 07X551 School Name: THE URBAN ASSEMBLY BRONX ACADEMY OF LETTERS Principal: ERIN GARRY 2018-19 SCEP-FL 1  School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Section 4: SCEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: 320700011551 6-12 339 Morris Avenue 718-401-4891 Section 1: School Information Page School Information The Urban Assembly Bronx Academy of Letters School Number (DBN): 07x551 Phone Number: 718-401-6626 Fax: Erin Garry egarry2@schools.nyc.gov Email Address: School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Erin Garry, IA Jake Thomas Evelyn Ibarra Amy Schless Vanessa Carrion Hold Hold N/A Affinity Schools CUNY/UA Geographical District: Superintendent’s Office Address: District Information Frederick Walsh Superintendent: 333 7th Ave Room 709B/715 NewYork, NY 10001 FWalsh@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 3  Phone Number: (718) 935-5618 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) Affinity FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Alexandra Anormaliza Executive Director: 131 Livingston Street, Brooklyn, NY 11201 aanorma@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: Phone Number: Fax: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the SCEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Amy Schless Jake Thomas Evelyn Ibarra Vanessa Carrion Carlos Valera DennilismarOsorio ShanikaSweeney *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/Teacher 2018-19 SCEP-FL 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Frances Herrera Denise Claudio MoneePerkins Member/Teacher Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 SCEP-FL 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) is a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. The process of developing and implementing the SCEP is aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding SCEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department has established programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students supports to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and SCEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint for continuous improvement that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to increase student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 7  In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five (5) goals and action plans that align with the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. Accountability Tools and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is informed by the New York State Education Department’s (NYSED) Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) Tenets, the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Rubric, School Quality Guide and other quantitative and qualitative data tools. NYSED’s Six DTSDE Tenets To strengthen the existing system, the NYSED has developed a tool that captures the best practices from each of the current tools called the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness. This new tool encompasses multiple instruments such as interviews, classroom observations and surveys. The protocol will begin with a clear and cogent statement of the optimal conditions of an effective school and the instruments comprising the protocol will measure how close or far away a particular school is to the optimal conditions identified. Once reviewed, the school and district will create a strategic plan to address the areas in need of improvement. All current Priority and Focus Schools and Focus Districts must use the tool; districts that are required to submit District Comprehensive Improvement Plans and Comprehensive Educational Plans also will use the tool. The DTSDE protocol includes a rubric, which identifies clear and coherent expectations of the optimal conditions of an effective school and school district across the following six tenets:  Tenet 1: District Leadership and Capacity  Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions  Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support  Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions  Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health, and  Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement 2018-19 SCEP-FL 8  NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 2017-18 Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) I. II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Structures for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the SCEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the SCEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. Next Steps for SCEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 9   Step 3: In Part 1A of the Section 5: Needs Assessment indicate the Statement of Practice (SOP) from the DTSDE Tenets that will be addressed in the action plan. Schools that received an Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) School Review should use the recommendations from the review to select their SOPs. Schools that did not undergo an IIT review should select SOPs informed by the major findings/recommendations from your most recent Quality Review (QR) or Central-led Review (CLR), and other qualitative and quantitative data.  Step 4: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 5: Build consensus around activities, strategies and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 6: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 7: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 10  1. What is your school’s mission statement? Mission Section 4: SCEP Overview In addition to challenging academic work, we are also committed to promoting flexible, self-motivated learning outside of the classroom. Our teachers facilitate a wide variety of extracurricular programs, including student government, gay-straight alliance, drama, art, dance, cooking, gaming club, national honor society, book club, and yearbook committees, and athletics such as basketball, baseball, soccer, trilatino and martial arts. During the year, our students participate in regular field trips to arts institutions, community outreach centers, job sites, colleges, and universities. When the Bronx Academy of Letters (BAL) opened its doors as a high school in September 2003, our founders – a dedicated team of students, parents, teachers, and community leaders – were united by a single idea: students who can express themselves clearly in writing will meet with more success on any path they choose in life. Today, our mission and vision have evolved, creating a community of learners where writing and social justice are at the core of how students engage with new content, new skill and character acquisition. Our rigorous, college-preparatory academic program spans grades six through twelve. Our curriculum includes advanced placement and honors courses, senior and master-level arts electives, and academic intervention services. Bronx Academy of Letters is part of The Urban Assembly (UA), a network of 21 public schools throughout New York City. UA is dedicated to empowering under served youth by providing them with the academic and life skills necessary for college and career success. UA works with the NYC Department of Education to create and manage public schools where all students graduate and attain success in college and careers. UA works towards this goal by providing UA schools with intensive support around instruction, college readiness, and student opportunities. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. At Bronx Letters, our programs are each firmly grounded in the values of vision, integrity, tenacity, compassion, self-expression, and inquiry. Our graduates are highly articulate, critical readers and writers, fully prepared to tackle the opportunities they’ll discover in college and careers. They are capable problem solvers. They take pride in their independence, organization, and confidence. They celebrate engagement with and service to the community. They are healthy, energized, and fit. They cultivate and pursue wide and varied ambitions to be anything from poets, journalists, and musicians to politicians, doctors, and scientists. They are ready to maximize their learning and growth – not only during college years, which serve as the gateway to so much future opportunity and success, but throughout their lives. Writing Of all the small, theme-based public schools in New York City, Bronx Letters has consistently been at the forefront in supporting its theme, in our case, the basic and essential skill of writing. Writing is the foundation of our academic program. We have regular assemblies, the Writers’ Forums, in which writers of all genres present their work to our students; and, as a supplement to our already rigorous writing program, our students run their own newspaper, The Raven , and literary magazine, One Pen . But it is through our Writer in Residence (WIR) that our students have the rare chance to truly feel like writers, to see writing as a vital art form that grows out of academic rigor to become something bigger. Our WIRs are professional writers who have spent years developing their skills and expertise. Additionally, our MS students are assigned to double blocks of English Language Arts (ELA), one with a writing focus 2018-19 SCEP-FL 11  and one with a reading focus, and thanks to a generous grant, we are able to provide LightSail reading across the 6-8 (a digital reading program that creates a Lexile appropriate e-library for students). In addition to double blocks of ELA, students are also in reading periods. Our partnership with Behind the Book, introduces our students to writers as they engage in the writing process and create a class book themselves. Arts Arts programming is a high priority for BAL as the connection between the written word and artistic expression is paramount. Students have access to visual arts and dance, in addition to our Actors in Residence (AIR) where actors are working with our students in the interdisciplinary field of theater. Advisory The Letters advisory system provides teachers and students with the opportunity to develop long-term relationships, both inside and outside the traditional classroom, and contributes to a strong sense of community within our school. Through this system, students gain advocates they know and trust. Each advisory group consists of 12 to 15 students and one staff member. As part of the advisory curriculum, freshmen practice leadership, communication, and study skills. Sophomores, juniors and seniors work with advisors to create academic plans that will prepare them for life after high school. Middle school students develop the skills for high-school readiness. Additionally, advisory is where we will strengthen our work with Restorative Justice and run circles with our students. Enrichment The Bronx Academy of Letters is committed to ensuring that every student is meaningfully engaged during his or her out-of-school time, both during the school year and in the summer. Our enrichment coordinator supports students with placement into exciting student internships, arts programs, community service opportunities, and pre college programs. Our partnerships with TriLatino, The Moth, Great World Text, Jazz at Lincoln Center, Junior State of America, Let’s Get Ready and many more- allow our students to engage in rich experiences inside and outside of the class. Additionally, our Middle School is part of the Middle School Quality Imitative and has a full after-school partnership with Eastside Community House, where students engage in daily activities from homework help, cooking, step, dance and a book club. Across the 6-12 grades, students are able to access art enrichment after school with partnerships that provide acting classes and musical training. Additionally, every Bronx Letters student travels annually as part of a series of grade-wide trips, whether to a local arts institution, an outdoor education camp, or to another city for a college tour. Finally, many students have the opportunity and financial support through the Urban Assembly Bronx Academy of Letters Advisory Board to travel overseas at least once during their high school experience. Current students have had the opportunity to visit countries including England, Thailand, Peru, South Korea, Spain, Morocco and Dominican Republic. Student Leadership Students at Bronx Letters participate in a variety of student led programs. Peer Group Connection (PGC) is a student leadership course that matches 11th and 12th grade mentors, or "peer leaders" with small groups of 9th graders. Our House Council consists of students across the 6-12 representing their peers through planning and implementing 2018-19 SCEP-FL 12  engaging and celebratory Founders’ Day assemblies as well as events like Field Day and our annual Thanksgiving Celebration. There are also students who spend their free time helping to tutor their peers at our school’s Writing Center and others who help to resolve conflict through our Peer Mediation program. This year, we have also launched a United Playaz program at the school to target leadership through community organizing and youth voice. Our IntegrateNYC class focuses on school integration, cultivating student organizing skills and their leadership. College A chief goal of our academic program is to prepare our students for successful study at whatever college they choose to attend. The college office works with students to establish a culture that understands the significance of the college essay, detailed resume, college selection process, and graduation requirements. Students in MS begin this exploration through college trips and students in High School take part in Let’s Get Ready, an after-school SAT prep as well as heightened access to the College Office. Additionally, during the spring semester of their junior and senior years, students work with the College Counselor to prepare for college life and independence. Our students have attended SUNY Stony Brook, SUNY Albany, SUNY Binghamton, CUNY-Baruch Honors Program, Northeastern, Fordham, Temple, University of New Haven, Johnson & Wales, University of Rochester, Sarah Lawrence, Skidmore, Wesleyan, and Columbia, among others. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Special Populations We work hard to support our special populations. At BAL, 30% of our students have IEPS and 15% are English-Language Learners. We offer structured ICT classrooms with teacher common planning and self contained classes that mirror our general education classes but with added scaffolds. Students who require a self contained setting also have access to on grade level curriculum in their needed smaller setting. Currently academic outcomes for SWDs are moving closer on trend with the general education population. MS State exams outcomes are similar yet course pass rates in the MS have slightly lower numbers for scholars with IEPs (about 6-7% in 2018). In 2018, 76% of students with IEPs graduated on time which aligns to credit accumulation for students in grades 9-11 who have IEP. Credit accumulation and course pass rates across the 6-12 show a heightened need in supporting students with IEPs in successfully meeting the demands of the course in order to pass. Our IEP Coordinator works with teachers to coach them in instruction and individualized goal setting. Additionally, she works with families to help them understand the IEP process and supports offered at school as well as supports that can be developed at home. ELLs are a growing population at BAL. Our ELL Coordinator supports students and families in their transition and learning journey. 31% of scholars showed improvement in proficiency and 55% had little to no change. Language acquisition during ENL course work remains a focus. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Strengths  85% graduation rate  86.9% of 9th graders earned enough credit to be on track for graduation and 89.29% of 3rd year students earned enough credits to be on track for graduation  Credit accumulation in grade 11 is at a 6 year high  6 yr graduation rate (89%) is extremely strong compared to city (73%) and borough (65%)  25% increase in students moving from 1s to 2s in MS  QR states that we are well developed in 5 our of 6 domains 2018-19 SCEP-FL 13 School Environment overall is solid, will need to enhance teacher perception to show growth in 2017-18   Post-Secondary Enrollment rate at 6 months is great- 70% and 75.4% of peers.  Post-Secondary Enrollment rate at 18 months- also strong at 71.3% but not as strong against peers at 62.2%   School excels in moving students to Least Restrictive Environments Student gains from incoming proficiency levels to Regents is strongest in ELA, followed by Math, Science and then US History. For our peer group- College and Career Readiness is strong, exceeds our target in nearly every area. Student Progress in ELA for Individualized Educational Program (IEP) students is strongest amongst performance outcomes.    95% of former 8th graders earn enough High School credit to be on track as 9 th graders  35% College Ready (highest college readiness since the index began) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 14  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 07X551 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 06,07,08,09,10,11,12,SE Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 590 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 77 76 9 7 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 38 29 9 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 90.0% % Attendance Rate 89.0% % Reduced Lunch 14.1% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.2% 62.9% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 2.9% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 0.1 5% 23% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 23.9% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 81% 72% 79.5% 0.0% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No No Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups SWD Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities N/A NO N/A YSH NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A NO N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A NO N/A N/A YSH Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A N/A NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient N/A YES N/A N/A No N/A 108 113 9 85.5% 0.7% 30.7% 33.2% 0.3% 0.7% 6 68% 5.2 10.4% 31% 73% 73% 81.8% 13% N/A No Yes NO N/A N/A NO NO NO N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A YSH N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 15  Economically Disadvantaged YES ALL STUDENTS YES 2018-19 SCEP-FL 16  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 3 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 3.2 The school leader ensures and supports the quality implementation of a systematic plan of rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of students. Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction (DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and address student achievement needs. The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. 3.3 3.4 3.5 SOP(s) Addressed X X X X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths ● “The school's focus on preparing student in verbal and written expression through literacy across the content supports high expectations ensuring students are provided with opportunity and support for clear paths to college and career.” (QR) ● “Students are expected to produce work that is similar to the demands they will face in post-secondary courses. Extended writing tasks such as research-based exhibition projects are judged by a panel, based on a rubric that assesses quality of the investigation, findings, and presentation. For students that struggle to meet expectations, teachers are available after school for extra individualized and small group help and provide students with opportunities to complete missed work, thus supporting all students towards attaining high expectations. Teachers submit course syllabi and unit plans much in the way this is done in college, and expectations for teacher practice are shared via frequent staff meetings and ongoing professional development, which engages teachers in studying the components of practice in the Danielson framework.“ (QR) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 17  ● “Administrators and staff meet regularly with teachers and engage in professional development and study groups focused on building a shared understanding of the instructional practices and prioritized goals based on the Danielson Framework. Individual planning conferences with the principal, resulting in goal setting for teachers, were held at the beginning of the year and a structure for frequent cycles of observation and feedback was established. Teachers state that they participate in professional development and study groups around the Danielson competencies.” (QR) ● “… they receive feedback from their colleagues and new teachers receive differentiated support from administrators and mentors. Although teachers articulate that they are aware of the school wide goal to improve how they facilitate student discussions and employ instructional moves that increase student ownership, feedback about their practice is inconsistent across grades. The focus on declining middle school student achievement data has led to teachers of grades 6 through 8 receiving more frequent formal feedback throughout the year.” (QR) ● Reviews of observation reports revealed that middle school teachers received detailed written observation reports that capture their strengths, assesses the quality of teacher and student work, and provide actionable next steps, relative to student groups, discussion techniques, and assessment during lessons.” (QR) ● 85% earn 10+ credits in 9 th grade (School Quality Snapshot) ● “Teachers create rubrics and analyze data from common assessments…resulting in adjustments to curriculum and instruction to meet students learning needs.” (QR) ● 72% of teachers were provided with content support (Learning Environment Survey) ● Teachers meet weekly in departments and grade teams ● Instructional Leads meet weekly with Admin ● Cabinet meets weekly with Admin ● Instructional Triad (Principal and 2 Instructional APs) meets weekly to plan and revise teacher PD (2014-15 SY) ● Teacher PD is sequenced in thematic weekly PD plan, aligned to instructional foci and planned with goals, objectives, benchmarks and assessments. "A" weeks are Instructional Foci aligned. B weeks are workshop options and planning) ● Classroom Management Book Club meets bi-weekly with AP ● Classroom Management Execution Clinic meets bi-weekly and is led by Instructional Lead of the math department ● Quarterly Intervisitations ● Quarterly Instructional Lead Department Walkthroughs ● Double blocks of ELA and Math in the MS ● Lightsail Reading program across the MS ● Double blocks of ELA in HS 9 and 10 th 2018-19 SCEP-FL 18  Needs ● “Targeted feedback is not as frequent for teachers in the upper grades, although they state that they are observed by administration and often engage in reflection verbally. For a set of teachers, there has been no formal feedback. As a result of inconsistency in observations and the feedback cycles for teachers, there are many missed opportunities to improve pedagogical practice across the school.” (QR) ● “Increase consistency of effective instructional strategies across grades and content areas so that all students are engaged in discussions and tasks that reflect higher order thinking and reflection” (QR) ● “Ensure that structures of observation and teachers practice using the Danielson framework result consistent feedback across grades” (QR) ● “In classrooms visited across grades and subject areas, school wide expectations for instructional strategies such as questioning, small group work, high levels of student engagement and participation, were inconsistent.” (QR) ● In several middle school classrooms for example, although lessons were aimed at engaging students in analyzing text and sharing their reflections, the majority of instructional time was teacher-directed and provided little opportunity for student self-directed learning or discovery. Teachers ask many higher order questions that require inference such as, "What do you think the article is saying?", but these are followed by minimal wait time or the teachers' own examples and summaries, limiting time for student reflection and engagement in discussion.” (QR) ● In a special education class, students observed as the teacher provided an example of an exhibition project. However, most students were passive and did not engage in meaningful reflection or discussion. On the other hand, activities and tasks embedded in high school lessons related to students' culminating exhibition projects include higher order skills in discussion and writing and produce opportunities for students’ natural engagement in feedback to peers. For example questions initiated by students in a geometry lesson, included a student asking if they could use a previously learned process to construct angle bisectors.” (QR) ● “In a Socratic seminar, students engaged in a higher order discussion while the teacher served as a facilitator. Additional higher order discussion and participation with rich content vocabulary was observed in an Introduction to Rhetoric class in which students determined which element of rhetoric they could infuse into an end-of-year essay requiring them to convey their high school journey. However, this level of discussion was not the trend for most of the lessons observed.” (QR) ● The inconsistent use of questioning strategies and student involvement in their own learning results in many missed opportunities to cognitively engage all students and hinders the schools’ strong attempts to promote higher order thinking.” (QR) ● 16% met state standards on MS ELA (School Quality Snapshot) ● 4% met state standards on MS Math (School Quality Snapshot) ● 84% pass rates in core subjects in MS (School Quality Snapshot) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 19  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June, 2019, we will effectively implement three school-wide assessment cycles where standards based, content-specific data is collected, analyzed and used to refine instructional priorities on an ongoing basis, as evidenced by a 10% increase in middle school math and ELA proficiency, and a 10% increase in Regents pass rates. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 20  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Teachers will revise curriculum maps and units to incorporate testing calendar, testing data analysis, and data celebration/share out. Teachers 9/7 Teachers will collaboratively work together to breakdown standards/concepts for each cycle, mock exams and ISAs. Teachers 9/7 Teachers will create exams rosters, exams groups, schedule and proctoring assignments Teachers 10/7 Cycle One Assessment (embedded in each cycle is the training through instructional leads, observation/coaching of weekly department meetings, and the development of ISAs) Teachers 11/3,11/4,11/7 Assessment Scoring and ISA data input Teachers 11/3-11/8 PD on data analysis Teachers 11/8 Using ISA to refine instructional priorities Teachers 11/9-1/23 Cycle Two Assessment (embedded in each cycle is the training through instructional leads, observation/coaching of weekly department meetings, and the development of ISAs) Teachers 1/24-1/27 Scoring and ISA data input Teachers 1/24-1/30 Use ISA data to refine instructional practices Teachers 1/31-3/27 Cycle Three Assessment (embedded in each cycle is the training through instructional leads, observation/coaching of weekly department meetings, and the development of ISAs) Teachers 3/28-3/30 Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Instructional Leads, Assistant Principals, Principal Instructional Leads, Assistant Principals, Principal Instructional Leads, Assistant Principals, Principal Instructional Leads, Assistant Principals, Principal Instructional Leads, Assistant Principals, Principal Instructional Leads, Assistant Principals, Principal Instructional Leads, Assistant Principals, Principal AP and Guidance Team Instructional Leads, Assistant Principals, Principal Instructional Leads, Assistant Principals, Principal Instructional Leads, Assistant Principals, Principal 2018-19 SCEP-FL 21  Assessment scoring and ISA data input Teachers 3/28-4/3 Reflection, Celebration, Next Steps (whole staff activity) Teachers June PD Instructional Leads, Assistant Principals, Principal Instructional Leads, Assistant Principals, Principal 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Welcome parent meetings, monthly calls from counselors, and monthly parent grade level breakfasts. This work will be overseen by our parent coordinator and discussed during our weekly leadership meeting to create connections across departments Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Instructional Leads will meet weekly on Tuesdays between 4:00-5pm in order to strengthen common core bandwidth, facilitation skills and instructional leadership Per-session will be used to compensate Instructional Leads Teachers will plan during Wednesday PD session and weekly department meetings Teachers will have coverages for department retreats 2X per year Two math coaches work across the 6-12 to support feedback Double Blocks of ELA and Math Common Planning 5th period (MS) and 6th period (HS) Per-session for data analysis and to disaggregate data Teachers will read Driven by Data Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) Title I SWP X Title I TA Title III PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring 2018-19 SCEP-FL 22  Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. At the end of each cycle (November, January, June), we will see a 3% increase. Each testing cycle will have data reflection and instructional next steps component that will allow us to reflect and revise. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. ISA analysis using structured protocol in grade teams and departments Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 23  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 5 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 5.2 The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. 5.3 The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students. 5.4 All school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health supports tied to the school’s vision. 5.5 The school leader and student support staff work together with teachers to establish structures to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental health needs. X X X X SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Strengths ● “79% of students feel safe in hallways, bathrooms, locker rooms and cafeteria” (Learning Environment Survey) ● “63% of students say that most students in the school treat each other with respect” (Learning Environment Survey) ● “School provides a safe and nurturing learning environment that values student voice in decision making and supports the academic and personal growth of diverse learners.” (Quality Review) ● “92% of parents are satisfied with the education their child has received.” (Learning Environment Survey) ● Peer-Group Connections (9-12) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 24  ● GSA (6-12) ● House Council (6-12) ● Advisory Program (6-12) ● Community Garden and Farm Stand (6-12) ● East-Side Community House Middle-School After School Program- 5X per week with full-time program coordinator and part-time social worker (6-8) ● Restorative Justice & Suspension Prevention Interventions (6-12) ● Peer-Mediation (6-12) ● Men’s Group (9-12) ● Making Theater (9-12) ● Community Mural Project with partner organization DreamYard ● Choir (6-12) ● PSAL ● Jiu Jitsu (6-12) ● Young Runners (6-12) ● Three Writers In Residence (6-12) ● One Pen (Literary Magazine) ● Raven (Student Newspaper) ● Writers Forum (6-12) ● Founders Day Assembly (9-12) ● House Council Assembly (9-12) ● House Council Assembly (6-8) ● Full-time program coordinator ● Full-time college counselor ● Full-time guidance counselor 2018-19 SCEP-FL 25  ● College trips (6-12) ● School Culture Team Needs ● 6-12 cohesion (evidenced in lack of continuity in community events and instructional continuity indicated in the QR) ● 6-12 community building ● 45% of 8 th graders move from MS to HS within the building Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools –Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. During the 18-19 SY, the improvement in school culture will be evidenced by a 5% increase in favorable responses from students and a 5% increase in favorable responses from teachers, as evidenced on the LES in June 2019 2018-19 SCEP-FL 26  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Establish Hallway Team: Create positions, train staff, create systems of accountability Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) 7/1- August 31 Hall Captains, Admin Culture Team, Admin, Operations Team, Teachers Implement CASS System Culture Team 6/1-9/10 Culture Team Purchase and install equipment, train team, create systems for each capability, train staff Welcome Back Staff PD Whole School September Culture Team Focus on monthly circles, jupiter roll out, peer mediation program, and policy implementation re: hallways Jupiter Roll Out Train families, students and staff on the use of jupiter as a public facing tool for grades, attendance, and behavior logs Roll out Peer Mediation Program 4 mediators will be schedule for peer mediation class each period throughout the day. We will roll out the program to students during the State of the Grade Monthly Circles Every month, teachers will facilitate circles with students to reset class, reflect on success, and process happenings. Families, Students, Staff First week of September Culture Team Families, Students, Staff First Week of September Culture Team Students and Staff On-Going Culture Team & Teachers House Council (MS), House Council (HS) and Senior Committee will collaborate on planning and executing our 3rd annual Thanksgiving Assembly Students, Staff, Alumni, and Families September- November House Council (MS) and House Council (HS) will collaborate on a first-ever School-Wide Award Ceremony highlighting student successes and celebrating student achievement across 6-12. Students, Staff, Alumni, and Families February House Council, Senior Committee, Principal, APs, and program advisors House Council, Senior Committee, Principal, APs, and program advisors 2018-19 SCEP-FL 27  Student & Teacher Survey- Check In on culture changes with a survey for students and staff with the 3 highlighted questions Students and Staff April Culture Team Data analysis and reflection re: culture work. Whole Staff reflection & next steps Staff April Culture Team End of Year School-Wide BBQ in order to bring together the entire community, celebrate the end of a school year and acknowledge our 6-12 community Students, Staff, Alumni, and Families June Staff Vs Student Celebration Games 4X per year Students and Staff October, December, February, April House Council, Senior Committee, Principal, APs, and program advisors Culture Team, Athletic Director Monthly check-in on culture work and circles during staff PD Staff on-going Culture Team 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. We will roll this out during out family engagement sessions and monthly breakfasts. Through monthly calendar and Remind text app, we will engage families in updates and progress monitoring. Students will also have a monthly Ravens 100 celebration where families will be invited. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Schedule adjustments for school-wide events, building council agreement on shared space utilization, organizational support for student-led events, donations for End-of-Year BBQ c6 use for hallway positions Spending for CASS machine and training  Money through fundraiser will cover costs.    CASS attendance software   Grade Level Counselors Host Monthly Events Jupiter System Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 28  In January, we will use a soft survey to gain a 5% increase in favorable responses on the mock LES Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. mock LES survey Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 29  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 4 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 4.2 School and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. 4.3 Teachers provide coherent, and appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. 4.4 Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences and tailored to the strengths and needs of all students. SOP(s) Addressed X X X 4.5 Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, and progress monitoring). Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. X 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths The focus on declining middle school student achievement data has led to teachers of grades 6 through 8 receiving more frequent formal feedback throughout the year.” (QR) New middle school math curricul Teacher leadership roles, helping to create model classrooms “The school's focus on preparing student in verbal and written expression through literacy across the content supports high expectations ensuring students are provided with opportunity and support for clear paths to college and career. Students are expected to produce work that is similar to the demands they will face in post-secondary courses. Extended writing tasks such as research-based exhibition projects are judged by a panel, based on a rubric that assesses quality of the investigation, findings, and presentation.” (QR) “For students that struggle to meet expectations, teachers are available after school for extra individualized and small group help and provide students with opportunities to complete missed work, thus supporting all students towards 2018-19 SCEP-FL 30  attaining high expectations. Teachers submit course syllabi and unit plans much in the way this is done in college, and expectations for teacher practice are shared via frequent staff meetings and ongoing professional development, which engages teachers in studying the components of practice in the Danielson framework.” (QR) “Parents say the staff and administrators are in constant communication via phone, email, and in-person, to keep them abreast of their children's progress and provide them with strategies to help their children meet goals. As a result, the school has already exceeded goals in credit accumulation as evidenced by a 10% increase in the percentage of students earning 10 plus credits in the first year of high school, and a 25% increase in the percent of students in the lowest third earning 10 plus credits in their first year “ (QR) “Administrators and staff meet regularly with teachers and engage in professional development and study groups focused on building a shared understanding of the instructional practices and prioritized goals based on the Danielson Framework. Individual planning conferences with the principal, resulting in goal setting for teachers, were held at the beginning of the year and a structure for frequent cycles of observation and feedback was established. “Teachers state that they participate in professional development and study groups around the Danielson.” (QR) They also say they receive feedback from their colleagues and new teachers receive differentiated support from administrators and mentors.” (QR) 72% of teachers were provided with content support (Learning Environment Survey) Teachers meet weekly in departments and grade teams Instructional Leads meet weekly with Admin Cabinet meets weekly with Admin Instructional Triad (Principal and 2 Instructional APs) meets weekly to plan and revise teacher PD (2014-15 SY) Teacher PD is sequenced in thematic weekly PD plan, aligned to instructional foci and planned with goals, objectives, benchmarks and assessments. "A" weeks are Instructional Foci aligned. B weeks are workshop options and planning Classroom Management Book Club meets bi-weekly with AP Quarterly Inter-visitations Quarterly Instructional Lead Department Walkthroughs Lunch and Learn PDs  Needs ● Units not aligned to Common Core ● Vertical alignment is not fully realized ● Common instructional practices are not fully realized 2018-19 SCEP-FL 31  ● Horizontal alignment is not fully realized ● Limited opportunities for 6-12 staff to collaborate based on PD timing ● “Increase consistency of effective instructional strategies across grades and content areas so that all students are engaged in discussions and tasks that reflect higher order thinking and participation” (QR) ● “Ensure structures for observation and evaluation of teacher practice, using the Danielson Framework, results in consistent feedback to teachers across grades thus promoting teacher development and improvement school-wide.” (QR) ● “In classrooms visited across grades and subject areas, school wide expectations for instructional strategies such as questioning, small group work, high levels of student engagement and participation, were inconsistent.” (QR) ● “In several middle school classrooms for example, although lessons were aimed at engaging students in analyzing text and sharing their reflections, the majority of instructional time was teacher-directed and provided little opportunity for student self-directed learning or discovery. Teachers ask many higher order questions that require inference such as, "What do you think the article is saying?", but these are followed by minimal wait time or the teachers' own examples and summaries, limiting time for student reflection and engagement in discussion.” (QR) ● “In a special education class, students observed as the teacher provided an example of an exhibition project. However, most students were passive and did not engage in meaningful reflection or discussion. On the other hand, activities and tasks embedded in high school lessons related to students' culminating exhibition projects include higher order skills in discussion and writing and produce opportunities for students’ natural engagement in feedback to peers. For example questions initiated by students in a geometry lesson, included a student asking if they could use a previously learned process to construct angle bisectors.” (QR) ● “In a Socratic seminar, students engaged in a higher order discussion while the teacher served as a facilitator. Additional higher order discussion and participation with rich content vocabulary was observed in an Introduction to Rhetoric class in which students determined which element of rhetoric they could infuse into an end-of-year essay requiring them to convey their high school journey. However, this level of discussion was not the trend for most of the lessons observed. The inconsistent use of questioning strategies and student involvement in their own learning results in many missed opportunities to cognitively engage all students and hinders the schools’ strong attempts to promote higher order thinking.” (QR) ● “Although teachers articulate that they are aware of the school wide goal to improve how they facilitate student discussions and employ instructional moves that increase student ownership, feedback about their practice is inconsistent across grades.” (QR) ● “Reviews of observation reports revealed that middle school teachers received detailed written observation reports that capture their strengths, assesses the quality of teacher and student work, and provide actionable next steps, relative to student groups, discussion techniques, and assessment during lessons. This targeted feedback is not as frequent for teachers in the upper grades, although they state that they are observed by administration and often engage in reflection verbally.” (QR) ● “For a set of teachers, there has been no formal feedback. As a result of inconsistency in observations and the feedback cycles for teachers, there are many missed opportunities to improve pedagogical practice across the school.” (QR) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 32  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. To strengthen instructional practice and increase student performance, teacher teams will engage in three cycles of inquiry which will result in 15% increase in teachers responding “Agree” or “Strongly Agree” to the question “Overall, my professional development experiences this year have been sustained and coherently focused, rather than short term and unrelated,” on the Learning Environment Survey and a 5% increase in MS state exam outcomes and a 5% increase in HS credit accumulation across each grade by June. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 33  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Collaborative teacher team will meet to develop a timeline and cycle for inquiry work in department teams (SpEd Team will focus on IEP students) Teachers May 2018 Collaborative Teacher Team Develop quarterly themes/foci for inquiry throughout the year Teachers May 2018 Give staff a survey for possible inquiry themes Teachers June 2018 Summer Project Work: Teachers Summer Projects (August 2018) Instructional Leads, APs, Principal Instructional Leads, APs, Principal Instructional Leads, APs, Principal  Create a collection of resources for each quarterly theme/foci on Dropbox  Develop a protocol for conducting inquiry, developing next steps and measuring success  Revise inquiry work templates and create samples of inquiry  Develop timeline for inquiry (benchmarks, etc)  Give a staff intervisitation survey & create a master list of staff interest for intervisitations Training for Instructional Leads on implementing & facilitating inquiry work: Teachers First week August Teacher Teams Inquiry cycle   Protocols for facilitating looking at teacher and student work  Celebrating successes and next steps Full staff professional learning: How to look at data Teachers 9/7 Teacher Teams First Cycle of Inquiry: Teachers 9/15-11/8 Teacher Teams  Department Teams review ISA data from Spring 2016 Regents & MS Common Core Exams + qualitative student data to develop problem of practice for their inquiry focus (September 15) Student Work Plan (September 23)  2018-19 SCEP-FL 34   Department Teams Review Instructional Strategies & Plan  Instructional Modifications (September 30) Intervisitations (2) & Instructional Revisions, Teachers Share Weekly Progress (October 5-October 27) o One intervisitation in across school (*Can be GT) o One intervisitation in department  Celebration - November 8th Election Day PD Cycle Two Teachers 11/8-1/30 Teacher Teams  Department Teams review Dress Rehearsal Assessment Data data + qualitative student data to develop problem of practice for their inquiry focus (November 18) Student Work Plan (December 2)   Department Teams Review Instructional Strategies & Plan  Instructional Modifications (December 9) Intervisitations (2) & Instructional Revisions, Teachers Share Weekly Progress (December 11-December 23) o One intervisitation in across school (*Can be GT) o One intervisitation in department  Celebration, Reflection - January 30th Cycle Three Teachers 2/3-4/7 Teacher Teams  Reviews & Revises Process: February 3  Department Teams review Dress Rehearsal Assessment Data/January Regents Data + qualitative student data to develop problem of practice for their inquiry focus (February 10) Student Work Plan (March 3)   Department Teams Review Instructional Strategies & Plan  Instructional Modifications (March 10) Intervisitations (2) & Instructional Revisions, Teachers Share Weekly Progress (March 13-March 31) o One intervisitation in across school (*Can be GT) o One intervisitation in department  Celebration - April 7 Cycle Four Teachers 4/21-6/8 Teacher Teams  Department Teams review Dress Rehearsal Assessment Data + qualitative student data to develop problem of practice for their inquiry focus (April 21) Student Work Plan (April 28)   Department Teams Review Instructional Strategies & Plan  Instructional Modifications (May 5) Intervisitations (2) & Instructional Revisions, Teachers Share Weekly Progress (May 8-26) o One intervisitation in across school (*Can be GT) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 35 o One intervisitation in department  Celebration - 06/08 Review & Reflections 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Admin 6/10 Admin & ILT How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent welcome meetings, monthly calls from counselors, monthly grade level parent breakfasts. The Parent Empowerment Team will work with families in accessing teacher data regarding student outcomes. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Tuesday Instructional Lead Meetings,  Cabinet Meetings,  weekly department meetings,  weekly team meetings,    per-session for Cabinet and Instructional Leads  Friday PD sessions, Instructional Triad planning and reflection, Supervisory Persession Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. a mock LES will be used in January Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. LES will be used Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 36  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 2 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 2.2 The school leader ensures that the school community shares the Specific, Measurable, Ambitious, Results-oriented, and Timely (SMART) goals/mission and long-term vision inclusive of core values that address the priorities outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP). Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital resources. 2.3 2.4 The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district's Annual Professional Performance Review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. 2.5 Leaders effectively use evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve critical individual and school-wide practices as defined in the SCEP (student achievement, curriculum and teacher practices; leadership development; community/family engagement; and student social and emotional developmental health). X X X X SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths ● “The focus on declining middle school student achievement data has led to teachers of grades 6 through 8 receiving more frequent formal feedback throughout the year. Reviews of observation reports revealed that middle school teachers received detailed written observation reports that capture their strengths, assesses the quality of teachers and student work, and provide actionable next steps, relative to student groups, discussion techniques, and assessment during lessons. “ (QR) ● 72% of teachers were provided with content support (Learning Environment Survey) ● Teachers meet weekly in departments and grade teams ● Instructional Leads meet weekly with Admin 2018-19 SCEP-FL 37  ● Cabinet meets weekly with Admin ● Instructional Triad (Principal and 2 Instructional APs) meets weekly to plan and revise teacher PD (2014-15 SY) ● Teacher PD is sequenced in thematic weekly PD plan, aligned to instructional foci and planned with goals, objectives, benchmarks and assessments. "A" weeks are Instructional Foci aligned. B weeks include workshop options and planning ● Classroom Management Book Club meets bi-weekly with AP ● Classroom Management Execution Clinic meets bi-weekly and is led by Instructional Lead of the math department ● Quarterly Inter-visitations ● Quarterly Instructional Lead Department Walkthroughs ● Attendance at APO/API institutes for 3 APs ● Weekly Operational Team Meeting ( ● Clearly articulated roles and responsibilities amongst administration Principal Reflection: I have aimed to incorporate shifts in organizational leadership that will net results. Teacher leadership is at the center of the instructional initiatives and how we are thinking about moving the instructional needle. Through a Cabinet and 6-12 Instructional Leads, leadership is developed and distributed across teacher teams. As leadership is developed amongst teachers, our Admin Meeting and Instructional Triad (Principal, AP Garry and AP Rowe) bring together school administration in planning, reflecting and executing instructional shifts and moves inclusive of teacher organization, PD and coaching sessions. Organizational leadership is focused on developing an Operations team that can support in sustaining the instructional vision and support culture shifts in the school. Through weekly Operations meetings and 1:1 check-ins with operations staff, there is a heightened level of support for sustaining and managing the organization capacity of our school. In terms of culture, I have implemented a Culture Team meeting in which is comprised of Deans, Guidance and Social Workers in order to address escalated student behavior in a Kid Talk process. Enrichment and College Counseling are also supported in 1:1 weekly meetings that look at next steps and data analysis. Needs ● “…targeted feedback is not as frequent for teachers in the upper grades, although they state that they are observed by administration and often engage in reflection verbally. For a set of teachers, there has been no formal feedback. As a result of inconsistency in observations and the feedback cycles for teachers, there are many missed opportunities to improve pedagogical practice across the school.” (QR) ● Developing QR indicator 1.2 ● Developing QR indicator 4.1 ● 60% of teachers stated that the “principal knows what is going on in my classroom” (Learning Environment Survey) ● 54% of teachers stated that “school leaders give me regular and helpful feedback about my teaching” (Learning Environment Survey) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 38  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART– Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Teachers will plan and implement professional learning communities, alongside administrators, that will result in unified weekly exercises and activities across departments and grades teams within our 6-12. This will result in a 5% increase on the Learning Environment Survey statement “principal knows what is going on in my classroom” by June 2019. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 39  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Principal and APs will identify roles and responsibilities for administration. Identify roles and responsibilities for cabinet members and instructional leads and reflect and revise those roles quarterly. Admin and Teachers September Principal and AP Principal will have 1:1 weekly meetings with Assistant Principals to review observation feedback and progress toward observation goals Admin On-going Principal Principal and two instructional APs will meet weekly for the Instructional Triad meeting in order to reflect on professional development, plan for next steps, and debrief observations/coaching. Distributive Leadership Focused Meetings: Instructional APs will lead weekly Cabinet Meetings and Instructional Lead meetings, following feedback and collaborative inquiry during Instructional Triad. PD Team will meet weekly with AP to map and reflect on bi-weekly professional learning that targets semester long sequencing of teacher development focused on 4 key areas. AP and P will go on weekly classroom walkthroughs focused on one department across the school. Walkthroughs will use a shared rubric and will provide each teacher with feedback and celebration. AP and P will use weekly check-in to discuss teacher practice/observations. In this meeting, we will also target conversations around teachers who are supporting our highest needs populations (SWDs, ELLs, OAUC) Admin On-going Principal Teachers On-going Principal and AP Teacher on going AP Teachers on-going Principal and AP Admin Ongoing Principal and AP New teachers will receive weekly coaching session by an AP Teacher Quarterly Danielson admin norming and cycle reflection APs ongoing ongoing AP principal 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 40  Parent welcome meetings, monthly call from counselors, monthly parent breakfasts and monthly newsletter will be facilitated by parent coordinator in partnership with other departments across the school. Parent Empowerment Team will remain a grade specific support for families. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Tuesday Instructional Lead Meetings,  Cabinet Meetings,  weekly department meetings,  weekly team meetings,    per-session for Cabinet and Instructional Leads.    schedule adjustments teacher per session and per diem supervisor per session Friday PD sessions, Instructional Triad planning and reflection, Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, there will be a 3% increase in the identified LES questions, based on a mock survey. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. LES and a mock LES will be used to asses progress Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 41  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 6 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 6.2 The school leader ensures that regular communication with students and families fosters their high expectations for student academic achievement. 6.3 The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders so that student strength and needs are identified and used to augment learning. 6.4 The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to support student success. 6.5 The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school community members centered on student learning and success and encourages and empowers families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their children. X X X X SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths: ● 78% of students feel that their schools offers enough variety of programs, classes, and activities to keep them interested (LES) ● 92% of parents are satisfied with the education that their child received (LES) ● 79% of students feel safe in the hallways, bathroom, locker rooms and cafeteria (LES) ● “The focus on declining middle school student achievement data has led to teachers of grades 6 through 8 receiving more frequent formal feedback throughout the year. Reviews of observation reports revealed that middle school teachers received detailed written observation reports that capture their strengths, assesses the quality of teacher and student work, and provide actionable next steps, relative to student groups, discussion techniques, and assessment during lessons.” (QR) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 42  ● Instructional Leaders identified in 6-12 ● House Council ● Peer Group Connection ● SLT/PTA Awards Ceremony Needs: ● 9-12 Attendance 84% ● 6-8 Attendance 90% ● 64% of teachers would recommend this school to parents (LES) ● 63% of students say that most students at the school teat each other with respect (LES) ● “Targeted feedback is not as frequent for teachers in the upper grades, although they state that they are observed by administration and often engage in reflection verbally” (QR) ● Strengthen family-teacher communication Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we will deepen our partnership with families and increase opportunities for reciprocal communication, as evidenced by a 20% increase in family event offerings. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 43  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Develop team norms and goals Organize monthly deliverable Target special populations in yearlong workflow (SpEd, ELLS, OAUC, Chronically Absent) teachers September Admin teachers September Admin teacers September Admin Map key grade level events and identify budget implications teachers September Admin Weekly Wednesday meeting with a check-in structure and then facilitated independent work time (event planning, data clarity, family communication, mailing prep) Monthly grade level mailing Quarterly grade level parent events (example: honor roll night, PGC parent event, Sports Awards, etc) Reflection & impact monitoring Family survey 3b – Parent and Family Engagement teachers On-going Admin families families On-going admin & teachers quarterly admin and teachers teachers on-going admin and teachers Families on-going admin and teachers If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Single Shepherd, Bronx Letters Foundation Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  per-sessions   supervisor per-session Supplies for events Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA X P/F Set-aside 21st Century C4E 2018-19 SCEP-FL 44  Title I 1003(a) Title III PTA Funded SIG Grant School Achievement Other Funding Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. In Febuary, The Parent Empowerment Team, will do a mid-year reflection with the goal of seeing a 10% increase events offered to families. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. School developed excel tracker Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 45  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Quarterly DRP, State Assessment 5-8, Common Core Exams, 9-12 Regents Data, Scholarship Data(course pass rates),In-Class Performance, Teacher Diagnostics DRAs When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) All during the day besides Afterschool 1:1 Tutoring and Lets Get Ready, Basketball Study Hall, HW Hours Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Small group, 1:1 tutoring, special class, special program ● ESL pullout in addition to SC ESL class (Grades 6,9,10) ● Office Hours (Grades 6-12) ● HW Hours (Grades 6-8) ● Basketball Study Hall (Grades 9-12) ● SpEd Accommodations ● Writers In Residence (Grades 6-12) ● Electives (9-12) ● Actors In Residence (9-12) ● After-school 1:1 Tutoring (Grades 6-12) ● High School Readiness Class (Grades 9 and 10 (expansion)) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 46  Mathematics State Assessment 6-8 Common Core Exams, 9-12 Regents Data, Scholarship Data (course pass rates), In-Class Performance, Teacher Diagnostics, DRAs Science Quarterly DRP Data, State Assessment Grades 4 and 8 Exams, 9-12 Regents Data, Scholarship Data (course pass rates), In-Class Performance, Teacher Diagnostics, DRAs ● Let’s Get Ready (Grades 10-12) ● Measuring Up (Grades 6-8) ● Office Hours (Grades 6-12) ● SpEd Accommodation (Grades 6-12) ● HW Hours (Grades 6-8) ● Basketball Study Hall (Grades 9-12) ● Afterschool 1:1 Tutoring (Grades 6-12) ● High School Readiness Class (Grades 9) ● College Math Class (before school) (Grades 11-12) ● Let’s Get Ready (Grades 10-12) ● 7 th grade Math Honors ● Science Intensives (Grades 6-8) ● MS Science Honors (Living Regents) ● Measuring Up (Grades 6-8) ● Lightsail Reading (Grades 6,7,8) Small group, 1:1, tutoring, special class, special program All during the day besides Afterschool 1:1 Tutoring, Let’s Get Ready, College Math, Basketball Study Hall, HW Hours Small group, 1:1, tutoring, special class, special program All during the day besides Afterschool 1:1 Tutoring, Let’s Get Ready, College Math, Basketball Study Hall, HW Hours 2018-19 SCEP-FL 47  Social Studies Triannual DRP Data, State Assessment ELA Common Core 5-8, 9-12 Regents Data (US and Global), Scholarship Data (course pass rates), In-Class Performance, Teacher Diagnostics, DRAs ● MyQuest (Grades 7-8) ● Office Hours (Grades 6-12) ● SpEd Accommodation (Grades 6-12) ● HW Hours (Grades 6-8) ● Basketball Study Hall (Grades 9-12) ● Afterschool 1:1 Tutoring (Grades 6-12) ● High School Readiness Class (Grades 9) ● College Math Class (before school) (Grades 11-12) ● Let’s Get Ready (Grades 10-12) ● Science Electives/AIS (Grades 9-12) ● Social Studies Intensives (Grades 6-8) Small group, 1:1, tutoring, special class, special program ● Lightsail Reading (Grades 6,7,8) ● MyQuest (Grades 7-8) ● Office Hours (Grades 6-12) All during the day besides Afterschool 1:1 Tutoring, Let’s Get Ready, College Math, Basketball Study Hall, HW Hours 2018-19 SCEP-FL 48  At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) ● SpEd Accommodation (Grades 6-12) ● HW Hours (Grades 6-8) ● Basketball Study Hall (Grades 9-12) ● Afterschool 1:1 Tutoring (Grades 6-12) ● High School Readiness Class (Grades 9) ● Let’s Get Ready (Grades 10-12) ● S.S Electives/AIS (Grades 9-12) ● Independent Study (Grades 10-12 ● Strategic programming with SpEd Team Grouping ● IEP Mandates ● Attendance Data Small group, 1:1, tutoring, special class, special program During the school day and after school social worker part-time ● Scholarship Data ● SC bridge classes ● Teacher Recommendations ● Kid Talk Protocol ● Men’s Group ● Peer Group Connection ● Peer Mentoring ● 1:1 Counseling ● Group Counseling ● Restorative Justice Circles ● MS Social Worker After-School PT 2018-19 SCEP-FL 49  2018-19 SCEP-FL 50  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 20 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. For students in temporary housing, we provide families with a uniform and we connect our PC with the family as another layer or support. Students will be supported by the PC to address any needs (glasses, school supplies, etc) and will meet with their grade level counselor to support them through the transition. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 51  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 52  Section 8: Title I Program Information Directions:  All schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Recruitment: Post our open positions early in the year in a variety of publications (craigslist.org, idealist.org, New Teacher Finder, listservs), spread the word among our network of educators, friends, and supporters, and conduct several rounds of interviews and demonstration lessons to select new teachers for our team. We also coordinate with Teach for America and the NYC Teaching Fellows to cultivate a strong pipeline of new teachers committed to working in our context. We host Teaching Fellows apprentice teachers for a residency in the spring that both helps cultivate our pipeline of prospective teachers, and supports the continued PD of our current veteran staff who mentors new teachers. Retention We support programs, systems and collective efforts that help ensure Bronx Letters is a professionally satisfying place to work. These efforts include: ● A Teacher Study/Book Group, focused on classroom management ● Teacher-led execution clinics ● Teacher-led department and team meetings ● PD for paraprofessionals ● 1:1 Coaching and feedback ● Department inter-visitations ● Department instructional rounds ● Differentiated PD 2018-19 SCEP-FL 53  ● Teacher Leadership positions inclusive of Instructional Leads and Cabinet Members ● Professional Learning Communities facilitated by teachers during department meetings, team meetings and whole staff professional development. ● Affinity PD ● Leadership Academy Coaching for principal and assistant principals ● Network intervisitations ● Teacher coaching through network ● AP coaching through network ● Allocating resources in Galaxy, and through funds raised privately, to support teacher initiatives, such as Extracurricular programs, arts programs, and sports. We also use these funds to support teacher professional development at conferences, travel programs, and attempts to pursue National Board Certification Assignments that support teachers being highly qualified We work to ensure that all teachers work exclusively, or nearly exclusively, in one content area, the area of their license. We hire intentionally to ensure that all teachers are licensed in the content areas in which they will teach, and that we allow teachers to specialize instructionally in ways that accentuate their particular strengths (i.e. have teachers who are most expert in Global History teach that content rather than teaching US History, or teachers who are expert in Algebra teach that content rather than Geometry). As a college preparatory school, we work to ensure our teaching assignments pair highly qualified teachers with teaching assignments that capitalize on their expertise. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the strategies and activities for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, staff, and paraprofessionals that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Professional Development: ● Weekly department meetings that are structured to support collaborative inquiry, organizational coherence across the school, and improved professional practice. ● Weekly team meetings that are structured to support collaborative inquiry, organizational coherence across the grade and school, and improved professional practice ● Weekly Instructional Lead and Cabinet Meetings to develop teacher leadership and support a distributive model of leadership within our school ● A Teacher Study/Book Group, focused on classroom management (differentiated PD) ● Teacher-led execution clinics ● PD for paraprofessionals 2018-19 SCEP-FL 54  ● 1:1 Coaching and feedback ● Department inter-visitations ● Department instructional rounds ● Differentiated PD aligned to instructional focus ● Teacher Leadership positions inclusive of Instructional Leads and Cabinet Members ● Regular formal and informal observations and coaching sessions ● An extensive New Staff Orientation that takes place in August ● Daily Instructional Rounds ● ELA/SS Coaching with 1 AP ● Math/Science Coaching with 1 AP ● Culture Coaching with 1 AP ● Summer Bridge/New Staff PD ● Summer PD in planning for 25+ staff members ● School wide PD focus on justice and culturally relevant pedagogy Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/information, early intervention services, etc.). 2018-19 SCEP-FL 55  N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Our teachers are intimately involved in the process of implementing the new evaluation system, and determining our schools’ MOSL selections. Teachers are also involved in the administration, scoring, and instructional implications processes of our interim assessments, which include a range of standardized and internally developed assessments. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds enables, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (SCEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Title I Part A (Basic) Title I School Improvement 1003(a) Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funds Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 511,014.00 0 84,779.00 0 12,336 0 4,053,830.00 X X X X X X X Column B Section Reference(s) All N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools 2018-19 SCEP-FL 56  may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I School Improvement 1003(a): To support implementation of school improvement activities identified through the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) reviews or a school review with district oversight and included in the DCIP/SCEP.  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: To support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs.  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 57   Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan.  Title I Priority and Focus School Parent Engagement Set-aside: Additional set-aside is to enable greater and  more meaningful parent participation in the education of their children. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process, including Title I 1003(g) SIG funds: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 58  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Bronx Academy of Letter, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Bronx Academy of Letters will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 59  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 60  ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement  developing the parent empowerment team  holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference  hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year;  encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; supporting or hosting Family Day events;   establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents;  encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers;  providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress  developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress;  providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand.  School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 61  Bronx Academy of Letter , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 62  ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 63  ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities 2018-19 SCEP-FL 64  ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 65 Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm 2. 3. Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components: 1. The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers. Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. 1. 2. 3. 4. High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” 1. Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences. Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. 1. These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: Bronx Academy of Letters This school is (check one): DBN: 07X551 conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): K 6 1 7 2 8 3 9 4 10 5 11 12 2018-19 SCEP-FL 66  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the · · · · · · rationale subgroups and grade levels of students to be served schedule and duration language of instruction # and types of certified teachers types of materials Begin description here: 2018-2019 School ENL Demographics: 29 Middle School Students 53 High School Students Below is the subgroup breakdown of # of students by grade level and proficiency level, based on the 2018 NYSESLAT results. 6th -12th Grade NYSESLAT Results: Commanding: 13 students Expanding: 57 students Transitioning: 19 students Emerging: 11 students Entering: 1 No Test: 1 Breakdown of Results: 6th Grade: 3 Commanding, 12 Expanding, 6 Transitioning, 1 Emerging, 1 Not Tested 7th Grade: 2 Commanding, 7 Expanding, 3 Transitioning, 3 Emerging 8th Grade: 9 Expanding, 2 Transitioning 9th Grade: 2 Commanding, 6 Expanding, 3 Transitioning, 1 Emerging 10th Grade: 1 Commanding, 10 Expanding, 1 Transitioning, 5 Emerging, 11th Grade: 3 Commanding, 7 Expanding, 3 Transitioning 12th Grade: 2 Commanding, 6 Expanding, 1 Transitioning, 1 Emerging, 1 Entering Middle School ENL ICT and Co-Teaching Direct Instruction Schedule: 6th Grade: 6th Grade Entering and Emerging ELLs are taught by ENL Teacher Joyce Salas during a pull-out ELA class during 4th period on Mondays, 5th and 6th period on Tuesdays, 4th and 5th period on Wednesdays, 5th and 6th period on Thursdays, and 1st period on Fridays. 6th Grade Transitioning and expanding ELLs are taught by ENL Teacher Joyce Salas during push-in to their ELA classes as follows: -ICT ELLs receive push-in to their ELA class by ENL Teacher Joyce Salas during 1st period on Monday and Wednesday, 4th period on Tuesday and Thursday, and 3rd period on Friday. -General Education ELLs receive push in to their ELA class by ENL Teacher Joyce Salas during 6th period on Monday and Wednesday, 2nd period on Tuesday and Thursday, and 5th period on Friday. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 67  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information -Self Contained ELL students receive push in to their ELA class by ENL Teacher Joyce Salas during 2nd period on Monday-Thursday and 4th period on Fridays 7th Grade: 7th Grade Entering and Emerging ELLs are taught by ENL Teacher Joyce Salas during a pull-out ELA class during 4th period on Mondays, 5th and 6th period on Tuesdays, 4th and 5th period on Wednesdays, 5th and 6th period on Thursdays, and 1st period on Fridays. 7th Grade Transitioning and Expanding ELLs are taught during push-in as follows: -ICT ELLs receive push in to their ELA classes by ENL Teacher Quinn Kroenen during first period on Monday and Wednesday and 4th period on Tuesday, Thursday, and Friday. -General Education ELLs receive push in to their ELA classes by ENL Teacher Quinn Kroenen during second period on Tuesday and Thursday and push in to their Science class by Bilingual-certified Teacher Loanky DeJesus during 5th period on Monday and Wednesday. -Seld Contained ELLs receive push in to their History classes by ENL Teacher Quinn Kroenen during 5th period on Monday, Wednesday and Friday and 6th Period on Tuesday and Thursday. 8th Grade: 8th Grade Entering and Emerging ELLs are taught by ENL Teacher Joyce Salas during a pull-out ELA class during 4th period on Mondays, 5th and 6th period on Tuesdays, 4th and 5th period on Wednesdays, 5th and 6th period on Thursdays, and 1st period on Fridays. 8th Grade Transitioning and Expanding ELLs are taught during push-in as follows: -ICT ELLs receive push in to their ELA classes by ENL Teacher Quinn Kroenen during 6th period on Monday and Wednesday, 1st period on Tuesday and Thursday, and 2nd period on Friday. -General Education ELLs receive push in to their ELA classes by ENL Teacher Quinn Kroenen during 4th period on Monday and Wednesday, 5th period Tuesday and Thursday, and 1st period Friday. -Self Contained ELLs receive push in to their Math classes by ENL Teacher Quinn Kroenen during 2nd period on Monday and Wednesday. ENL teachers Joyce Salas and Quinn Kroenen observes classes and meets with 6th, 7th, and 8th grade teachers for curriculum support and development during 8th period Monday through Thursday. High School ENL ICT and Co-Teaching Direct Instruction Schedule: 9th Grade: 9th Grade ENL entering, emerging, transitioning, and expanding students are taught during 9th Grade ICT ELA during their assigned ELA classes Monday through Friday by ENL Teacher Jee Hae Lee. In addition to this, entering and emerging ELLs are taught in a pull-out by ENL Teacher Audrey Beegle during 9th Period daily. 9th Grade entering ELLs also receive ICT ENL services in Earth Science daily during 2nd or 6th period by bilingual-certified Teacher Karla Rodriguez Monday-Thursday. 10th Grade: 10th Grade ENL emerging, transitioning, and expanding students are taught during 10th Grade ICT ELA 8th period daily by ENL Teacher Audrey Beegle or during 10th Grade ICT Global Studies 2nd period daily by ENL Teacher Audrey Beegle. In addition to this, entering and emerging ELLs are taught in a pull-out by ENL Teacher Audrey Beegle during 9th Period daily. 10th Grade entering ELLs also receive ICT ENL services in Earth Science daily during 2nd or 6th period by bilingual-certified Teacher Karla Rodriguez Monday-Thursday. 11th Grade: 101h Grade ENL emerging, transitioning, and expanding students are taught during 11th Grade ICT ELA 3rd or 6th period daily by ENL Teacher Audrey Beegle. In addition to this, entering and emerging ELLs are taught in a pull-out by ENL Teacher Audrey Beegle during 9th Period daily. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 68  Newcomers:&nbsp;For our newcomers, we are focused on training through technology to Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information 12th Grade: 12th Grade ENL students are taught by ENL teacher William Rose during Government/Economics classes during 3rd, 4th, 6th or 9th period daily. In addition to this, entering and emerging ELLs are taught in a pull-out by ENL Teacher Audrey Beegle during 9th Period daily. Supplemental Program- Schedule and Duration: We will provide supplemental instruction during Saturday Academy beginning on October 20th for High School ELLs and during our After School Program (Monday-Thursday) for Middle School ELLs, which target the following subgroups: · provide native language support and training educators in providing native language support in instruction. Additionally, we are focused on supporting literacy with decoding and generating sight words and creating lexicons to support access to Regents-prep courses. · provide native language support and training educators in providing native language support in instruction. Additionally, we are focused on supporting literacy with decoding and generating sight words and creating lexicons to support access to Regents-prep courses. &nbsp;Additionally we are focused on supporting these students with classroom procedures and community agreements to support them into transitioning into a consistent educational context.&nbsp; · Long-Term ELL(s):&nbsp;For&nbsp;our long-term ELL(s) we are most focused on supporting with attendance, Regents preparation, and work submission. &nbsp;Many of our long-term ELL(s) struggle with attendance, passing Regents courses and exams with above a 75% and submitting classroom work. We are committed to supporting them in these three areas. Middle School Dates: Monday-Thursday from 3:00-3:45, October 8th, 2018-May 31, 2019. High School Dates: Saturdays from 10-12, October 20th-January 19th (excluding Holidays) and March 2nd-June 15th, excluding holidays. SIFE: Similar to our newcomers, we are focused on training through technology to rationale teachers to receive training schedule and duration topics to be covered name of provider Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. · · · · · Begin description here: ICT Co-Teaching and Co-Planning Schedule Middle School ESL The middle school ESL teachers meets with co-teachers and push-in teachers on a rotating schedule during 8th and 9th periods. They also push in to other classes that need additional support and offer instructional feedback. High School ESL The high school ESL teacher meets daily with her co-teachers to support. ENL Department Instructional Meetings The ENL department will meet bi-weekly during Friday PD time from 2:05-2:50 to participate in inquiry work around a targeted group of ENL students. School Wide PD 2018-19 SCEP-FL 69  Part C: Professional Development During Friday Professional Development, there will be two separate workshop series that meet for a duration of six weeks each that address the following: -Curriculum modifications for ENL students (Cycle 2 - November-December) -Working with Long Term ELLs (Cycle 3 - January-March) rationale schedule and duration topics to be covered name of provider how parents will be notified of these activities Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. · · · · · Begin description here: In order to increase school-wide ELL parent engagement we will be translating all documents and announcements into the parents' native languages. Spanish translation services will be provided internally by Ms. Monge and Mr. Alston. Translation of low incidence languages such as Arabic and French will be provided by NYC DOE Translation services. Our parent coordination to support our ESL students will be paid for through Title III. ELL Parent workshops are held twice a year in November and May each year during Parent-Teacher Conference. On November 15th from 4:00pm - 7:00pm, our ESL department (Ms. Beegle, Ms. Lee, Ms. Salas & Mr. Kroenen) will hold a welcome workshop for new immigrant families and families of Long-Term ELL(s). Translation services were provided to assist parents in completing lunch forms, understanding school rules and expectations, learning about after school opportunities, and previewing the curriculum. Additional topics will include parts of the exam, how to prepare your child, and implications of the NYSESLAT. On Wednesday, March 6th, during Spring parent teacher conferences, the ESL teachers will run a parent workshop to discuss Regents and NYSESLAT examinations and summer school from from 5 to 7 pm during Parent Teacher Conferences. Topics will include parts of the exam, how to prepare your child, and implications of the exams. This workshop will specifically target newcomer parents as well as the parents of long-term ELLs who may be unclear about why their child is still receiving ELL services. Our extensive partnerships are critical to our involvement with our ELL community. We plan alongside with the Urban Advantage, one of our partnerships, to build community ties with the families of our ELLs. We have two trips per year to a New York cultural institution, in order to bridge the school community with our ELL parents and ELL students. This year, we would like to plan two trips on two separate Saturdays in March and April. One trip will be to the New York Botanical Gardens, located in the Bronx, to strengthen the community ties with the borough to our ELL families. The other trip will be to the American Museum of Natural History, so as to provide entry points to our families about their natural community. Finally, we provide information through our translation services to the international convention and English Language Expo through TESOL ELL, which focuses around increasing the student achievement of ELLs. The focus is to ensure that our ELL parents are all on board with the importance of student achievement and in understanding the vision and mission of the Urban Assembly Bronx Academy of Letters. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 70 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) 1. 2. Purchased services 1. Per session Per diem High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials 2. Must be supplemental. Additional curricula, instructional materials. Must be clearly listed. 3. 4. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 2018-19 SCEP-FL 71  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 07 School Name Urban Assembly Bronx Academy of Letters Borough Bronx School Number 551 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Brandon Cardet-Hernandez Coach Duane Wardally ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Sarah Camiscoli Teacher/Subject Area Joyce Salas/ENL Teacher/Subject Area Audrey Beegle/ENL Related-Service Provider Vanessa Dominguez Superintendent Fred Walsh Assistant Principal Amy Schless Coach type here School Counselor Nick Melendez Parent Elsy Matthews Parent Coordinator Lisa Monge Field Support Center Staff Member type here Other (Name and Title) Meredith Smith/ELA/ENL C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 2 0 1 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 1 4 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] D. Student Demographics 2018-19 SCEP-FL 72  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 603 Total number of ELLs 81 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 13.43% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 K 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 4 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 6 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? We use formative assessments based on Common Core Aligned language objectives. These assessments include reading logs, conferences, and multiple-choice reading passages pulled from state exams from previous years. We also use the DRP three times per year to assess reading fluency and determine each ELLs lexile level. DRP exams inform the construction of formative assessments and help interventionists suggest appropriate supports and text levels for ELLs within content classes.Many ELLs demonstrate that they are below grade level on these reading assessments. However, with scaffolding and language supports ELLs can perform on grade level when it comes to reading and writing skills. At the 10th-12th grade level, we use the ELA Regents Exam to evaluate the on grade level skills and common core skills acquired by our ELL(s). Most ESL 10th-12th grade 2018-19 SCEP-FL 73  students take the exam two or three times. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Last year, we hired an ENL Coordinator. She meets weekly with ENL teachers, reviews programming, provides curriculum support and tools, and supports with testing assignments. She taught ESL for four years in the school, so her experience, connection with families, and curriculum are used to support the current teachers. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? Their success is evaluated by their progress on the NYSESLAT, NYS Exams, and portfolio assessments. Additionally, they are evaluated by independent projects and a culminating inter-disciplinary end of the year presentation in front of a panel of teachers (exhibitions). 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? The ENL Coordinator meets weekly with the Assistant Principal who manages ENL and IEP services and the ENL team. In these meetings, interventions are discussed and planned out. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] N/A 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The outcome assessments used are NYSESLAT and ELA Regents. We do two mock exams in the fall and spring to prepare students for the winter and summer exam. After the mock exams, the ENL teachers use intervention tools created by the ENL coordinator to itemize student exams, practice areas for growth, and mark progress on each section. Additionally, the NYSESLAT is used to support in programming students into the least restrictive environment possible with the greatest amount of supports. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? The mock Regents exams are made available to the entire staff. The NYSESLAT scores are discussed in the ENL team weekly meetings when discussing programming decisions. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Students in the middle school receive ENL services in place of their general ELA class. Students travel with a heterogeneous cohort in their grade for all content areas and then attend the ENL class separate from native speaking students. These students receive three double blocks and two single blocks per week. ENL classes in the middle school span across 6-8th grades and are heterogeneous in language level. Additionally, the ENL middle school 2018-19 SCEP-FL 74  teacher with small groups of ENL advanced students in an elective ENL class and pull out group. At the High School level, classes are divided by proficiency level with beginner and intermediate students in one class that meets for three double blocks and two single blocks per week. A second stand-alone ENL class meets once per day and has advanced level students who are preparing for the Regents. Additionally, the high school ENL teacher co-teaches ELA and Global History classes to support learners who are not in the stand alone classes. Finally, three times a week, the ENL certified ELA 9th grade teacher does pushes into a self-contained class that contains double-certified IEP/ENL students and then twice a week pulls them out for more intensive interventions. b. TBE program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: NA c. DL program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: NA 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Students are scheduled in cohorts according to language proficiency level. Students from the entering to transitioning strategies are in a stand alone ENL class that meets for 392 minutes weekly (three double blocks and two single 49 minute blocks) Students at the Expanding level receive services through bi-weekly small pull out groups, push in, and ICT services. During the weekly ENL meetings we review student programs, progress, and plan strategic interventions. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. The standalone ENL class follows an ELA Common Core aligned curriculum that aligns to the ELA Regents at the HS level and to the ELA state exams at the middle school level. Teachers use the Whole Language Approach to discuss language structures within the context of genre writing. Additionally, teachers apply Vgostky's theory of proximal development by strategically grouping and pairing students of differing language levels within ENL and content classes. During the planning phase of Units, teachers employ the strategies of backward planning and the CALLA method to plan towards performance based assessments that assess both language and content skills. : 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Many of our students have been receiving ENL services for 5+ years and do not choose to be evaluated in their native language as that is not the language in which they learned the majority of the content. However, ENL students are offered the same accommodations that they receive on state mandated exams (translated tests and/or use of a bilingual dictionary). Our entering students choose this option when being evaluated. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Often, our newcomer ELLs are our SIFE students. SIFE and newcomer students are provided with explicit instruction on how to use Google translate as a tool. Additionally, they are provided with sentence starters, small group instruction, and additional images in order to aid in both the understanding and production of language. Developing ELLs are provided with checklists, cloze paragraphs, and sentence starters as a means to make the metacognition of writing and responding to texts more explicit. The ENL teachers' work with long term ELLs focuses on differentiating between Academic English and Structures 2018-19 SCEP-FL 75  versus Social English. Students are explicitly taught academic vocabulary (precise verbs) and grammatical structures such as subject -verb agreement. Additionally, the push is towards more specificity and analysis of evidence in their writing. Former ELLs are supported by the ENL teachers and their work with Content teachers. They are provided with checklists, lexicons, and writing conferences. : 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Teachers of ELL-SWDs provide many scaffolds to provide access to academic content and English Language development. These scaffolds include modified texts with vocabulary defined or translated in the text, graphic organizers that make note-taking explicit, and images to build background knowledge. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? ENL teachers push in to ELA Self-Contained classes to work individually and in small group with students on ELA assignments. The Special Education and ENL teacher work together to evaluate the student and evaluate progress of IEP goals. The ENL pushes into/ pulls out ENL students who receive ICT services. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Targeted interventions are provided through professional development lead by the interventionists that is then brought to the classrooms by content teachers. Three intervention strategies have been teaching teachers across content areas how to use multilingual lexicons to enforce language acquisition in each of their content areas, how to implement literacy strategies into a year long curriculum across content areas, and how to utilize Ipads to support translation and translanguaging in the classrooms. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? One new program that has been considered and now implemented is a double block beginner section in both the middle school and high school. This new program switch is going to be a very effective support for the beginners and the OTC students to have an academic space to acclimate to the new school environment and work amongst peers with similar experiences and interventionists with adequate experience to support their learning and report back to other content teachers. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? None. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. Students are provided with the same content as Gen Ed students with translation provided as necessary. : 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Students are given access to translation services, translated materials, and google images. Students are supported by IPADs and computers in the classroom. Students use LightSail program for independent reading at their lexile levels. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? We do not have DL and TBE. The way that the home language is delivered through ENL is through translanguaging strategies in the classroom for native Spanish speakers (the interventionists speak Spanish) and through translation technology on the new Ipads purchased for students who do not. There is also some secondary support provided by paraprofessionals who 2018-19 SCEP-FL 76  speak French and Arabic to support occasional conversations between staff members and ELL(s) with native languages of Arabic and French. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. ENL teachers align Unit content and skills to Common Core standards at the ELLs' grade level. Additionally, students work on the same ELA performance tasks as General Education Students but are provided with scaffolds appropriate to their language level. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Students are given access to translation services, translated materials, and google images. Students are supported by IPADs and computers in the classroom. Students use LightSail program for independent reading at their lexile levels. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Paste response to question here: The school offers a summer bridge program where all new studnets have an opportunity to meet with their teachers and other new students and run through a mock school day. In addition, there is a field day with other new admits. The ENL interventionists attend this event to welcome the new ELL students and their families. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Spanish, Arabic, Language Lab 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Our ESL teachers provide PD for teachers on a rotating basis on formulating language objectives and modifying curriculum.ELL personal attend various professional development throughout the school year given by the NYC DOE, UFT, and Hunter College. Additionally, the MS ENL teacher co-teaches with an artist from Story Studio and attends professional learnings about Art and Language integration at Urban Arts. The ENL is attending three sessions about integrating language objectives, common core standards and the arts at Story Studio(Urban Arts). As of now, that is the only ELL specific PD planned. Both ENLS attend PD's through UFT specifcally related to using Ipads in ESl settings. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include 2018-19 SCEP-FL 77  how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Many students are transitioning from out Middle School to our High School. The ENL teachers have meetings to share information about the needs and strengths of incoming High School ELLs. Additionally, High School content teachers discuss incoming 9th graders with the MS ENL teacher to plan for the appropriate language supports needed. Teachers participate in rotating professional development groups about small groups/conferencing, school culture, and data analysis. The implications for ELL students are discussed in each group. Attendance and Agendas for each meeting are digitized and stored in a shared google drive folder. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? ELL parents are invited to the annual Parent Night for ELL's which will be held early winter. In addition, the ENL teachers meet individually with ELL parents as needed to discuss assessments and overall concerns. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. We encourage and invite ELL parents to particiapte in all parent and school activities. We currently have parents of ELLs sitting on our PA. We had a large ELL parent turnout at our annual Open School Night. We foster involvement by sending all communications home in the familes native language whenever possible. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 78 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Brandon Cardet, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 79  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Bronx Academy of Letters School DBN: 07X551 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Title Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) Brandon Cardet-Hernandez Principal Amy Schless Lisa Monge Assistant Principal Parent Coordinator Sarah Camiscoli ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent Audrey Beegle/ENL Teacher/Subject Area Joyce Salas/ENL Teacher/Subject Area Duane Wardally Coach Coach Vanessa Dominguez School Counselor Fred Walsh Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Meredith Smith/ELA/ENL Other Teacher Other Other 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 2018-19 SCEP-FL 80  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 07X551 School Name: Bronx Academy of Letters Superintendent: The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Amy Schless AP Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Parents are given the Home Language Survey upon enrollment, As they are returned we update the information in ATS. In addition, when parents complete blue cards we ask them to note their home language preference and we also ask parents 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 81  Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Spanish, English French Farsi X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Spanish and english Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency How do you Distributed to Families School calendars are distributed monthly, parent -teacher conferences flyers are distributed twice a year(Fall and Spring), afterschool program information is given out at the beginning of the school year as well ongoing throughout the year, student curriculum information is given out in the Fall and letters from school leadership are put into quarterly mailings. Monthly plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. In house and paid services. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 82  Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school Formal interactions are Curriculum night(September), Parent Teacher Conferences(November and April), College Night(October), 8 th grade articulation meeting(October), IEP meetings(ongoing), SLT and PA(ongoing). Informal meetings are attendance coordinator daily calls, attendance teacher home visits, Disciplinary meetings, Thanksgiving celebration, Parent volunteers, afterschool program showcase. Quarterly plan to provide interpretation service(s)? Translation line and in house translators 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. For spanish and french speaking families, we have identified staff members. For any other family, we use the translation service line provided by the DOE Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. We review this policy at the start of the year. It is also included in our staff handbook. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Brochures from the DOE are available at Parent teacher conferences for parents in need of translation services. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? 2018-19 SCEP-FL 83  We will ask parents during PA meetings, informal school contacts,robocalls as well as the school survey feedback. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 84 
