2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 11X556 School Name: BRONX PARK MIDDLE SCHOOL Principal: RENEE RINALDI 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2 Section 1: School Information Page School Information Bronx Park Middle School 11x556 321100010556 6, 7, and 8 th Grade 2441 Wallace Ave, Bronx NY 718-652-6090 School Number (DBN): 718-652-6096 Fax: School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Phone Number: Madge Anderson manderson@bronxparkms.info Email Address: School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Renee Rinaldi Mark Walters Kimalisa Gonzales Ben Paikowsky Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): Deb Torres Gerald Brown (Bronx House) CBO Representative: District Information Geographical District: 11 JeremyKabinoff Superintendent: 1250 Arnow Ave, Bronx NY, 10469 Superintendent’s Office Address: Jkabino@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718) 519- 2620 Phone Number: FSC: Bronx (718) 519- 2626 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) Jose Ruiz Executive Director: 2018-19 CEP 3  1 Fordham Plaza, Bronx, 10458 and 1230 Zerega Ave., Bronx, 10462 Executive Director’s Office Address: JRUIZ2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: (718) 828-7776 Phone Number: (718) 828-6280 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Renee Rinaldi Mark Walters Kimalisa Gonzalez Deb Torres Ben Paikowsky Ralph Labossiere Regina Arone *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ UFT Member/ UFT Member/ UFT 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Kimalisa Gonzales Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Bronx Park Middle School. Flow. Growth. Purpose. Every student. Every day. The mission of Bronx Park Middle School is to empower and inspire each student to apply the knowledge, skills and attitudes necessary to become INNOVATIVE problem solvers, to achieve personal success and to contribute responsibly to our diverse and dynamic world. Through Professionalism, Reflection, Innovation, Determination and Empathy (PRIDE) we are becoming our best selves in order to make our community its best! 2018-19 CEP 9  Equity Statement: At Bronx Park Middle School, we honor the uniqueness of each individual and embrace diverse backgrounds, values, and points of view. It is our mission to be intentional about and accountable for the advancement of equity, diversity and inclusion across all facets of our learning community. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Located on Wallace avenue a few short blocks from the Bronx Park, home of the NYC Botanical Gardens and the Bronx Zoo, Bronx Park Middle School (BxPk) opened as a new school in 2012. The school reached its full capacity as a 6-8 grade Middle School, now serving over 400 students on the Frank Whalen Middle School campus (x135). This spring we graduated our 3rd class of 8th graders onto high school. Bronx Park is a small, innovative school that offers a comprehensive, interdisciplinary college and career preparatory curriculum with a theme of applying learning to problem-based projects within the fields of modern, sustainable careers. Students take the traditional core courses each year, but always learn through interdisciplinary, project-based units that incorporate problem-based curriculum from a variety of career fields. In 2014 Bronx Park joined the first cohort of Progressive Redesign Opportunity Schools for Excellence (PROSE) schools, which is the Chancellors initiative to collaborate with the UFT to allow for innovation in schools. At BxPk this PROSE innovation takes the form of 5 curriculum retreats, including to PD days without students, built into the regular school calendar to design, revise, and review our interdisciplinary curriculum. This program also allows the school’s ILT to adjust the allotment of the 155 minutes of PD time as necessary throughout the year. To support essential adolescent social and emotional development, BXPK students receive daily advisory time with character development curriculum targeting our five core values of Professionalism, Reflection, Innovation, Determination, and Empathy. At BxPk our Staff Promise sates: “Every day we will provide our students with a safe, personalized, and inspirational space so that they can bring their best self to work, think deeply about themselves and their challenges, think creatively about their choices and solutions, learn about each other as individuals, and never give up.” Bronx Park offers a rich array of enrichment opportunities including software engineering, foreign language, the arts, band and physical education, as well as extra-curricular activities including clubs, sports teams, student leadership, and school internships. BxPk is also one of the city’s few Software Engineering Pilot Programs, offering students in all grades the opportunities to learning website design, Scratch programming, and robotics. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Bronx Park Middle School supports a population of approximately 20% Students with Disabilities by offering the full range of learning environments with a focus on Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ICT) model classrooms. Our intention is to facilitate students’ transition into their appropriate least restrictive environments, with the eventual goal of reducing necessary services until full declassification is possible. BxPk has a population of approximately 21% current and former English as a New Language students. With a similar lens of inclusion, BxPk offers English as a New Language services in both push-in and pull-out models to support students’ swift language acquisition. Students in the Entering, Emerging, and Transitioning ENL levels receive small group targeted support matching their proficiency 2018-19 CEP 10  level. Students at the Expanding and Commanding ENL levels receive ELA in a reduced class size in addition to their minutes in integrated ENL class. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. In the first three years, Bronx Park Middle School grew tremendously in its development of interdisciplinary-curriculum, building structures for social and emotional support for students, developing systems for reviewing student work and data, and creating structures for parent engagement. Across the board, the school has celebrated successes in these areas. Previously, with the launch of the Framework for Great Schools, BxPk expanded its Supportive Environment by building school wide structures to support student's social and emotional needs and students who are in crisis as well as improved its systems for Collaborative Teachers by launching goal and action-plan driven Academy teams on each grade level. Within the supportive environment framework the school has recently partnered with groups such as "Elevate", "Grad Alliance"and "Brain Power" to make strides in both student comprehension skills as well as issues of anxiety among students. Now, in year six, the schools’ major focuses have shifted onto improving Rigorous Instruction school-wide. This will be done by improved systems for assessment, data reflection and data sharing. It will also be driven by improving student literacy through stronger reading comprehension and writing outputs in all disciplines, as well as a the introduction of NCTM's Mathematical Practices across all grades in Math. This work with further the challenging and innovative contexts already built into the unique BxPk Curriculum. Additionally, BxPk will continue to expand its focus on offering targeted academic intervention services in both literacy and mathematics. Lastly, the school has recently partnered with Algebra for All to prepare students to be ready to pass the Algebra I Regents. 2018-19 CEP 11  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 11X556 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 406 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 25 24 6 4 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 25 22 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 88.0% % Attendance Rate 84.7% % Reduced Lunch 19.7% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.2% 58.4% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 13.5% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 1.25 3% 38% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 39.0% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES YSH YSH YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO NO NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A YES N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 45 46 89.5% 4.2% 19.0% 17.5% 9.4% 1.2% 4 44% 6 23.6% 45% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No YES N/A N/A NO YES NO N/A N/A NO NO YES N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 12  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Based on a comprehensive assessment of our school’s academic program, our school’s strengths with Rigorous Instruction include: 1. 2. 3. In 2017-2018, school-wide proficiency (students scoring 3s and 4s) on the NY State ELA exam increased to 39% for an average of 7% proficiency growth. In 2017-2018, school-wide proficiency (students scoring 3s and 4s) on the NY State Math exam increased to 24% for an average of 18% proficiency growth over the last two years. In 2017-2018, proficiency (3s and 4s) on the NY State ELA and Math exams grew for SWDs by 3% and 1% respectively. 4. Our 2017 Central Led Review identified, our Curricula (Quality Review Indicator 1.1) and our Pedagogy (Quality Review Curricula 1.2) as areas of celebration 5. Our 2018 Quality Review identified our Quality Review Indicators 1.1 and 1.2 as Proficient. Based on a comprehensive assessment of our school’s academic program, our school’s needs with rigorous instruction include: 1. Although our 2017 Central Led Review identified our Curricula (Quality Review Indicator 1.1) and our Pedagogy (Quality Review Curricula 1.2) as areas of celebration, it was recommended that school leaders expand the range of scaffolds and extensions within units of study, to address the learning needs of diverse student populations, including subgroups of English Language Learners, Students with Disabilities, and High Performers. 2. Despite strong growth in school wide ELA proficiency, SWD sub-groups have failed to demonstrate adequate growth. 3. Despite strong reductions in students far below proficiency in Math the school's progress in math proficiency continues to lag behind its ELA growth. In 2017-2018, proficiency (3s and 4s) on the NY State ELA and Math exams grew for ENL Students by only 2%. 4. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 2018-19 CEP 13  Rigorous Instruction : During the 2018-2019 school year, department teams will work together to produce vertically aligned unit-plans and assessments that engage students in higher order thinking/discussion/tasks that will result in 3% increase in students meeting proficiency levels on the ELA and Math state exams by June 2019. 2018-19 CEP 14 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? SpEd, ENL Bi-monthly curriculum retreats. All teachers participate in the development of their grade-level, discipline specific units and assessments. All teachers present drafts of their unit plans to their departments and academies for feedback. The unit plans are submitted to the Instructional Leadership team for review and feedback. School administrators and department chairs play a role in giving unit feedback. Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). CCSS Aligned Curriculum Planning : All teachers will participate in five Understanding by Design (UbD) unit-planning Curriculum Retreats for the 2018-2019 year. The focus of these retreats will be to develop/revise unit plans with CCSS aligned learning goals, DOK level 3 and 4 performance assessments, and learning activities aligned to the CCSS. Teachers will develop CCSS aligned unit plans with weekly aligned assessments and a summative performance assessment project. While Math and ELA will align their units and assessments to the state exam rubrics, social studies and science departments will align these assessments to the NYC Performance Assessment Rubrics. Non-core subject areas will be assigned specific standards and rubrics to align to support a school-wide infuse of literacy and mathematics standards. Daily, weekly, and unit level performance tasks and assessment will be used to provided teachers and students with formative and summative data around students growth. As per feedback from our 2017 Central Led Review, special attention will be placed on teaching teachers how to effectively plan a wide range of scaffolds and extensions within units of study to address the learning needs of diverse student populations, including subgroups of English Language Learners, Students with Disabilities, and High Performers. (DTSDE SOP 3.2) Additionally, school leaders will provide professional development opportunities for teachers to deepen their understanding of effective techniques for questioning and discussion and routinely implement these techniques in classroom instruction. (DTSDE SOP 4.2) Additionally, within each UbD, qualitative learning targets will be developed in alignment with these assessment rubrics. PD will be implemented to build differentiated Performance Assessments 2018-19 CEP 15  for ENL students and SWDs in all core subjects. As supportive planning resources for assessment tasks and learning activities, math teachers will utilize the CMP3 curriculum and the units from EngageNY. Teachers in all other departments will use exemplar units from Engage NY to support literacy planning within their subject area. Within Rubicon Atlas, our school wide curriculum platform, all teachers will submit first drafts of their CCSS-aligned UbD unit plans for feedback prior to their unit launch. Feedback will target UbD criteria using the Wiggins & McTighe Understanding by Design Rubric and the Tri-State Unit Rubric to ensure alignment to standards and high quality. Units on each grade level are planned around shared interdisciplinary themes and essential questions to help drive student inquiry. Units culminate in week-long performance tasks know as Project Week where students solve rigorous challenges in each subject area and then communally share their work in project share expo. In addition to the bi-monthly curriculum retreats, significant professional development time is dedicated to the production of these performance tasks including special focus on modified versions containing scaffolds for ENL students and SWDs. Math units of study will specifically and strategically incorporate NCTM 8 Mathematical Teaching Practices to increase the level of rigor of unit plans, across all grade levels. This year our 7th grade team with partner with The Center for Technology and School Change (CTSC) at Teachers College, Columbia University to pilot a partnership aimed to create, facilitate and support the successful creation of interdisciplinary STEM programs. School-wide Interim Assessments: Based ongoing curriculum auditing in our Rubicon Atlas Curriculum platform, data from the NY State Exams and internal assessments, review of school-wide assessment policies, and our focus on Mastery Based Learning, it was decided that Bronx Park Middle School would shift toward a school wide Interim Assessment System. This year our interim assessment system will also incorporate work done by teacher teams who are collaborating with MSQI and The Mastery Collaborative. All. Sept/Jun Bi Monthly Grade Team Leaders , Depart Teams, Admin (AP). 2018-19 CEP 16  Additionally, as per feedback from our 2017 Central Led Review around needing to create structures and systems to specifically support the learning needs of diverse student populations, including subgroups of English Language Learners. To support this work, school leaders will create and implement an ENL specific component to our interim assessments system to better and assess and monitor the proficiency and growth of our ENL students. Teams of teachers and educators will come together over the summer to review the CCSS instructional shifts, the 2017-18 state exam questions, and the June Instructional Report data. This team then created Math and ELA Interim Assessments using prior state exam questions and questions provided by the State's exam provider company. These IAs include September baseline diagnostics and January mid-year exams with the full range of question types. For these exams, members of the planning team will train teachers to score the constructed responses using the exam scorer guides provided by the state. These IAs also include abbreviated IAs to be given after each major unit of study focused on a range of state standards. These shortened IAs will focus on multiple choice selections and will use electronic bubble sheets for instant scoring and data disaggregation on the GradeCam.com platform. Teachers are required to take each IA during the aforementioned Curriculum planning retreats to internalize key standards. These exams were then used to help to backwards plan within the unit plans. Teachers will receive professional development around the breakdown and review of data. In addition to the Atlas Data Review protocol staff will be trained in the "Got it. Getting it. Needs Support," (GGN) Protocol for identifying mastery subgroups. Disaggregated data from the exams and these protocols will be used by departments and grade teams to revise units, plan subsequent instruction, identify subgroups in need of Academic Intervention Services, and celebrate student growth. This data will also serve as predictive benchmarks for our above stated CEP goal. 2018-19 CEP 17 Weekly. Quartely. All students will be targeted by proficiency level, ENL students, SWD students, Lowest Third Grade Team leaders will work in concert with the school’s Digital Technology Leads to collect and analyze the data. Advisers within each academy will review the data with students in an ongoing basis. We will have two teams of teachers focused AIS ELA and Math respectively. We will also use our testing coordinator to organize , administer, and analyze the quarterly assessment data necessary for re-grouping. We will encourage our strongest literacy and mathematics teachers to apply for the after school and weekend AIS postings. Targeted Academic Intervention Services and Expanded Test Preparation : All students will be given accounts for online reading and mathematics support programs including, MyOn.com and IXL.com. Grade Teams will run monthly competitions for minutes spent and growth progress shown on these programs outside of the classroom. Starting in October, additional time after-school and on Saturday will be allocated for our Brain Pump Academies. During these AIS courses students will use the school computer labs and Chromebook carts to complete minutes in these programs. Students will be targeted based on their learning needs and sub groups. This will include groupings for ENL students and SWDs as well as at risk students and advanced students receiving Specialized High School preparation. Additionally, all students will be given license to Rosetta Stone language software so they may conduct this enrichment activity at their individual leisure . English as a New Language (ENL) students will have access to the English version of the program for their correct proficiency level during regular and AIS classes. During the regular school day, all students will be programmed for leveled reading and mathematics courses supplemental to their standard ELA and Math courses. During It's lit (8th grade) and MSQI (6th and 7th), students will be grouped by ability level for targeted instruction based off of DRP data which is representative of their reading level and grouping. Teachers have specifically been trained in SGI and certain academic strands to target lagging literacy skills sets, MyOn as a digital library option, and teacher lead guided reading modelled after the Junior Great-books collaborative inquiry curriculum. Subgroups of students in need of the most intensive interventions will receive Wilson's in small groups. Students will also have a regular allotment of time dedicated to independent reading in order to foster students life long love of reading! Similarly, for mathematics, students will grouped by ability level for targeted instruction, and will use a blend of CMP3 tasks. ENL students will have their AIS courses co-taught in the integrated ENL model. Students with disabilities will receive these AIS services as a supplement to their mandated services. Since this AIS is programmed during the regular school day participation will be mandatory. To attract students, for extra curriculum AIS programming, the school will hand select the first participants with individualized invites paired with family calls from students' adviser-teachers. This should help to get the message to students and parents about the logistics and importance of these AIS courses. Additionally, to "incentivize" participation, the school will run student challenges focused on participation and demonstration 2018-19 CEP 18 All students, ENLs, SWDs Twice per month All teachers. of learning culminating in prizes for the top performers in both categories. Beginning in December, our AIS course work will pivot toward state test preparation. This shift will include the use of iReady digital and workbook resources and the Accessing Complex Texts (ACT) Curriculum for reading and writing. It will also include the use of IXL.com digital resources and the Go Math Curriculum for mathematics. Student Data-folios : To more deeply invest students in their own data, each student will develop a Data-folio that will follow them for their three-year tenure at Bronx Park Middle School. This Data-folio will include state test results, up-to-date Lexile and mathematical fluency data, monthly usage data from our digital systems, bi-monthly progress reports from the online grade-book, PRIDE Point summaries from the school’s PBIS system, and significant classroom assessments and performance tasks with teachers rubric-aligned feedback. Additionally, students with disabilities will include a list of their IEP goals and their Transition Planning activities and goals in their Data-folios . ENL students will include usage reports from Rosetta stone and their most recent language proficiency results. These Data-folios will be housed in the student’s advisory classroom. Advisory teachers will be expected to engage their advisees with these data-folios each time updated documents are available. These data-folios will also be used by students to present a case for their mastery of grade level standards to their parents during the three student led conference evenings next year. During professional development teachers will receive training on the creation, maintenance of, and use of the Data-folios for classroom instruction. This will include PD around structured student reflection. This year school leaders will expand the team of teachers collaborating with The Mastery Collaborative to support the development, revision and implementation of Data-folios to include all SLT members. SLT members will collaborate with school leaders in the creation and implementation of school wide Data-folio systems and Professional Development for teachers around research based best practices, specifically around reflecting on student mastery (for both teachers and students). 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. 2018-19 CEP 19  The Data-Folios will be the "touch-point" for parent review of student work during our Student Led Conferences. These conferences take place during our fall, winter, and spring family conference nights. We will provide families some basic training in how to interpret what they are seeing and reviewing during these conferences. Each grade has two grade team leaders who will facilitiate the oversight of this system. They are; Marlowe Knipes, Aliya Castillo (6th grade), Chris Mitariten and Davina Ruiz (7th grade) Cherrylin Badilla and Sam Mercuris (8th grade). Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Strategic hiring and staff will allow for two teachers in each core subject area on each grade. This will make collaboration possible for curriculum and instructional design. It will also allow for greater flexibility of scheduling for SWD and ENL students.  We will program at least 6 teachers per grade for Academic Intervention services in Math, ELA, and ENL to allow for the greatest flexibility of grouping and targeted interventions.  We will continue to purchase the supporting professional texts for Curriculum Design work including the Wiggins and McTighe book: The Understanding By Design Guide to Creating High Quality Units, and Classroom Instruction That Works by Marzano and Pollock.  We will update our purchase of a Rubicon Atlas account for curriculum sharing, revision, and archiving.  We will purchase the text sets for Junior Great-books, the ACT workbooks, Strategies for Writers (ZB), and Go Math.  We will renew our purchase for school wide accounts for IXL.com, MyOn.com, and Rosetta Stone.  We will be purchasing the Online Gradebook Skedula, as well as the entire IO Education suite of school support products, to support central grading, mastery based learning, real-time communication with families, and digital assessment disaggregation.  We will be purchasing Lightsail to support MSQI Tiered intervention and school wide AIS reading  We will set aside per session for all pedagogues to participate in a week-long summer PD training and 5 curriculum retreats throughout the school year. Additional professional development will take place during weekly PD minutes. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. We will use baseline assessments for both Math (PSeries) and ELA (DRP) in September and a mid-year predictive in January. The goal will be to see at least 2% growth in scores on these exams across the school by January 2019 as evidence that the aforementioned action plan has been effective. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) 1. Interim assessments based on prior state exams for both Math and ELA will be given at the end of every unit. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 20  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Based on a comprehensive assessment of our school’s academic program, our school’s strengths with our Supportive Environment include: 1. Our 2018 Quality Review identified all School Culture Indicators as well developed, and 3.4 (High Expectations for Staff, Students, and Families) as an Area of Celebration. 2. According to our school's 2017-2018 School environment Survey, positive student response rates around Safety were 89% positive, which is 8% above the city average. 3. According to our school's 2017-2018 School environment Survey, 94% of students agreed or strongly agreed they they feel safe in their classes at their schools. This is 4% above the district and city average. 4. According to our school's 2017-2018 School environment Survey, 93% of teachers agreed or strongly agreed that they are able to design appropriate instruction that is matched to students' need (e.g. English language learners (ELL) proficiency and students with disabilities). 5. According to responses our school's 2017-2018 School environment Survey, 93% of our students gave positive responses about our Guidance staff and their support. Based on a comprehensive assessment of our school’s academic program, our school’s needs with our Supportive Environment include: 1. According to our school's 2017-2018 School environment Survey, only 45% of students said that students rarely or never harrass, bully, or intimidate other students at their school, 3% below the city average. 2. According to responses on our school's 2017-2018 School environment Survey, only 64% of students say that student rarely or never harass, bull yor intimidate each other because of their race, religion, ethnicity, national origin, or citizenship/immigration status, 3% below the district average. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Supportive Environment : During the 2018-2019 school year, the school’s Restorative Justice League (RJL) will implement a school wide PBIS program to raise the school’s positive response rates in the School Environment Survey scores in the area of Supportive Environment: Preventing Bullying by 3% by June 2019. 2018-19 CEP 21  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Restorative Justice League : In the 2017-18 school year, the EmSoc Team will be expanded to include school administration, deans, guidance counselors, social workers, the crisis intervention team, and a teacher representative from each Grade Team, as well as a representative from the special education and ENL departments and be re-named the Restorative Justice League. This team will meet on a weekly basis to review school wide PBIS data and discuss on-going professional development needs for staff to support student develop. The team will help to set and revise school-wide expectations in the student handbook regarding discipline and our core routines and procedures. This team will also set policy and review effectiveness of our On Call student support team, our Reflection Center, and our PRIDE Point system. Members of this team will help to run staff development surrounding domains two during August PD and in an ongoing basis throughout the school year. Members of this team will also serve time on our On Call Counseling schedule and our Reflection Center schedule. Students with lagging social and emotional skill sets including SWDs and ENL students. SAPIS will support students at risk for exposure to drugs and alcohol as well as provide curriculum to all students. The Team will first meet in August to review effectiveness of prior year (2015-16). Subsequent meetings take place weekly. Restorative Justice League, including: School administration, deans, guidance counselors, social workers, the crisis intervention team, SMHCP consultant and a teacher representative from each homeroom, as well as a representative from the special education and ENL departments. Also in collaboration with our RJL, the school will also host the School Mental Health Consultant Program and will begin to receive services during the second phase of the program roll out, starting this academic year, in September. The School Mental Health Consultant will support our school by: 1) Promoting mental health and informing our school community about the program, 2) Identifying our school’s internal resources, gaps and creating School Mental Health Plans to connect schools with community based providers and other resources, 3) Provide training and consultation to our staff in order to raise their awareness about mental health and address mental health concerns for students. In the 2017-18 school year, the RJL will begin to collaborate with the Equity Committee to ensure that school wide Social and 2018-19 CEP 22  Emotion programs, polices and procedures are aligned with our school's vision for equity. Advisory Curriculum Focused on Social and Emotional Learning: In the 2017-18 school year, all students will be programmed for 100-120 minutes of advisory time per week. Advisories will either meet in co-taught classes as a large group or in smaller groups with their specific advisory teachers. For the first time this year, advisors will be teachers on the grade level that do not directly teach their advisees in their core academic classes. This will lead to a more natural role as a student advocate for each respective advisor. In concert with the RJL, representatives from each grade level worked on a summer curriculum planning initiative to build a school wide advisory curriculum scope and sequence that focuses on helping students to build the necessary life habits and skills for success. The curriculum combined resources including professional texts like The Advisory Book , by Linda Crawford, as mentor texts. The curriculum incorporates the school’s five core values of professionalism, reflection, innovation, determination, and empathy. It also focuses on topics of interest and importance to adolescent students including, but not limited to, issues of bullying, hygiene, future careers, digital safety, self-esteem, and build positive friendships. As an expectation, each month of the curriculum must culminate in a performance task for students to complete with their fellow advisees. Results from these performances, or the performances themselves, will be shared as part of a monthly grade level assembly. Finally, starting this year, the RJL will partner with the organization 'Graduation Alliance', to conduct a number of student surveys meant to provide context for at-risk students. The RJL will then work the grade team leaders to create at-risk advisory groups to best support students who are likely to be struggling. Monthly Student Town Hall Meetings: To incorporate regular student voice into our planning for student safety and social and emotional development, we will institute monthly Student Town Hall meetings. These meetings will take place on Friday’s during our extended advisory block and will be facilitated by a member of our EmSoc Team along with the advisers for the class. These meetings will teach students protocols for sharing successes and struggles, analyzing class PBIS data, sharing constructive feedback with teachers and collaboratively goal setting. In addition to the class town hall meetings, the grade-wide town Restorative Justice LEague,, All student-advisory teachers. The grade level representatives for the Advisory Curriculum Planning team. All students are supported by advisory curriculum. Special care is given to pairing ENL students and SWDs with advisers who are skilled with working with these sub-populations The first draft of the scope and sequence is due mid-august. Staff PD around the curriculum takes place in early September. Monthly assemblies begin in September. All Students The monthly town hall dates will be posted on the school calendar in September. EmSoc Team members, All student-advisory teachers. 2018-19 CEP 23 hall sharing will be conducted as a portion of the monthly PRIDE assembly allowing students and teachers to exchange ideas grade wide. Outcomes from these meetings will also be shared with the EmSoc Team and used to revise the advisory curriculum. Student PBIS and Celebrations Calendar : To help to codify and reinforce positive student habits, the school will deepen its use of school wide PBIS. This includes additional professional development for staff around the use of deescalating techniques and our Ladder of Reflection. This will also include professional development around the norming our staff's use of the of the PRIDE Point System, which is used to monitor students earning their points for professionalism and determination. These points will be tracked in central Google-Doc. Families will also receive a weekly PRIDE letter detailing their student’s point earnings. Incentives will range from small prizes to access to major field trips though cumulatively high averages. To further reinforce positive student habits and proper demonstration of school-wide PRIDE values, the RJL will implement a school wide celebrations calendar. This calendar will include one major monthly celebration linked to student PRIDE point averages as well as weekly incentives that students are able to earn. This calendar will also include one monthly reading-related celebration on the school calendar to reinforce the school’s reading expectations. RJL will also review earnings and attendance data related to these events to review their relative effectiveness for encouraging positive student habits. Restorative Justice League. The Incentives, Celebrations, and Events Committee will meet quarterly to update the events calendar. All students are supported by the PBIS structures but PBIS is designed to specifically aid students with lagging social and emotional skill sets, SITH students, SWDs, and ENL students. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Our supportive environment plan is supported by our use of digital technologies to engage families. We use Skedula to provide our families with total access to student grades and anecdotes led by both our AP and our PCT Ben Paikowsky. We use Classroom Dojo to communicate with families about their students conduct, work habits, and social and emotional learning. This is also used for student incentives. This area is led by our dean Mr. Labossiere as well as our Sped Coordinator Ms. Arone. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Weekly time will be programmed into EmSoc team member’s schedules to ensure regular meetings.  Per-session was set aside to fund the summer Advisory Curriculum Planning Team.  Copies of The Advisory Book were be purchased to support this work. 2018-19 CEP 24   Funding was used to pay for Rubicon Atlas to allow for central curriculum creation, review, revision, and archiving. Funding will be made available for student incentives and EmSoc activities within the guidelines of budgetary SOPs. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. We will give students a quarterly in-house environment survey to both students and staff that has questions modeled off of the actual school environment survey in regards to the domain of Supportive Environment. We will measure to see a 3-5% increase to positive responses regarding this domain. By February 2019 (the 3rd Quarterly Assessment) we will have met at least 2% of this larger goal. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The City-Wide School Environment Survey; Supportive Environment Section; Classroom Behavior Question selections Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 25  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Based on a comprehensive assessment of our school’s academic program, our school’s strengths with our Collaborative Teachers include: 1. Our 2018 Quality Review identified our Teacher Teams and Collaboration (Quality Review Indicator 4.2) as Well Developed. 2. According to our school's 2017-2018 School environment Survey, 98% of teachers responded positively that at Bronx Park teachers design instructional programs (units and lessons) together. 3. According to our 2016-2017 Framework for Great Schools Report, in the domain of Peer Collaboration, 98% of teachers agreed or strongly agreed that at our teachers talk to one another about instruction. Based on a comprehensive assessment of our school’s academic program, our school’s needs with our Collaborative Teachers include: 1. Although our 2018 Quality Review identified our Teacher Teams and Collaboration (Quality Review Indicator 4.2) as Well Developed, it was recommended that school leaders expand upon successful teacher collaborations to deepen the teams’ understanding and routine implementation of effective inquiry cycles. 2. Data from our internal assessments demonstrated inconsistent application of Mastery Based Learning grading methodologies and academic growth rates vertically and horizontally across grades and departments. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Collaborative Teachers :During the 2018-2019 school year departments will vertically align Mastery Based Learning practices and programs to develop a data-driven culture for their discipline that informs instruction and will result in an average of 90% core-course pass rates for students as evidenced by their overall final STARS report card, by June 2019. 2018-19 CEP 26 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All students, SWDs, ENL Students. September, December, Feburary, April Aug/Sept Bi-Montlhy Principal and AP along with the ILT, which includes a teacher representative from each school department. These members were selected in collaboration with the UFT chapter leader and fulfill the responsibilities of the PD team. Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Inquiry Cycles for Teachers: As per feedback from the 20117-18 Quality Review on Indicator 4.2, school leaders facilitate professional develop cycles expand upon successful teacher collaborations to deepen the teams’ understanding and routine implementation of effective inquiry cycles. Mastery Based Learning Policy: During the previous school years, our school's instructional leadership Team (ILT) collaborated around the creation of a school-wide Mastery Based Learning policy to help to shape our schools instructional vision for student learning. Revision work continued over the summer to including our learning and reflections about the implementation of various elements of the plan. We will continue to revision and update this policy moving forward. Currently this MBL policy includes expectations for generating CCSS aligned learning targets and rubrics for UbD unit-plans, scoring guide lines for converting rubric scores to for STARS and our Online Gradebook Skedula, norms for generating mastery-based assessments , MBL structures that need to be represented in the classroom environment, and curriculum scopes and sequences that offer students multiple opportunities to demonstrate mastery of a given standard. Guidelines will also be established for selecting key standards for IEP promotional goals and utilizing ENL language standards appropriate to a given ENL student’s English proficiency. School administration, in collaboration with the ILT, will plan and deliver professional development to all teaching staff during our week-long August PD. During this time, all teachers will be required to update their unit plans and instructional practices with high priority Mastery Based Learning strategies and structures. Ongoing PD, conducted during weekly PD minutes, will continue to push and inform teachers' practices throughout the year. 2018-19 CEP 27  In the 2017-2018 school year, we will expand our collaboration with The Mastery collaboration to include teams of teachers who are also New Teacher Center Mentors, our Special Education Coordinator and IEP teacher, to further support Mastery Based Teaching and Learning initiatives across the school. Mastery Based Learning "Work-logs" for Student Data-Folios: To support student investment in their learning and growth, students will maintain MBL Work-logs in their Data-folio for each subject area. For each unit, each teacher will produce a MBL Work-log that will lay out the key standards/learning-targets for the unit and give students a location for tracking assignments and rubric scores for each assignment. As students receive back scored work, that work will be placed into their Data-folio and students will update the unit Work-logs accordingly. Teachers will periodically teach lessons to students around structured reflection on their mastery. Students will use their Work-logs as the data source to look for areas of strength and areas for growth. At the end of each unit, students will bind their assignments together with the Work-log to archive for promotional purposes at the end of the year. Strong samples of work will later be selected for Student Led Conference folders and EOY promotion portfolios. This practice directly aligns with the IEP promotional standards checklists related specifically to students' IEP annual goals and promotion criteria. ENL students will also maintain a Work-log related the language proficiency standards appropriate for their level of language mastery. These Work-logs will be used in collaboration between the ENL and core discipline teachers for ongoing progress reports and EOY promotion decisions. Mastery Based Learning Instructional Rounds and Reviews: To help systematically review the implementation of our Mastery-Based Learning policy, we will implement a series of periodic instructional rounds. These rounds will involve full day reviews of classroom teaching practices using a normed data collection tool focused on key MBL indicators. To further incorporate teachers into our schools instructional leadership, ILT members, representing each grade team and department, will participate as reviewers. These instructional rounds will be non-evaluative for teachers and focus instead on programmatic successes and areas for growth. These rounds will be conducted monthly beginning in November. To continue to build on our strong teacher collaboration, and in addition to our weekly grade team meetings, our core discipline departments will meet twice per week during student lunch time. During these times, our departments will use Tuning Weekly All students, SWDs, ENL Students The ILT Team, All core discipline teachers, SPED teachers, ENL Teachers ILT Members, Grade and Department leaders, Admin All Students Goal Setting Meetings will take place at the end of September. Meetings are weekly. 2018-19 CEP 28  Protocols to tune their unit learning targets, rubrics, and assessments. They will use the Atlas Data protocol to review ongoing student outcomes as evidenced by student work in Data-Folios, classroom anecdotes and ongoing Interim Assessment results. Department and Grade teams will generate goals and action plans at the beginning of the year based on baseline data, and then update these plans throughout the year based on the outcomes from the aforementioned protocols. Mastery Based Learning and Student-Led Conferences (SLCs): To enhance on our current Student Led Conference model, Data-folios will be used to catalogue student evidence for reflection. Before each of the three SLC sessions scheduled in 2018-19, teachers will engage students in structured reviews of the contents of their Data-folio for each subject area. Using a reflection protocol as a guiding format, students will select 1-2 pieces of work and the Work-log for each discipline, complete a reflection template focused on their mastery for each discipline, and include the reflections and work samples in their SLC folders. On the evening of their conferences, students will lead a 15-20 minute conference with their family members where they describe their level of mastery for each core discipline and use their work samples as evidence. Parents will be provided with question guides, translated as necessary, to support their ability to probe students about their assignments, reflections, mastery levels, strengths, and growth areas. As additional supporting documentation parents and students will also be given updated data snapshots from the Data-Folios including progress reports, lexile and math levels, and interim assessment results. Students with IEPs and ENL students will also prepare reflections related to their IEP specific goals and ENL specific Work-logs. The evenings when SLCs are held will also include Parent Engagement activities. In addition to conferences, these evenings will include: 1) workshops for parents to become familiar with our online systems (iReady, Skedula, Classroom Dojo, etc) to support their access and participation from home; 2) Parent surveys to collect parent preferences and feedback about school functioning; 3) Scholastic Book Fairs to support family reading habits; 4) Parent Workshops related to other parent interests (PTA activities, High School Admissions, Home academic support for students, etc). Mastery Based Low Inference Data Collection Systems As per feedback from our 2017 Central Lead Review, school leaders will provide professional development opportunities to support the strengthening of teachers’ existing assessment practice of conferring with students, through enhanced note taking and/or documenting student mastery during whole group instruction and targeted skills groups (SGI). In professional development, departments will develop, implement and reflect All Students with some mods for SWDs and ENL Students. November, March, and May. Reflection All teachers, particularly advisers who oversee SLCs, and students. Workshops will be run by our guidance team Aug All Students with some mods for SWDs and ENL Students. Principal , AP along MAstery collaborate committee SLT, UFT 2018-19 CEP 29  on effectiveness of commonly created templates for collecting low-inference mastery data. Last year, teachers participated in one round of Japanese Lesson Study. For the 2018-2019 school year we will leverage this type of collaborative inquiry by increasing the frequency of lesson study cycles and specifically targeting efficiency nd effectiveness of school wide mastery based structures for collecting and using low-inference mastery data. n/a 3b – Parent and Family Engagement n/a n/a n/a How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Families will be engaged in discussion and learning about our mastery based learning policy and practices during each of the 4 family conference nights over the course of the school year. Additionally these conversations will be reinforced by student assignments and grades in Skedula. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Per-session will be allocated for summer planning around the Mastery Based Policy. Additional per-session will be allocated for summer professional development with all teachers to rollout the key MBL structures.  To support the creation of Work-logs, funds will be used to purchase professional texts including Seven Strategies of Assessment for Learning by Jan Chappuis.  Coverage per diem will be allocated to cover the classes of ILT members so that they can participate in  Instructional Rounds. Strategic staffing will allow for all teachers to have PD minutes during student lunch periods 3-4 times per week. This will support grade team and departmental planning as well as addition PD minutes built into teacher’s schedules. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 1. We will review STARS data at the end of Marking Period 2, and will be looking to see that the average pass rates for students is at 90% or higher (meaning at least 90% of students are passing all 4 core courses). 2018-19 CEP 30  2. Vertical alignment Mid-Year audit. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 1. STARS reports will be used to assess pass rates at the end of MP2. 2. Vertical alignment Mid-Year audit. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 31  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Based on a comprehensive assessment of our school’s academic program, our school’s strengths with Effective School Leadership include: 1. Our 2017 Central Led Review identified our Development and Supervision of Teachers (Quality Review Indicator 4.1) as an area of celebration. 2. Our 2018 Quality Review identified our Development and Supervision of Teachers (Quality Review Indicator 4.1) as Proficient. 3. During the 2017-2018 school year, 95% of parents responded positively about inclusive leadership on the Framework For Great Schools Report. 4. During the 2017-2018 school year, in addition to the 155 minutes of professional development time mandated in the new teacher contract, Bronx Park offered all new teachers a week of training in August, all staff members a week of Professional Development in August, and all teachers an extra 45 minutes of professional development built into their schedules each week. A teacher participating in all three areas received over 10,000 minutes of professional development. Based on a comprehensive assessment of our school’s academic program, our school’s needs with Effective School Leadership include: 1. Although our 2017 Central Led Review identified our Development and Supervision of Teachers (Quality Review Indicator 4.1) as an area of celebration, it was recommended that school leaders provide professional development opportunities for teachers to deepen their understanding of effective techniques for questioning and discussion and routinely implement these techniques in classroom instruction, this feedback was also provided during our 208 Quality Review. 2. Average teacher proficiency (ratings of effective and highly effective) on the Danielson Rubric for component 3B: Discussion and Questioning, never exceed 72% during 2017-18. 3. Despite strong growth in both Math and ELA proficiency the school's math proficiency continues to lag behind 4. its ELA scores. In 2017-2018, proficiency (3s and 4s) on the NY State ELA and Math exams grew for ENL Students by only 1% in both subjects. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 2018-19 CEP 32  Effective School Leadership : During the 2018-2019 school year School leaders will implement a system of regular and targeted professional development focused on high level questioning and rigorous and differentiated learning tasks, which will result in a 5% increase in average observation ratings of Effective or Highly Effective for Danielson Component 3c by June, 2019. 2018-19 CEP 33 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All students, SWDs, ENL Students. 8/24-8/26. 8/29-9/6. Bi Weekly Admin, ILT team members, all teachers Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Targeted Summer Professional Development Week : To build launch the year with clear instructional expectations and well trained teachers, Bronx Park runs a full week of summer professional development, with an additional three days built in for all new staff members. School leaders and ILT members collaborate to run PD sessions aligned to best practices for planning, classroom environment, and instruction. During the summer PD leading up the 2018-19 school year, school leaders will PD focused on Danielson Component 3b with the intention of increasing regular classroom rigor through more challenging questioning and better structures for discussion. The goal is to develop teachers ability to use questioning to help students make and deepen meaning. These PD sessions will model methodologies for developing high level questioning and design discussions that will support students pushing each others thinking. These sessions will also model the pedagogy that teachers are expected to implement in their classrooms. These sessions will also set the expectations for instructional practices that administrators are expecting to see. These sessions were also differentiated for new staff members and new teachers. They also included special scaffolding to support teachers' practices for working with SWDs and ENL students. Ongoing Observation and Domain Specific Professional Development: All students. bi-weekly . Administrators, ILT members As per feedback from the 2018 Quality Review, school leaders, School leaders will continue to utilize cycles of observation, grounded in the Danielson Framework for Teaching, including professional development and peer coaching, to ensure higher Mid-Year reflections will be conducted quarterly after the 2018-19 CEP 34  order thinking and engaging discussion techniques across classrooms on a school wide basis (Components 3b, 3c). release of score trackers To support teacher practice, Bronx Park has developed several supportive structures. First, in collaboration with the ILT (serving as the UFT PD committee), BxPk implements a monthly PD focus aligned to the needs of the school as defined by student data, classroom observation, and teacher feedback. These monthly foci target components of practice from the Danielson Rubric. During the 155 minutes of after-school PD and the 180 minutes of school day minutes allotted for PD and team meetings, the ILT implements PD sessions or task-driven meetings aligned to the monthly focus and that offer strategies to support all teachers in using effective and highly effective practices for each stand. In support of teacher learning, subsequent rounds of teacher observation align with the PD focus and the strategies and structures taught to teachers during that month. This reinforces successful implementation of the focus strand and offers school leaders a mechanism to review the effectiveness of the PD being taught. Subsequently, observation data then influences future PD foci and is used to further differentiate PD for teachers based on their varying degrees of effectiveness in different skill areas. During the 2018-19 school year the September PD focus strands will be 2a and 2d to help staff create positive classroom norms, expectations, and routines. This is the foundation of strong classroom management and efficient classroom instruction. The October focus strand will be Discussion and Questioning (3b) to support teacher development of rigorous questioning and discussion. The focus will be using questioning and discussion as a tool to push student thinking and help them to make meaning. These will support student learning during the first project week of the year and student reflection leading up to the first SLC for the year. The November focus strand will also be Discussion and Questioning (3b) but with the focus of using targeted questioning as systematic formative assessment during instruction. At the end of November, the ILT will review data from the first three months of observation to evaluate the effectiveness of PD and establish the subsequent monthly PD focus strands. In an attempt to model strong Mastery Based Learning for teachers, on a quarterly basis teachers will be given their Advance Score trackers. Teachers will be asked to review their goals from the IPC and the results of their observations to 2018-19 CEP 35  develop goals for the second half of the school year. These goals will be discussed with school leaders during subsequent observation debriefs. School leaders will also help teachers to refine the goals based on observation data to ensure quality and appropriateness of the goals. Ongoing Observation and Content Specific Professional Development: In the 2018-2019 school year, to support teacher practice school leaders will implement Math specific PD cycles to focus on developing teacher practice in the monthly foci to target components of practice from the Danielson Rubric across content areas to support Mathematics. These task-driven meetings will offer strategies to support all teachers in integrating Math Practices across content areas and using effective and highly effective practices for each component of the Danielson Rubric. New Teacher Mentors via NTCM Program: In previous years we to improve mentorship for new teachers, increase teacher retention, and improve student outcomes, Bronx Park has partnered with the New Teacher Center Mentor (NTCM) program based out of the New Teacher Center at the Santa Cruz school for Education. Due to the success of this program as measured by teacher retention rates and new teacher success rates, for the 2018-2019 school year we will expand this program to include a third teacher leader. The three teacher leaders were selected to participate in a year long training curriculum to become expert new teacher mentors. Using research-based strategies these mentors will work with 1st and 2nd year teachers to help build their teaching practice in a coaching-based, non-evaluative model. These mentors will meet weekly to discuss their coaching tactics as well as participate in monthly PD sessions with NTCM Program to grow their own capacity. The mentors will also meet biweekly with school leaders to discuss observation data and goal setting for new teachers. Inclusion of Teacher Leaders in PD Implementation: To build the capacity of our teacher leaders and to increase the amount of differentiation we can offer our pedagogical staff in their development BxPk will ask its teachers with effective and highly effective practices to help to facilitate PD sessions. Based on prior 2017-18 observation data and ongoing classroom observation, as well as our new partnership with the Office of Teacher Leadership, teacher leaders will be identified for their strong practices, and will be included in PD planning and implementation. These teachers will also be used as exemplars to support developing teachers with observable strong practices. All students, SWDs, ENL Students Ongoing for all staff Ongoing for all staff Administrators, All Teachers All students NTC PD begins in August and runs through out the year. All students, SWDs, ENL Students This will begin during august PD Administrators and All Teachers 2018-19 CEP 36 Teachers in need of support will conduct inter-visitations with to see these practices and will debrief their observations as part of PD time. A particular area of focus will be to have teacher leaders with strong practices for supporting our sub-populations, including ENL students, SWDs, and students in the lowest third, run professional development sessions for how best to support these populations of students during instruction. As per feedback from the 2018 Quality Review, school leaders will continue to utilize cycles of observation, grounded in the Danielson Framework for Teaching, including professional development and peer coaching, to ensure higher order thinking and engaging discussion techniques across classrooms on a school wide basis (Components 3b, 3c). All students This will School Leaders. begin during august PD 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Discussion of school focus for teacher and student development will be shared at SLT meetings for PTA leadership to then share with the PTA. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Per-session will be allocated for summer PD planning to pay teachers for the participation.  Strategic staffing will allow for all teachers to have PD minutes during student lunch periods 3-4 times per week. This will support grade team and departmental planning as well as addition PD minutes built into teacher’s schedules.  Per-session will be allocated for PD planning time for teacher leaders demonstrating Effective and Highly Effective practices in our Danielson focus strands.  Per-session will be allocated to pay Mentors for their PD hours with NTC. Mentors will have have schedule reductions to allow them the necessary time to engage in coaching with new teachers. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Based on a Mid-January review of Advance data for the first half of the school year, we will be expecting to see a 3% increase in average observation ratings of Effective or Highly Effective for Danielson strand 3C. This goal may need to be adjusted if we see a high fall baseline for teacher practice in these areas (i.e. a high fall performance level for a practice would necessitate less overall growth.) Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 2018-19 CEP 37  Advance Data Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 38  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Based on a comprehensive assessment of our school’s academic program, our school’s strengths our Strong Family and Community Ties include: 1. Our 2018 Quality Review identified our High Expectations for Staff, Students, and Families (Quality Review Indicator 3.4) as Well Developed and an area of celebration. 2. According to our school's 2017-2018 School environment Survey, parents positive response rates met or beat the city average for parent-teacher trust and parent-principal trust at 95% and 97% respectively. 3. According to our school's 2017-2018 School environment Survey, in the domains of Strong Families and Community and Trust, our student positive response rates for student-teacher trust was 89%. This dramatically exceeded the district average and city average for student-teacher trust by 10% and 9% respectively. In the 2017-18 School year over 92% of BxPk Families attended one or more CCSS focused learning events (including SLCs, project shares, and academic events). 4. 5. Based on a comprehensive assessment of our school’s academic program, our school’s needs with our Strong Family and Community Ties include: 1. Although our 2018 Quality Review identified our High Expectations for Staff, Students, and Families (Quality Review Indicator 3.4) as an area of a celebration, it was recommended that school leaders provide a robust menu of parent workshops covering a wide range of topics identified by parents through a needs assessment survey. 2. According to responses on our Framework for Great Schools Report, only 82% of our parents gave positive responses for our "parent involvement in school," which is 2% below the city average. 3. During the 2017-2018 school year PTA membership and participation was inconsistent. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Strong Family and Community Ties : During the 2018-2019 school year, the school will increase family usage of use our online communication platforms (Skedula and Class DoJo) as measured by “registered and active users” on each system, by 3%. 2018-19 CEP 39  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Provide Families with Digital Systems Workshops: All Students Trainings All teachers, Parent Coordinator, PTA members sessions will take place during Tuesday afternoon family engagement times and during evening PTA meetings. Office staff, Admin, Teacher Team leaders All Students One call now will be implemented in September. Remind will be rolled out based on team readiness. To increase regular communication with families, and in conjunction with our PTA, BXPK will work with Skedula, iReady, Classroom Dojo, and MyOn to provide to trainings for families. Each system plays a distinct role in our students' learning experience and parents will be able to choose which systems they wish to become experts in. Skedula is our online grade book and anecdotal system and will give families instant access to their students academic data. Classroom Dojo is the tracking system for students' PBIS points which will allow parents to follow how well behaved their students are throughout the day. iReady is our main AIS program and will allow parents to cooperatively learn with their students at home for both literacy and math skills. MyOn is our digital library and will allow parents to engage their students in independent or shared reading at home. Starting in October BxPk will run bi-weekly afternoon trainings on Tuesdays to help families familiarize themselves with these programs. We will also run trainings with the PTA to make sure all PTA members are comfortable using these digital systems with their students. Improve Communication with One Call Now and Remind: To guide mass communication with families school admin have developed a Mass Communication Policy. This policy outlines formats and expectations for communicating with large groups of our families and should ensure efficient and professional communication. While our school consistently backpacks and mails home important announcement for parents, we are aware of the need to get more family contact. We are incorporating two services into our Mass Communication Policy that allow us to increase coverage and contact. One Call Now allows us to send bulk messages to families in the form of automatic phone calls. These calls will be conducted to make announcements and to handle routine notifications like lateness. Remind is a bulk texting system that allows mass text messages to be sent to 2018-19 CEP 40  customizable groups of families. Our team will allow grade team leaders access to this system to send notifications and announcements to the families of their students directly. This will aide teams' ability to engage families. Increase Available Translated Arabic Materials for Families: While Bronx Park Middle School routinely provides materials translated into home native languages and translation during events for Spanish speaking families, our community demographics have been shifting and our translation services need to keep up. To match this demand, Bronx park will add Arabic as a standard translation for school documents being backpacked home and hire Arabic translators for our major student led conference events. All Students, particularly families with native languages other than English Roll-out of translated materials began in August and continues in an ongoing basis. Parent Coordinator, PTA Leadership, Parent Coordinator, PTA Leadership, School leadership Additionally, school leadership will work with our PTA to use their Title I funding to engage Spanish and Arabic translators for their mailings and meetings. This should help to increase the PTA's ability to engage our diverse parent body. Provide Families with Interest Driven Workshops: All Students The survey will be given in Septemeber. Data will be reviewed in October. Workshops will begin in either November or December based on the PTA meeting schedule. As per feedback from our 2017 Central Lead Review and our 2018 Quality Review, in the 2017-2018 school year the school will offer a robust menu of parent workshops covering a wide range of topics identified by parents through a needs assessment survey. Surveys will be provided in a variety of languages, will give parents a menu of topics of interest and ask parents to identify which topics they would be most interested in attending as parent workshops. Based on the result of these surveys, with collaboration between our PTA, parent coordinator, and School leadership, Bronx Park will offer monthly parent workshops targeting one of the most requested topic areas. These workshops will be set up to coincide with PTA meetings and other school wide events, to encourage additional parent participation. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. 2018-19 CEP 41  Digital platform registration and training will take place in September and October. Workshops will be monthly and facilitated in collaboration with the SLT and PTA. In addition, the school partners with Bronx House after school program which offers a wide berth of options for students to partake in. Teachers also have several sports options throughout the year, parents and community members are invited both through flyers, as well as our digital platforms on school run social media accounts such as twitter. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  The school will fund each of the digital systems that support parent engagement (iReady.com, Classroom Dojo, Skedula, Graduation Aliance). The school will also allocate funding for professional developers from these companies to train members of our staff who will then run parent workshops. Funding will be set aside for Arabic and Spanish translation for both oral and written translation. Title III grant money will be used for this category.   The school will set aside funds for Remind and One Call Now. The School will provided professional development to the staff members who operate these systems during regular PD minutes. If necessary Parent Coordinator work hours will be adjusted to allow for regular attendance at PTA meetings.  Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. In January, the school will conduct an internal audit on registered and active users of use our online communication platforms (Skedula and Class DoJo). Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Meeting attendance sheets kept by school administration. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 42  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Level 1 on prior state ELA test, or low reading baseline in Performance Series, or low mastery in ELA on classroom assessments. Level 1 on prior state math test, or low baseline in Performance Series, or low mastery in Math on classroom assessments. Low mastery in Science on classroom assessments. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Socratic Reading using Junior Great Books Curriculum, Reading Support/Conferencing during Independent Reading, Saturday Academy Using MyOn.com, iReady.com, Bronx House HW Help, Guided Questioning w/ classroom instruction, MSQI targetedreadinggroups every dayof theweek. Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Ability level specific AIS class w/ second group instruction, tutoring Targeted Math AIS class, Saturday Academy Using iReady.com, Bronx House HW Help, Guided Questioning w/ classroom instruction, Mathleticstargetedinstructiongroupsonesemesterperyear Small group and tutoring Extra Help Academy, Bronx House HW Help, Guided Questioning w/ classroom instruction When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) During school, after lunch, after-school and on Saturday During school opposite of enrichment classes or AIS reading class, after-school and on Saturday During school, after-school and on Saturday During school, after-school and Small group and tutoring Small group and tutoring Social Studies Low mastery in Social Studies on Extra Help Academy, Bronx House HW Help, Guided Questioning w/ classroom instruction 2018-19 CEP 43 Individual and Group Counseling, Student Mentor Program on Saturday During school hours Small group and 1:1 sessions, peer 1:1 mentoring At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) classroom assessments. Mandated Services, Counseling request from Student, Parent or Teacher, or Recommended as a tier of RTI through an SIT review. 2018-19 CEP 44  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 4 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. In addition to the academic and social programs described in the sections above, we offer our STH population free school materials, free school dress code clothing, support for finding and navigating support services, and priority seating for at risk classes and counseling in the school. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 45  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 CEP 46  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified.  During teacher recruitment, candidates are put through a rigorous multi-stage application process, including review of their credentials to ensure they are a Highly Qualified Teacher.  We will provide professional development opportunities for all teachers focused on deepening their understanding of differentiation of literacy instruction, embedding the Common Core State Standards into our curriculum, understanding text complexity, developing performance tasks and discussion question with higher cognitive demand and academic rigor. The facilitators are our teacher leaders, as well as from our Principal, Assistant Principal, and various teacher leaders.  During several weekly sessions, teachers will receive intensive professional development aimed at aligning all units and lessons to the CCSS and raising student achievement.  Teachers will meet in their Academy Teams and Departments to review student and school data, review student work, implement new best practices and strategies, and engage in inquiry cycles.  Teachers will also receive high-quality feedback from administrators, based on low inference evidence from observations, and aligned to a research-based teaching framework.  We will support and encourage teachers to communicate with parents/guardians via telephone, email, communication through our Online Gradebook system or personal meetings.  Teachers with a track record of strong student outcomes will take on an additional class of students to support their learning in all subjects, while reducing class size overall.  Teachers with abilities for developing student social and emotion skills will be partially assigned to our Reflection Center to work with students in crisis.  To support teachers becoming Highly Qualified, Bronx Park will support teachers application to addition graduate school course work with recommendations and financial support when applicable. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). ● During the summer new teachers participate in a week long Curriculum PD program focused on learning high quality UBD unit planning. All teachers then participate in 4 additional curriculum retreats through the year. 2018-19 CEP 47  ● During the summer all teacher participate in a week long environment and instruction PD program focused on effective teacher practice in domains 2 and 3 of the Danielson Rubric. ● All teachers participate in 335 minutes of weekly PD sessions focused on instruction and CCSS aligned practices. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Four different teams take a role in helping to make decisions regarding assessment and improving instruction 1) The Student Promotion Committee, comprised of multiple teachers and administrators selected by the Principal, considers multiple indicators of progress toward mastery of CCSS. These individuals consider a wide range of possible indicators and then refine the list into 4 concrete measures to be used for promotional decisions in May and June. 2) The Measures of Student Learning Committee, comprised of teachers selected in collaboration between the Principal and the UFT chapter leader, review prior student achievement and progress on MOSL exams, options for subsequent MOSL exams, and consider school wide goals based on prior year student achievement data. They then make recommendations for MOSL selections that will best support students and teachers in meeting school wide goals for student achievement. 2018-19 CEP 48  3) The Instructional Leadership Team, comprised of teachers selected in collaboration between the Principal and the UFT chapter leader, will review school wide data and goals for student achievement. They then make recommendations for teacher professional development related to pedagogy and curriculum and programs and initiative selection that will support student achievement. 4) The School Leadership Team, comprised of the Principal, UFT chapter leader, and elected staff members and parents, reviews school wide to determine effectiveness and shape the direction of school policy and development. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) Sections 4 & 5 Sections 4 & 5 Sections 4 & 5 Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 337,912.00 0 12,366.00 0 3,315,696.00 X x X 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used 2018-19 CEP 49  conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 50  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent Involvement Policy Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Bronx Park Middle School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students Bronx Park Middle School (11X556) will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level in literacy and math. This will include providing access to outside resources and tools such as 2018-19 CEP 51  ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children through monthly ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress through conferences, parent engagement time, and ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff to improve outreach school culture and instructional needs for the members of the school community. Parental Involvement and School Quality In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent-Teacher Association , as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office. The Bronx Park Parent Coordinator is Madge Anderson; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g.,ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 2018-19 CEP 52  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events, such as the Welcome Dinner, the Project Share and PRIDE days; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing regular syllabi and PRIDE point Reports for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand School-Parent Compact School-Parent Compact (SPC) Bronx Park Middle School (11x556) , iin compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: 2018-19 CEP 53  ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards using Universal Backward Design process; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences three times a year (Student Led Conferences) during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; 2018-19 CEP 54  ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences, Student Led Conferences, Welcome Dinner, PRIDE Trip Days, Thanksgiving Dinner, Coffee with the Principal and more; Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; Parent/Guardian Responsibilities: II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; 2018-19 CEP 55  ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; III. Student Responsibilities Student Responsibilities: ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 56  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP 57  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: Rationale: Upon close data analysis of our ELL students that indicates that most of our diverse ELLs read from 1 to 6 years below grade level, and their speaking and writing skills require additional and targeted opportunities for practicing academic language contextualized through subject area content, we decided that our Title III program will address these academic areas of need of our individual ELL students who scored at Entering, Emerging and Transitioning levels of proficiency on the most recent NYSESLAT, Additional data that we considered is the students' reading levels according to running records (Fountas and Pinnell), as well as their literacy and math skills as indicated by their performance on the ELA and Math standardized tests. Coincidentally among the targeted group of students for the Title III are the newcomers, SIFE and long-term ELLs as well. The program will focus on language and literacy acquisition through the study of thematic units that elucidate the content and literary concepts introduced in the ELA and Math classes. The co-teaching approach allows for an extended and more comprehensive study of the given unit's Learning Targets and Essential Questions. This means that the ENL providers will spend time closely studying the ELA and Math curriculum units, and identifying individual student's areas of strength and areas for growth as the instructional leverage points. Schedule and duration: The Title III program will be offered after-school on Wednesdays from 3:00 to 6:00 PM and/or Saturdays from 9:00 to 12:00 PM to accommodate the ELL students who might participate in other enrichment programs. The Title III program will run then twice per week (6 hrs.), on Wednesdays and Saturdays, from early October 2018 to late March 2019. Language of Instruction: Since our Entering, Emerging and Transitioning students' home languages vary, the language of instruction will be English, with some supports in Spanish for the Spanish-speaking students who need that scaffold. The students will learn and practice reading and discussion techniques that help them identify what the literary and math texts say explicitly and determine what they mean, as they read them in partnership, in teacher-led small groups and whole class settings. During the speaking-centered activities students will use knowledge of the text and key academic vocabulary, phrases and clauses to show and clarify the relationships among math concepts, and claim(s), counterclaims, reasons and evidence, when discussing informational texts that they read. During the writing-centered activities, the students will use word banks and the previously completed graphic organizers to develop a short essay that uses and maintains a formal style to introduce, conclude and support claims with relevant reasoning and evidence. The four teachers, who will deliver instruction, will employ authentic assessments that require sophisticated uses of language embedded in rich and rigorous content. The students will monitor their progress by using analytical rubrics that provide them with guidance on content knowledge and language development. compliment 2018-19 CEP 58  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information # and Types of Certified Teachers: Ms. Stack, Ms. Garrett and Ms. Sonneborne, the three TESOL certified teachers, and Ms. Ahmad, a middle-school Math certified teacher who is in the process of receiving her TESOL extension, will provide 22 weeks, 6 hrs. per week, of instruction in the Title III program from early October 2018 to late March 2019. The school will compliment the cost of the program using other funding sources. All student records and attendance will be kept on file. Materials: Students will read informational texts that address the Enduring Understandings, Learning Targets, and Essential Questions of the thematic units in ELA and Math. Each lesson will introduce a content and a language objectives that will allow the students to bring forth their prior knowledge about the literary and math topics/concepts. The teachers will utilize Reading A to Z, Readworks, Reading Rockets: English Language Learners and NewsELA, four online reading sources that provide texts in a variety of genres at different lexical levels, for independent, guided and shared reading activities with the students. Some of the aforementioned programs/websites offer texts in languages other than English as well. The students will have access to either a class-set of laptops or a computer lab as needed. Similarly, the math content will be taught through hands-on activities utilizing visuals, graphs, manipulatives, and online resources. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: The professional development for the Title III teachers will provide planning needed to precede learner-centered instruction as well as follow up opportunities after in-house PD sessions that are scheduled weekly on current topics of instruction in the content areas as well as every five to six weeks for curriculum unit planning retreats on Fridays after school and on Saturdays. The PDs will include current research-based literature, media and technological resources that expand the teachers' knowledge and enhance their ability to gain further knowledge. The weekly calendar of PDs is shared electronically with the staff at BXPK Middle School. The sessions are facilitated by the Principal, Assistant Principal, Grade-Level Team Leaders, Subject Area Lead Teachers, and outside consultants. All sessions will be provided at no cost to the Title III program. All records such as attendance and agendas will be kept on file. 2018-19 CEP 59  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Rationale: There is a steady growth in ELL population at BXPK Middle School that is linguistically and culturally diverse. In order for us to cultivate culturally diverse community that values backgrounds and experiences of all students our staff and students contribute to the BXPK Monthly Event Calendar that highlights all students’ academic and extracurricular achievements. Since the objectives of the Title III program address the acquisition of content knowledge, ELA and Math, as well as language development through mastering the skills in speaking, listening, reading and writing, we would invite the parents of our Entering, Emerging and Transitioning ELLs to be our after-school and Saturday sessions on roll-in/ on-going basis so they, too, can take part in reading instruction alongside their child and celebrating publishing of their child's academic writing. Research shows that these type of events produce motivation and support networks for all parties involved, the students, parents and the teachers. Schedule and Duration: Wednesdays after-school and Saturday mornings 9-12, from October, 2018, to March, 2019, on roll-in basis as the individual parents are available. Topics to Be Covered: The parents will learn how to support their child in developing their study habits by systematic check-ins, reading together (sharing a book), which technology supports both content and language development, supporting their child by discussing cultural differences between their country of birth and the United Sates of America, conducting discussions on the benefits of maintaining their home language--both oral as well as literacy, discussing what it means to be an adolescent in a new country/school, discussing different models of language instruction, etc... Name of Provider: Madge Anderson, our Parent Coordinator, and our three TESOL certified teachers-- Deborah Stack, Mary Garrett, Stephanie Sonneborne, and one Math teacher who is in the process of working on her TESOL extension, Renee Ahmad, in collaboration with the school staff, will coordinate the events for the ELL parents. How Parents Will Be Notified of These Activities: The parents will be sent letters informing them of their child eligibility to participate in the Title III program. The letter will highlight the purpose/objectives of the program along with the benefits. While the Title III is underway, the parents will be invited periodically to attend the interactive sessions so that they can be abreast their child's progress. Most of the mailings will be bag-packed for the students to take home, and each mailing will be followed by both pre-recorded phone-messenger as well as the individualized phone calls delivered by the Title III teachers and the Parent Coordinator. All communication with parents as well as workshop sessions will be conducted in the parents preferred language whenever possible. All records will be kept on file. 2018-19 CEP 60 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. NA Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) NA  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA 2018-19 CEP 61  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 11 School Name Bronx Park Middle School Borough Bronx School Number 556 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Renee Rinaldi Coach Davina Ruiz ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Mary Garrett Teacher/Subject Area Deborah Stack/ENL Teacher/Subject Area Chris Mitariten/SS Related-Service Provider Regina Arone Superintendent Meisha Ross-Porter Assistant Principal Phil Hammack Coach School Counselor Mark Walters Parent Erika Genao Parent Coordinator Madge Anderson Field Support Center Staff Member Wladimir Pierre Other (Name and Title) C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 3 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 403 2018-19 CEP 62 Total number of ELLs 80 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 19.85%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 3 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 K 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 4 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 6 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? 1. At Bronx Park Middle School one in every 5 students has a status of a current ELL (nearly 20% of the total enrollment—total enrollment 403 students and currently 80 ELLs). This ratio has remained steady since the inception of Bronx Park Middle School which is in the beginning of its fifth academic year now. The quantitative and qualitative data on our ELLs defines a very diverse group of students. There are currently 13 different languages on the record that the BXPK ELLs speak at home. One third of all ELLs at BXPK are students with interrupted formal education (SIFE), where in some cases, as the NYSITELL, SIFE survey questionnaire, the state MLS, the Spanish LAB (where appropriate), Fountas and Pinnell along with teacher-created assessments indicate that this particular group of students possesses very limited, or no formal literacy in their home language, and their language and academic content acquisition is delayed by up to 6 years. We are also planning on using the new state exam, the MLS next year to test students literacy in their native language. Approximately, 12% of all ELLs at BXPK are students with disabilities placed in either ICT or self-contained classes, and/or receiving related services such 2018-19 CEP 63  as SETTS or speech as per their IEPs. Almost two-thirds of the ELLs at BXPK are considered “Newcomers,” they have been receiving the ELL services for less than 3 years. Additionally, one in every 5 ELLs is considered a “Long-Term ELL”, students who belong in this group have been receiving ELL services for 7 or more years. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Our ELL Coordinator works with the grade level content area teachers to make sure students are tested in a timely manner and that the results are shared with all teachers that come in contact with that student. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? At BXPK Middle School we evaluate the success of our programs for ELLs by monitoring annual increases in the number and percentage of ELL students making progress in attaining English language proficiency as it is reflected in the school summative state test data. Additionally, we monitor Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in English language arts and mathematics for ELL students. We address the educational needs of ELL students by engaging in review and analysis of student performance and provide training to teacher teams on how to use this data to make informed decisions that lead to higher academic achievement for ELLs. Our professional development calendar offers high quality professional development to teacher teams on effective, Common Core-aligned instructional practices that address the academic and linguistic needs of ELLs on the last Monday of every month. We provide a rich calendar of family engagement activities to increase parent involvement that highlight individual student progress during three annual Student-Led Conferences, trainings for the families on how to access Skedula, our on-line data base grading system, workshops on how to assist ELLs with homework as well as regularly scheduled events that provide information on the BXPK curricula and foster multiculturalism. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? We have a Saturday Academy in place that meets for 2 hours weekly. We focus on literacy and math skills, two areas that we have found from our summative assessments that our ELLs tend to be lacking in. We also have targeted small group reading and math classes called Flow Reading or Flow Math Monday through Friday. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] The question is not applicable since we are a 6-8 middle school but we do provide academic interventions for at-risk ELLs like specialized reading classes, small pull-out sections for content areas, a reflection center, prove-it stations where students can practice skills and standards all while providing high quality evidence-based instruction for all students. To create some of these interventions we used the results of the DRP to make reading groups that range in skill level from phonics to independent book circles. In the reflection center we provide reflection sheets in the home language of the student and conflict mediation with interpreters. We have both ENL and content area teachers providing small group instruction for at-risk ELLs. We also have small group single gendered advisory groups that allow for students to get and provide feedback on academic endeavors. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. We use the NYSESLAT scores from the RLAT, State ELA, and Math exams to evaluate our programs. We also look at the risk indicators for student on ELL Data Analysis tool and use that to plan student programming and interventions. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? We change the scheduling of the ENL teachers depending on the needs of the students annually. At the beginning of the school year the ELL Coordinator meets with each teacher that has ELLs in her or his class and gives them a summary of her or his students NYSESLAT scores and explains what they mean. The ELL Coordinator also maintains a google doc that is shared 2018-19 CEP 64  with all teachers that has the current level of all ELLs and is updated with each new student. The google doc also contains explanations of what each level means and performance indicators. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. 1. Upon completing the ELL identification process the current and former ELL students are placed in the “03” classes at each grade level (eg. 603, 703 and 803) to receive their mandated minutes under CR Part 154 along with non-ELL peers. If an ELL student has an IEP that student is placed in either the “01” class at each grade level that are the ICT sections or one of the SpEd Self-Contained classes “80” sections that provide specialized services for ELLs with disabilities. Additionally, the ELLs whose IEPs indicate mandates for other related services receive SETSS and/or speech through a pull-out format. All homerooms where ELLs are placed have students grouped heterogeneously as per their language proficiency levels, and in the case of the “01” homerooms as well as the “80” homerooms, the ELLs might be integrated in class with other students who are non-ELLs. BXPK vision emphasizes high expectations for ELL student achievement supported by a purposeful plan of action leading to post-secondary options, including college; therefore, providing the ELLs who show readiness with opportunities to interact with their peers who are native speakers of English while continuously monitoring the ELLs’ progress through periodic ELL data analysis, and systematically adjusting instructional/learning targets based on a wide variety of evidence and data, proves to accelerate academic and language acquisition especially for the ELLs at the “Transitioning,” “Expanding” and the “Commanding” proficiency levels. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Bronx Park Middle School ensures the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels by providing standalone ENL, co-taught content area classes, and having a dual certified teacher. All students receive a specified amount of standalone ENL and integrated ENL to develop English language skills so that students can succeed in core content courses. The standalone ENL is delivered by a certified ESL teacher. The Integrated ENL instruction is delivered by co-teaching team—by an ENL teacher and content area teacher. The Entering, Emerging English Language Learners receive more than 2 units (360 minutes) of study per week through daily 60-minute long standalone ENL courses (Monday through Friday) as well as 45-minute long Integrated ENL courses, either Flow Reading or Flow Math (Monday through Thursday). The Transitioning ELLs’ programming reflects that of the Emerging ELLs, that is they receive 300 minutes of standalone ENL plus 180 minutes integrated ENL through either Flow Reading or Flow Math. Both, the Expanding and the Commanding ELLs are placed in the “03” homerooms (603, 703, 803 respectively) where they receive the mandated 1 unit of study per week (180 minutes) from a certified ESL teacher during the Flow Reading or Flow Math. All information is entered into STARS. 2018-19 CEP 65  3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. All teachers who service the ELLs and school leadership know their ELL population and their individual needs well. At the beginning of the year the content area teachers meet with the ELL Coordinator to discuss their students using information from previous teachers and NYSESLAT data. Progress reports are provided to students and their parents in biweekly cycles that show individual student growth in all core subjects (via Skedula reports). Furthermore, school organization and structure is maximized for ample collaboration and planning time among teachers, school leadership, and all stakeholders. The ELLs are grouped in heterogeneous, mixed proficiency-levels classes at each grade level for push-in and collaborative-teaching instruction as well as pull-out instruction (standalone ENL) for targeted instruction to specific proficiency subgroups (Entering, Emergent and Transitioning). The teachers who service ELLs support and learn from each other in a way that recognizes the interdependency of language proficiency and content instruction (ELA/ESL, Flow Reading, Flow Math, accelerated beginners instruction, and self-contained Special Ed instruction--where appropriate). Language development and academic concepts and skills are addressed through the instructional models across the core subjects. In this manner our school leadership is able to make connections between the Children First concept of accountability for ELL outcomes and key instructional initiatives. Teachers use google translate, glossaries, native language supports, duolingo, program, visuals, repetition, grouping, and other supports within the classroom. We do have a few bilingual teachers that provide supports in student’s native language as well. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? For the 2017-2018 school year and beyond we plan on using the MLS (Multilingual Literacy Screener) for newcomer ELLs who are not Spanish speaking to evaluate their current literacy level in their L1 as suggested by DELISS and CUNY since the exam has a literacy checking function. We will use the Spanish Lab to evaluate newly identified Spanish speaking ELLs and translated state exams. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status At BXPK Middle School we differentiate instruction for all students who require academic intervention, are considered at-risk, have disabilities, or belong to one of the ELL subgroups. Our SIFE students who comprise one-third of our ELL population as well as our Newcomers receive a maximum number of service minutes through stand-alone ENL and Flow Reading that totals in 480 minutes of instruction per week by a certified ENL teacher. Their instruction/learning emphasizes both literacy as well as academic content area development using both the BICS and CALLA approaches as well as paying close attention to each individual student’s learning style through the lenses of the multiple intelligences. The SIFE, Newcomer, Developing, Long Term ELLs find supportive classroom environment in every classroom where they receive instruction in our school, but specifically, in two our ENL classrooms solely dedicated to the stand-alone ENL where the environment is print-rich with many visuals, reference charts relating to the current themes and concepts addressed in the units of study are posted and systematically updated. There is a logical organization to the lay-out of each classroom as outlined by a detailed school-wide policy on classroom environment where among other features seating charts reflect either heterogeneous or homogeneous student grouping for collaborative or guided team work. Students are aware and self-directed as per in-class portfolio system, in-class notebooks and supplies for station/centers work. Each area of the room is marked by diagrams, graphic organizers, utilizes realia—authentic objects. The ELLs have opportunity to participate in lessons that are clearly structured using the GANAG framework, our inquiry model lesson format developed by Jane Pollock. This calls for multi-phase inquiry lessons including a goal statement, and activation of prior knowledge, a new information phase, an application phase, and finally a generalizing phase. The connections to Danielson’s framework and Pollock’s teaching model are easy to make. G: In the goal phase a clear and rigorous goal should be stated and linked to the bigger learning of the unit. This goal should also preview the rigorous thinking that students will have to be able to perform later in the unit. This linking should involve connections with 2018-19 CEP 66  unit’s transfer goals, learning targets, enduring understandings, and/or essential questions. A: During the activation of prior knowledge, a check of understanding should be done that is accessible to students current knowledge and skill level and that also previews the core or “crux” thinking of the lesson. There is an expectation of pair and whole class discussion during this time to allow for student processing and for formative assessment. N: During the new information phase, students should explore new information with the support of teacher modeling and questioning and organizing these ideas through note-making strategies. These strategies should include multi-modal note development to help all learners to process the ideas being presented. This phase should also include some guided practice and questioning to help the teacher check for understanding and determine additional scaffolds for application time. A: The application phase should be where the new skills and knowledge are applied to strategic thinking and reasoning tasks. Across classrooms, students should be expected to collaborate with peers through discussion and experimentation, close read and annotate their thinking, use argumentative thinking and reasoning, and critically apply the ideas and skill from the new information phase to authentic and/or novel contexts. G: During the generalizing phase, students should answer some summative questions about the learning of the day in the formats of mastery tasks, generalized class discussion using the larger concepts of the unit, or through student naming of takeaways from the lesson. Across the vast majority of classrooms, teachers’ assessment practices consistently reflect the varied use of ongoing checks for understanding and student self-assessment so that teachers make effective adjustments to meet all students’ learning needs and students are aware of their next learning steps. Outside of the specific structure of our classes and classroom we provide other differentiated interventions for ELLs including targeting reading groups for Former-ELLs and Long-Term ELLs, small group skill assessment and development for SIFE, and specific classes and an adapted curriculum for Newcomer and Developing ELLs. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? The teachers of ELL-SWDs look closely at a range of student biographical, assessment data, samples of student work, classroom anecdotals and IEPs to inform their instructional steps. ELLs with disabilities are carefully placed in the least restrictive instructional/learning environment, as it is dictated by their IEPs. This could include self-contained class for one or two core subjects and then they are mainstreamed for other subjects, ICT classrooms with the support of a paraprofessional, or related services such as SETSS and Speech. The materials chosen for support of individual student goals are based on their proficiency levels in literacy as well as their math performance data. The texts that the students use across content areas match or are slightly above their comprehension level. The classroom teacher and/or paraprofessional provide a wide range of scaffolds to enable the student access to those materials. The ELLs-SWDs are surveyed for their preferred/default learning modality as delineated by Howard Gardner so that the ENL and content area teachers find access points with each individual student to their prior knowledge in order to expand their learning, thinking, and development of skills in listening, reading, speaking, and writing. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? The ELLs-SWDs achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment as a result of teacher team collaborations, and the development of curricula across all core subjects that emphasize differentiated instruction by delivery of content, student materials, student grouping, and student product. We use scheduling-flexibility also to allow our ELLs-SWD to receive instruction from our ENL teachers in a smaller setting. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. ELLs obtain targeted intervention programs through what we call at Bronx Park, Flow Reading and Flow Math. Both of these courses are delivered daily, Monday through Thursday, through a licensed ENL teacher and an content area teacher. All English Language Learners participate in Flow Reading whereas those most at risk of not meeting grade level standards in Math are programmed to participate in Flow Math. Additionally, an ENL-certified peer coach provides supports to the Math content area teachers through collaborations on curriculum design and timely feedback on lesson plans and development of learning targets appropriate for ELLs in that content area. 2018-19 CEP 67  9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Significant improvements are being implemented to the work of teacher teams (Academies, departments, and grade-level teams) at Bronx Park Middle School where the adults engage in structured professional collaborations using an inquiry approach that promotes shared leadership, and focuses on improved student learning. Additionally, the newly created positions of Department Facilitators and Peer Coaches deliver supports to the teachers through collaborative planning sessions, cycles of professional development addressing the needs of ELLs and ELL-SWDs. The Peer Coaches will work on supporting the development of individual teachers’ goals as identified through peer intervisitations, analyzing student data, looking at student work and measuring our practices against the Danielson Framework for Teaching as a guide for professional improvement that will have a positive influence on student achievement. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? At this time, we do not plan to discontinue any services for the ELLs. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. Our ELLs are afforded equal access to all school programs that include (SGI) small group instruction tutorials before and after school, Title III enrichment programs ran throughout the year and over the summer as well as on Saturdays (Saturday Academy), courses offered through partnerships with community-based organizations such as Bronx House. Through all the programs mentioned here our ELLs are provided small group instruction in the core subjects, homework assistance, and a myriad of enrichment programs in the fine arts, music, intramural sports, culinary arts, STEM program that features robotics and computer science. The ELLs are an integral part of the diverse fabric of our school community. Through strategically designing supplemental programs for ELLs and ELL-SWDs that complement our academic day programs, we intend to close the achievement gap for all students including those for ELLs and SWDs. Our mission is promoting access to college and career readiness through mentoring our students as well as supporting accountable collaborations among faculty so that groups of teachers hold themselves accountable for their students’ progress. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. A wide range of instructional materials, including technology, are used to support English language and content knowledge development for ELLs. Our school has two computer labs that were assembled in the past two years, both give the students access to the internet as a research/reference tool. Individual language accounts on Duolingo and RosettaStone allow students to learn a foreign language or learn English in their native language. Additionally, two computer carts with class-sets of laptops as well as a class-set of iPads are available for use in any classroom for teaching and learning. Our own Bronx Park Middle School library has been expanding over the last three years along with smaller versions of thematically-based classroom libraries for the ELLs and ELL-SWDs. All teachers were assigned a MacBook for planning and delivering instruction as all our lessons are presented to students using the GANAG format (described in #6 under ELL Programing) where each component of the lesson is shown through Power Point slides in every classroom across all content areas. The ENL and content area teachers use video as a medium where students see and hear language in a variety of contexts, with a variety of purposes. Teachers contextualize language and content concepts through a wealth of visuals, manipulatives and realia that bring to life math, science and ideas in social studies through hands-on activities. Project-based learning offers students opportunities for building deeper understanding about content concepts, and it explains an individual learner’s preferred or well-practiced learning style. In other words, the learner has a preference, inclination, skills, vision for completing an academic task in a certain manner that is guided by the multiple intelligences as researched by Howard Gardner. This information serves our teachers as entry points for adapting our instruction to accommodate different types of learning styles; may it be spatial/kinesthetic, logical/mathematical etc.. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Home language support is delivered to the ELLs in different ratios of scaffolding depending on demonstrated need that we determine by reviewing a range of criteria, such as: the English proficiency level of the individual ELL, the student’s literacy in their home language, availability of staff who is both fluent and qualified to deliver academic supports in the home language of the ELL student, student grouping where students of the same home language background are engaged in inquiry projects in 2018-19 CEP 68  collaborative teams, technology applications that serve as instantaneous translators (“Say, Hi!”), and reading materials and assessments either available through the DOE or teacher-created. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. All required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and are grade-level appropriate. The ELLs are grouped by proficiency levels on either the NYSITELL (for the new admits) or the NYSESLAT for those continuously eligible to receive the services. Although some courses have age/grade-mixed groups (6-7-8 Entering ENL bridge class) the instruction delivery, the materials (texts are high-interest/low readability and are thematically aligned to the grade-level scope and sequence topics). The ELL Department at our school, systematically reviews individual student data for setting the ELL specific learning targets that we then consider and incorporate in the next steps of our plan for instructional practices. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Although we do share a single building with two other schools we have most of our own resources to meet the needs of our ELLs. We have our own ENL team, strong content area teachers, social worker, parent coordinator, guidance counselor, comfort dog, and native language library. The resources we do share, gym, cafeteria, playground, and auditorium are scheduled according to use and time is fairly distributed between the three schools. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). BXPK acclimates newly enrolled ELLs via activities offered during the student orientation week that takes place in August before the official DOE school opening. The ELLs and their parents are offered regularly scheduled events where they experience first hand the motto of BXPK-- “Flow. Growth. Purpose.” Flow: Being within the ideal learning experience, wherein enjoyment and inquiry are guided by a clear goal and immediate feedback, and which result in significant growth. Growth: Measureable improvement toward our goals. Purpose: The commitment to reason for taking action, be it a personal calling, a passion, or a goal. Bronx Park teaches our core PRIDE values where all school members and stakeholders are asked to exemplify. Through these shared values students learn our standards for conduct and our ideals for a more socially conscious society. Our values have been gathered from around the skills necessary for an individual to put him or herself into Flow as described by Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi in his landmark work Flow: The Psychology of Optimal Experience. Second, the values have been aligned to the work of Dr. Greene in Lost At School as they related to the social and emotional skills necessary for a person to be successful in an academic environment. Moreover, a rich monthly calendar published by our school pupil secretary, parent coordinator, school counselors, deans, teachers and administrators delivers a varied menu of options for taking active part in our cultural and community-building events. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? At this time, Spanish language is offered to all students, including the ELLs, as an elective (there are 13 different languages spoken by our ELLs at home of which Spanish speakers comprise 120 students), both Duolingo and RosettaStone offer supplemental language courses in 10 different languages. Students and teachers are encouraged to open an on-line language account to learn a foreign language at their individual pace. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? 20. At this time Bronx Park Middle School does not offer a dual language program as the parents select ENL (formerly ESL) program as their first choice on the survey. 2018-19 CEP 69  Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Professional development events on the BXPK Calendar for all teachers and non-pedagogic staff who support ELLs at BXPK will be delivered by the ENL (ESL Certified) teachers and SpEd teachers in collaborations. The Principal and the Assistant Principal discuss Professional development plan with individual teachers using the Danielson Framework for Teaching as a reference to set goals. All ENL teachers and those supporting ELLs work on delivering the mission of BXPK through affiliations with different teams of colleagues who serve as a system of differentiated supports. Each team works on tasks that problem-solve and improve school-wide, team and individual’s performance. BXPK offers 5 PD Session Types that support all teachers who work with ELLs and ELL-SWDs. Each teacher learning community models practices, behaviors, expectations that with mentoring and coaching translate into practice and improve routine procedures across the school. The five types of PDs on our calendar are: i. Staff Meeting that addresses topics on professional practices in reference to Danielson’s Framework for Teaching. Furthermore the purpose of Staff Meetings is to discuss broad issues of school operation, cultural, and achievement. The issues pertaining the pedagogy for ELLs that addresses acclimating the Newcomers, highlighting multiculturalism as part of building our school culture and analyzing ELL data to identify trends of improvement as well as identify leverage/entry points for supporting growth. These sessions are planned and facilitated by the principal and the assistant principal. The second type of PD is Curriculum Planning where the purpose of the workshops is to model best practices and strategies for effective curriculum planning, classroom culture, and classroom instruction. The curriculum planning retreats are facilitated by administrators, external coaches, or teacher leaders. The third type of PDs are Grade Team/Academy Meetings with teachers and non-pedagogic staff review and troubleshoot effective implementation of school wide cultural and instructional initiatives at the academy level and to support pressing student needs. Academy Leaders facilitate these weekly meetings. Our Department Meetings (ELL &SpEd, ELA, Math, Social Studies and Science) are dedicated to reviewing data and troubleshooting effective implementation of instructional initiatives at the departmental level & to supporting pressing student needs. The fifth type of PDs at BXPK serve as one-on-one or small group mentoring and coaching where individual teachers participate in cycles of action research trying different instructional approaches and strategies to reach all learners and improve their academic achievement. All meetings will have sign-in sheets that are stored in a binder in the main office. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. In addition to the professional development supports described in #2 (above), our staff meets regularly to unpack the CCSS and how they are reflected in the work of our ELLs. This process allows all teachers to see language, literacy and content progressions that are expected at each grade level and across all content areas. BXPK meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2 where 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual and ENL teachers are provided with ELL-specific professional development. The ELL-specific PD topics are attended to at all 5 types of PDs described in #2. Furthermore, monthly all staff PD on last Monday of every month is solely dedicated to ELL topics. All facilitators, that includes the Principal, Assistant Principal, Academy Leaders, Department Facilitators, Peer Coaches/Mentors and outside presenters provide agendas and collect attendance from all participants at every session; these documents are collected and stored by the administrators (hard copies) as well as they live in Google Documents that are shared with all participants and the administration. 2018-19 CEP 70  Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? BXPK provides several opportunities for individual meetings with parents of ELLs that are a permanent feature of our school calendar that is both sent to our ELLs’ homes as well as it is posted on our website. Some of the events for the ELL families occurring regularly every year are the initial interview after enrollment (outside of the mandated initial conference), parent/student orientation the week before the formal opening of the DOE schools, three Student-Led Conferences, Curriculum Night and Welcoming Dinner. Individual one-on-one meetings are scheduled as per family’s needs ie on the phone or in person. Records of those meetings are kept in a binder in the ENL Coordinator's room. We also offer a weekly parent class either on Wednesday evenings or Saturday mornings that has a variety of topics. For parent's who prefer interpretation we will employ The Big Word for on-site interpretation and the language line for less formal occasions. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. BXPKMS highly values parent and community involvement, and we have taken steps to ensure that both are a part of the school’s culture starting with the ELL identification process, program selection and placement, periodic student progress notifications, social and cultural events organized by our principal, parent coordinator, staff and the School Leadership Team. ELL parent involvement at BXPK involves interviews at enrollment when the parents are assisted in completing the HLIS form and are informed about the three programs for ELLs in the NYC DOE, Curriculum Night--where the teachers share the highlights from the curriculum units taught and the parents have an opportunity to ask questions about our program and practices. The presentations are followed by a welcoming dinner for the parents and teachers. Weekly “Coffee with the Principal” allows parents to inquire about their child’s progress, hear about BXPK school-wide initiatives, and network with other families of ELLs. It is the BXPK practice to ask teachers to make at least 4-5 positive phone calls to parents each week, which are logged. Our “3Fs”-- Food, Families and Fun provide for frequent, at least once monthly, events where the parents participate in class and school-wide celebrations organized by administration, Parent Coordinator, individual Teacher Advisors, Deans and Counselors. These multicultural events include class field trips that take place every six weeks as a culminating activity as a conclusion of each thematic unit cycle. The ELL students participate in grade-wide trips to Barnes & Noble Booksellers, apple-picking at a farm, visits to the New York City landmarks and museums, an overnight camping trip, school talent shows (twice per year), Broadway shows, tickets to the baseball games of the NYC local teams, and many more. All events are provided free of charge to the families. Each year an ELL family representative is offered a seat on the BXPK School Leadership Team. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. The Bronx Park Mission, Vision and Core Values invite all families to take part in collaborating and strengthening the Bronx Park Student Mission that states: “ We are on the path to finding our life’s work and passion. We hear our community, country, and planet calling us to solve the problems that face them. Through professionalism, reflection, innovation, determination and empathy we are becoming the people who solve these problems. At Bronx Park Middle School we put our learning to work.” We hold the Bronx Park staff accountable to upholding our values through a promise: “Every day we will provide our students with a safe, personalized, and inspirational space so that they can bring their best self to work, think deeply about themselves and their challenges, think creatively about their choices and solutions, learn about each other as individuals, and never give up.” 2018-19 CEP 71  2018-19 CEP 72 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Renee Rinaldi , testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 73  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Bronx Park Middle School School DBN: 11X556 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Renee Rinaldi Title Principal Phil Hammack Assistant Principal Madge Anderson Parent Coordinator Mary Garrett ENL/Bilingual Teacher Erika Genao Parent Deborah Stack/ENL Teacher/Subject Area Chris Mitariten/SS Teacher/Subject Area Davina Ruiz Coach Coach Mark Walters School Counselor Meisha Ross-Porter Wladimir Pierre Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 2018-19 CEP 74  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 11x556 School Name: Bronx Park Middle School Superintendent: JeremyKabinoff The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Mary Phil Garrett ENL Teacher/ELL Coordinator Yes - 10/24/2016 Hammack Assistant Principal No Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Bronx Park Middle School (11X556) situated in the Pelham Parkway part of the Bronx, has 20% English Language Learner students currently on the rosters, and the number of students who speak language other than English at home is approximately 50%. Upon enrolling at BXPKMS the ENL provider advises the parents on submitting the HLIS form as well as they deliver an informational workshop on the available ELL program models in the NYC DOE. The HLIS forms inform the BXPKMS of the ELL student and his/her family's home language. We also give a multilingual survey (oral and written) to parents at our Annual start of year Family Dinner on what language they prefer communication in. We also cull data from the RHLA report on ATS that includes data from non-ELL students. For any students that have information missing from the survey or RHLA report we use Student Emergency Contact cards. According to this survey and report there are 10 languages other than English spoken at 2018-19 CEP 75  homes of our students, and they include Albanian, Arabic, Bengali, French , Italian, Russian, Spanish, Urdu, and Khmer. The hard-copies of our communications with our families of ELLs are translated in-house, and outsourced to either the Office of Translation and Interpretation or to an independent translation/interpretation service agency. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Amharic Albanian Arabic Bengali Chinese French Italian English Oneida Russian Spanish Urdu Vietnamese Wolof 2 7 26 4 2 4 2 325 0 1 160 3 1 1 .37 1.3 4.83 .74 .37 .74 .37 60.41 0 .19 29.74 .56 .19 .19 2 7 24 4 0 3 2 328 1 0 163 3 1 0 .37 1.3 4.46 .74 0 .56 .37 60.97 0 0 30.3 .56 .19 0 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. 2018-19 CEP 76  Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Annual Welcome Letter/Family Dinner September ELL Notification Letters September Title III Saturday Academy October/November Student-Led Conferences As per the DOE calendar NYSESLAT notification letters March Monthly Calendar IEP Docuements Monthly As needed Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Document are submitted to Translation and Interpretation Unit over a month in advance Pre-translated letters are pulled from NYSED and previous DOE Vendor translations Permission Slips/Letters are pre-translated from previous years. We change the dates. Letters are pulled from the Translation and Interpretation Unit's Intranet and we will use Language Line to read other important documents to parents Pre-translated letters are pulled from NYSED and previous DOE Vendor translations In-house translation We use a DOE approved vendor and in-house translation as needed 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to 6th grade parent Orientation September Annual Family Dinner/Curriculum Night September provide interpretation service(s)? On-site interpretation from staff in high frequency languages Phone interpretation for low frequency languages. Written materials are already translated from previous years On-site interpretation from staff in high frequency languages Phone interpretation for low frequency languages 2018-19 CEP 77  Student-Led Conferences (Parent-Teacher Conferences) As per the DOE Calendar ELL Parent Night April On-site interpretation from staff in high frequency languages. External hired interpreters though the a DOE vendor that provides translations and interpretations for additional help. Phone interpretation for low frequency languages On-site interpretation from staff in high frequency languages. External hired interpreters though a DOE vendor that provides translations and interpretations for additional help. Phone interpretation for low frequency languages 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. We have many staff members that speak the home language of parents that prefer a language other than English that work in our main office. We also have cards in the front office that have the language line info for staff to use to reach parents that we don't have a staff member that speaks the language. We also have pre-translated messages we can send out in Remind, a digital platform that allows mass texts to be sent out. Those messages have been created by either language line staff, in-house staff, or previous translators. We have trained staff to tell parents that prefer a language other than English that in an emergency call the school and just stay the name of the language they need. The staff that answers the phone knows either how to speak the language or how to reach an interpreter over the phone. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. The Language Access Coordinator will ensure parents that prefer a language other than English are provided with a meaningful opportunity to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education by providing turnkey training on language access to all staff members. The LAC will also distribute Language Line cheat sheets at the beginning of the year and email reminders to staff periodically to use the line. The LAC will also provide the DOE intranet link for the Language, Translation, and Interpretation Unit and a reminder of their services to all staff. The LAC also works with the front office staff in order to set up a protocol in order for parents that prefer a language other than English to always be provided with the interpretation they need. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services 2018-19 CEP 78  Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) BXPKMS will address the translation and interpretation needs of the parents of ELLs who demonstrate the need in accordance with the Chancellor's Regulation A-663, and as part of our Comprehensive Educational Plan. We will provide each parent whose primary language is a covered language and who require language assistance services with a copy of the Bill of Parent Rights and Responsibilities which includes their rights regarding translation and interpretation services. We have posted in a conspicuous location at or near the primary entrance to such school a sign in each of the covered languages, or most prominent covered languages, indicating the availability of interpretation services. Our school’s safety plan contains procedures for ensuring that parents in need of language access services are not prevented from reaching the school’s administrative offices solely due to language barriers. If ever, the school at which the parents of more than 10% of the children at such school speak a primary language that is neither English nor a covered language, will obtain from the Translation and Interpretation Unit a translation into such language of the signage and forms required pursuant to this section and will post and provide such forms in accordance with this section VII of A-663. BXPKMS has put in place procedures for ensuring that Limited English Speaking parents are provided with a meaningful opportunity to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education as delineated by our school CEP, our annual school calendar of events and that they reflect the current NYC DOE organization. No minor students will provide translation services. We will ensure to obtain training for our key staff on language access requirements. We will also use pre-made notification documents that are found on the Interpretation Unit's intranet site. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? BXPK will gather feedback from parents of ELLs on the quality and availability of services through a parent surveys, during Student-Led Conferences (three times a year), one-on-one meetings scheduled by either the parent or any of the BXPK teams--Counselors, Parent Coordinator, Advisors, ENL Teachers, Content Area Teachers, Related Services Providers, School-Based-Support-Team, School Administrators and Deans. The findings and recommendations with regards to effectiveness of providing services will be shared by all parties involved, and used to improve the quality of our services. 2018-19 CEP 79 
