2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 07X557 School Name: MOTT HAVEN COMMUNITY HIGH SCHOOL Principal: HELENE SPADACCINI 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: Mott Haven Community HS 320700011557 School Number (DBN): 07X557 BEDS Code: Grades Served: 9-12 School Address: 455 Southern Boulevard, Bronx NY 10455 Phone Number: 718 655-8512 Fax: 718 665-8518 School Contact Person: Helene Spadaccini Email Address: hspadac@schools.nyc.gov Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Helene Spadaccini WardellMinor AliceaZaidlyn John McSorley Alicia Zaidlyn Denise cooper ImaniWilliams Brian Birkeland District Information Geographical District: 07-Transfer school Superintendent: Paul Rotondo Superintendent’s Office Address: 198 ForsythStreet Superintendent’s Email Address: protond@schools.nyc.gov Phone Number: (646)654-1261 FSC: Bronx Executive Director’s Office Address: Fax: 212 432 8035 Field Support Center (FSC) Executive Director: 1230 Zerega Avenue, Bronx, NY 10462/ One Fordham Plaza, Bronx, NY 10458 Jose Ruiz Executive Director’s Email Address: Jruiz2@schools.nyc.gov 2018-19 CEP 3  Phone Number: 718-828-7776/(718) 741-8895 Fax: ( 718) 828-6280 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Helene Spadaccini WaedellMinor AliceaZaidlyn Carmen Pressano AliceaZaidlyn Denise Cooper ImaniWilliams TashaHolley Lastassia Hargrove Larry McCants John McSorley Maria Alvarado *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable/ Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/CSA Member/ UFT Member/ 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Mott Haven Community High School is a transfer high located in the South Bronx that is entering its 7 th year. The mission of MHC is to provide a safe, supportive learning environment that gives over-age, under-credited students a fresh start and empowers them to move forward in a positive direction understanding that they can learn from their past and are not bound by it. 2018-19 CEP 9  2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. The components that help our students move forward are our advisory program, mentor program, individualized education plans, and internships. Our students graduate with a high school diploma prepared for post-secondary success in college and/or a career in order to become positive leaders in their community. In any school, but especially in ours where we are serving over-age under credited students it is vital to create and maintain a safe, supportive environment and provide individualized targeted academic intervention that will support disengaged students in reconnecting to school and finding success. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Our school serves 32% SWD students and 13% ELL students. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. We have been successful in creating a supportive environment and fostering collaboration amongst teachers and CBO staff and will continue our work in these areas but our main focus this year will be on ensuring rigorous instruction in all classrooms, targeting the needs of all learners and building strong family ties . 2018-19 CEP 10  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 07X557 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 232 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 13 15 2 3 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 26 13 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 83.0% % Attendance Rate 83.2% % Reduced Lunch 7.8% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.4% 68.5% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 3.0% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 6.25 5% 5% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 53% 28% 13.7% 0.0% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A YSH N/A N/A YSH Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YSH N/A N/A YSH Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES N/A N/A YES Yes N/A 77 75 66.7% 0.0% 30.6% 27.6% 0.0% 0.9% 2 21% 1.2 N/A N/A 53% 36% 50.5% 0% N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A YSH N/A N/A N/A N/A YSH N/A N/A N/A N/A YES 2018-19 CEP 11  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. This goal was based on data that showed that our January 2018 passing rates were low in these content areas, especially among our Special Education (SPED) students. Extended response questions such as DBQ’s and thematic essays were especially difficult for our SPED students as evidenced by their low scores which are an average of 14 points less than their General Education counterparts on these sections of the US History and Global History regents in June 2014 and January 2015. While our school’s instructional practice has been to differentiate lessons and tasks to meet the needs of all learners and provide multiple entry points to the content, these practices have been inconsistent across classrooms as evidenced on our 2014-15 Quality Review results. We will address the needs outlined above by continuing to develop our data driven instructional practices in which we will use bi-weekly formative assessments to regularly monitor student learning and by teaching to areas of need. We will track student growth through data logs, re-teaching plans and looking at student work protocols. We will have our SPED coordinator and ESL teacher create one page student profiles on students strengths, areas of need and disability and support gen ed teachers in the instruction of these students by providing teachers ongoing PD in Data Driven Instruction, Instructional Grouping and Differentiation/Scaffolding and through team teaching of lessons, common planning in which targeted plans and scaffolded strategies are developed. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we will increase our students Regents Pass rates by 5%, in all regents as compared to our June 2018 Regents pass-rates by developing a culture of data driven instruction in which teachers analyze student data and develop individualized targeted plans for each student. Teacher teams will analyze student data to identify skills students are lacking, once identified thesse skills will be incorporated in all lessons across content. 2018-19 CEP 12  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Teachers will use formative assessments to target student needs and develop action plans based on data. Teachers will maintain a data binder for each of their classes with individual student and class data. Teachers will participate in bi-weekly data meetings in which they will review data and complete action plans. There will be a school wide focus on argumentative writing and we will develop or adopt a school wide writing protocol to be used in all classes SPED coordinator and ESL teacher will create one page student profiles on students strengths, areas of need and disability and support gen ed teachers in the instruction of these students through team teaching of lessons, common planning in which targeted plans and scaffolded strategies are developed and by providing additional professional development Professional Development: All teachers will participate in PD throughout the school year that focuses on DDI, differentiation of lessons and teaching SPED and ELL students. Teachers will work in inquiry teams to assess student development of identified skills. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All students September to June Principal and Content Leads All students September to June Principal and ELA Lead SPED/ESL students September to June SPED coordinator and ELA teacher Teachers August to June Principal, AP's , Master Teacher How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Will hold parent conferences and send out biweekly progress reports to keep parents updated on student progress. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ELA Master Teacher will be given one less teaching period to plan, coordinate, provide support and professional development to content teachers on how to incorporate identified skills into lessons. Will hire a Peer Collaborative teacher to work with Master Teacher in supporting teachers, will provide per session to teachers to attend professional development on common core curriculum writing, DDI and meeting needs of all learners. 2018-19 CEP 13  Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring X SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Progress will be monitored during bi-weekly data meetings in which student work samples and formative assessments ate analyzed and action plans developed, bi-weekly student progress reports and quarterly report cards. We will also monitor individual student progress through Google Docs with benchmarks reviewed on a bi-weekly basis. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Teacher created Formative assessments will be used to measure student progess and student progress will be tracked in a google doc. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 14  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Our school has created a supportive environment for our students through our Advisory, CBO partnership and youth development approach however our students still struggle with consistent attendance and credit accumulation. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. We will increase student credit accumulation by 20% Trimester 1 2018, as compared to student credit accumulation trimester 1 2017 for SWD students. 2018-19 CEP 15  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers will use formative assessments to target student needs and develop action plans based on data. Teachers will maintain a data binder for each of their classes with individual student and class data. Teachers will participate in bi-weekly data meetings in which they will review data and complete action plans. SWD Students and ELL students Sept to Dec AP and SPED and ELL teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Through ongoing communication and progress reports Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Will hire an additional SPED teacher for the 2018-2019 school year Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Credit Accumulation Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Grades measured through progress reports, report cards and credit accumulation measured through STARRS. 2018-19 CEP 16  Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 17  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. While we have many strong collaborative practices including our teacher inter-visitation program, common planning program and teacher leaders we still struggle to ensure rigorous instruction and quality writing is taking place in every classroom as noted in our Quality Review, Regents scores and seen in our ADVANCE MOTP end of year ratings. We hope to leverage our collaborative culture to increase teacher performance in 3B(Questioning and Discussion Protocols) and increase student discourse in all classrooms and institute a school wide writing protocol to be used in all classes to increase student achievement. We are also strengthening our inquiry work using the Lesson Tuning protocol and inter-visitation to ensure teachers get consistent feedback from their peers as well as supervisors. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2018, we will increase the use of DDI in all classrooms as evidenced in lesson plans, unit plans, student writing pieces, classroom observations and formative assessment data by 10% as compared to the 2017-2018 school year. 2018-19 CEP 18  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). ELA Master teacher will lead teachers in developing school wide argumentative writing protocol to be used in all content areas to teach and assess student progress in argumentative writing. Teachers will participate in weekly common planning by content to assess student progress on argumentative writing tasks in their content, ELA lead will support content teams on school wide writing protocol and SPED Lead will support teachers in scaffolding tasks to make them accessible to all students Teachers will use the Lesson Tuning Protocol in team meeting to provide feedback on lesson plan, then conduct inter-visitation to provide feedback on lesson, using “Danielson Framework” . Teacher team will assess student work from lesson using "Looking at Student work protocol" 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers July - September Principal, AP, Master Teacher, PCT All teachers October -June Principal, AP, Master Teacher, PCT All teachers October to June Principal, AP and Master Teacher, PCT How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Teachers will reach out to parents through phone calls, text messages and bi weekly progress reports. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Teachers will be paid per session to participate in summer PD to develop school wide writing protocol, rubrics and unit plans that include argumentative writing tasks. Inter-visitations leads will be paid per session to participate in PD, develop inter-visitation feedback form, coverages will be provided for teachers to participate in inter-visitations Will purchase KINVOLVED to create and monitor a system of communication between parents and teachers. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other 2018-19 CEP 19  Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Student growth will be assessed during common planning using “Looking at Student Work Protocol” and during inter-visitations and post observations. Student progress will be tracked using tracker. Effectiveness of Cluster Framework will be assessed during fall team meetings in October, November, March and April. Student progress on argumentative writing tasks will be measured and tracked bi-weekly during content team meetings. Teacher MOTP ratings will tracked using ADVANCE system Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Danielson Framework and student assessment tracker in google docs. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 20  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 2018-19 CEP 21  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Through PTA and SLT meetings and having an Open Door school Policy Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Budget set aside for parent workshops and meetings. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Parent attendance at PTA, SLT and school functions. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Review of Parent sign in sheets. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 22  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. While we have had few behavioral issues and our student culture is strong we struggle with student attendance as our YTD attendance is about 67%. Also, even though we have had a larger turn out at Curriculum Nights and Parent-Teacher Conferences our attendance by parents at PTA meetings has been low. In an effort to improve our student attendance and parent involvement we will strengthen our Attendance Committee, increase parent outreach. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. We will improve parent attendance at PTA meetings and family events by 20% as compared to this year, by June 2019. We will increase teacher to parent communication by 10% as compared to June 2018. 2018-19 CEP 23  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Will hire at Parent Coordinator for 2015-2016 school year to organize parent events, increase outreach and provide another support to our families. Will offer bi-weekly and monthly family workshops such as Resume Writing, Microsoft Word, Fitness etc. Will conduct a parent survey in September to assess what workshops parents would like. Will hold family events throughout the year, Welcome Back BBQ in August, Curriculum Night in September, Holiday Dinner in December, Women’s Empowerment Dinner, Family Bowling Night, Family Day at Yankee Stadium, Family Day at Citi Field Families September -June Principal Families September -June Principal, Parent Coordinator, CBO staff and Teachers Families July -June Principal, Parent Coordinator, CBO and School Staff 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. East Side Settlement house and Single Shepherd Counselorss. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Parent Coordinator Funding, teachers to give workshops, funding for student incentives, food and supplies., purchase KINVOLVED to increase communication between teachers and families. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 2018-19 CEP 24  Will review weekly student attendance and set weekly and monthly benchmarks. Will monitor parent attendance at workshops and events and teacher outreach. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Student attendance, parent attendance and outreach through KINVOLVED> Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 25  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Formative and summative assessment data, teacher observation, student/parent request Formative and summative assessment data, teacher observation, student/parent request Formative and summative assessment data, teacher observation student/parent request Formative and summative assessment data, teacher observation, student/parent request Teacher or Advisor recommendation, parent or student request Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Re teaching Plans, Read 180, Wilson, Writers workshop-argumentative and persuasive essays,1:1 tutoring , Castle Learning, 1:1 tutoring, Computer aided lessons, manipulatives, writers Workshop-Extended Response Small group, 1:1 tutoring, individual re-teaching plans, writers workshop Small group, 1:1 tutoring, individual re-teaching plans, writers workshop Advisory Program, Services provided by Guidance Counselor, Social Workers, Assigned Advisor Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Small group, 1:1 tutoring, individual re-teaching plans Extended day after school, and Saturdays Small group, 1:1 tutoring, individual re-teaching plans Extended day after school, and Saturdays Small group, 1:1 tutoring, individual re-teaching plans Extended day after school, and Saturdays Small group, 1:1 tutoring, individual re-teaching plans Extended day after school, and Saturdays Small group, 1:1 During school day, Extended day after school, and Saturdays 2018-19 CEP 26  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 24 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Our Social Worker, Leah Plasse has formed partnerships with Covenant house, the Door and Office of Housing to meet our students needs. We are also setting up a food pantry, providing school supplies and clothing to our students to support their basic needs. Our Single Shepherd counselors are also working with the counselors in the shelters to support our students. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 27  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 CEP 28  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. Schoolwide Program (SWP) X Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. In order to retain high quality teachers we ensure teachers have voice and leadership roles within the school. We support strong teachers by providing ongoing professional development so that they can take an active role in mentoring and supporting their peers. and have hired a Master Teacher and PCT to support teacher development. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Teachers will attend weekly in school professional development on argumentative writing, academic discourse, questing, scaffolding, data driven instruction and instructional grouping given by Principal, AP, Content Leads, SPED Coordinator and Master Teacher. They will also attend outside professional development aligned to our instructional focus given by BFSC. Teachers will also receive weekly embedded support and coaching from Master Teacher, PCT and Admin. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). 2018-19 CEP 29  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Teachers work in consultation with the Principal to select and implement appropriate assessments for all students. Teachers will receive PD throughout the year beginning in August 2018 focused on Data Driven Instruction, how to use data to assess student achievement, how to use data to inform instruction and track student progress through google docs. Teacher teams will use the Lesson Tuning Protocol and Looking at Student Work protocol to assess and analyze teacher lessons and student progress. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 124,828.00 0 0 0 2,241,719.00 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools 2018-19 CEP 30 Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) 10-11, 14-15, 18-20 10-11, 14-15, 18-20  may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. 2018-19 CEP 31   IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 32  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Mott Haven Community HS, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. [Mott Haven Community HS] will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 33 Parental Involvement and School Quality  The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; 2018-19 CEP 34  ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) Template School-Parent Compact (SPC) Mott Haven Community HS , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; 2018-19 CEP 35  ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; 2018-19 CEP 36  ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 37  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 07 School Name Mott Haven Community High School Borough Bronx School Number 557 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Helene Spadaccini Coach Theresa Cantatore ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Wardell Minor / ENL Teacher/Subject Area Steve pascarella/ELA Teacher/Subject Area Jacob Cespedes/Social Studies Related-Service Provider Charlotte Allinger Superintendent Paul Rotondo Assistant Principal John McSorley Coach School Counselor Merilyn Sanchez Parent Judith Madera Parent Coordinator Sandra Generoso Field Support Center Staff Member Glenn Olga Other (Name and Title) C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics 2018-19 CEP 38  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 243 Total number of ELLs 19 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 7.82% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 0 1 4 3 2 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? All students are administered teacher-created baseline assessments, which are aligned with the NYSESLAT and CCLS. The assessments are administered to assess students’ reading and writing levels. ELLs are given the periodic assessment as a tool of evaluating the student progress throughout the course of the school year. These assessments include teacher generated formative and summative assessments. These assessments assist in the teacher's ability to adjust curriculum to meet the CCLS. This information informs the overall ENL instruction.Data indicates that our students struggle with academic vocabulary. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? The school has three administrators, one who serves as the testing coordinator. In addition, the assistant principal serves on the LAP team. He meets with teachers individually after the administration of the teacher-created baseline assessments to 2018-19 CEP 39  ensure the alignment of curriculum with the instruction that takes place in the classroom. All of our students receive the requisite number of minutes, per their respective levels. Entering students received five periods of 55 minutes of stand-alone ENL class in addition to five 55 minute periods of collaborative team teaching services. Emerging students are scheduled for the same number of minutes, as the schedule allows for additional services to be provided for these students. Transitioning and expanding students receive services totaling 275 minutes, per one of their content area classes. The ENL instructor engages in collaborative team teaching with the content area teachers in these areas. Commanding students are scheduled for two fifty-five minute periods of collaborative team teaching periods weekly. In compliance with the New York City Department of Education’s Division of Assessment and Accountability, all modifications for ELLs are implemented for city and state examinations. Explicit instruction is delivered by a certified ENL teacher to students. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? The school reviews all student data: course grades, attendance, teacher developed assessments, and state assessments. Data is compared to see if gains were made in areas that are in need of improvement and what academic intervention services are needed to make gains. Additionally, we will opt into the ELL Periodic Assessment to measure ELL progress. Content area instruction is delivered in English. ELLs are programmed with general education students for these classes. Every attempt is made to program these students into ICT classes for each content area to ensure that they receive the appropriate support. When available, some teachers can provide the students with native-language support. In addition, teachers provide student with native-language texts to supplement and support the English texts. Teachers give special attention to academic vocabulary and implement other strategies, such as the use of visuals, graphic organizers, and cooperative learning to provide multiple entry points for the ELLs in their classes. Newly enrolled ELL students receive an array of academic and support services. The school offers mandated tutorials in core content areas, Saturday Academy enrichment programs and a myriad of extra-curricular clubs and sports activities. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Weekly departmental meetings are held, and the performance of ELLs is at the forefront of those meetings. The data from teacher-generated assessments is evaluated, and students are assessed throughout the school year to measure progress. Students are provided the option of taking assessments in their home language, when they are available. As most core classes culminate in a Regents examination, many students are provided with Regents-based questions in their home language from previous Regents Examination administrations. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] N/A 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The majority of our students have received ELL services for more than five years and are performing at the transitioning and expanding levels. Our ELL population also needs to pass New York State Regents. Students are programmed to assist in their mastery of Regents exams and the NYSESLAT modalities. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Weekly professional development meetings take place, and teachers are provided with up-to-date data about their ELLs. The data is disseminated school-wide, and individual plans are made to address the specific needs of the students. Part IV: ELL Programming 2018-19 CEP 40  Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. All of our students receive the requisite number of minutes, per their respective levels. Entering students received five periods of 55 minutes of stand-alone ENL class in addition to five 55 minute periods of collaborative team teaching services. Emerging students are scheduled for the same number of minutes, as the schedule allows for additional services to be provided for these students. Transitioning and expanding students receive services totaling 275 minutes, per one of their content area classes. The ENL instructor engages in collaborative team teaching with the content area teachers in these areas. Commanding students are scheduled for two fifty-five minute periods of collaborative team teaching periods weekly. In compliance with the New York City Department of Education’s Division of Assessment and Accountability, all modifications for ELLs are implemented for city and state examinations. Explicit instruction is delivered by a certified ENL teacher to students. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Content area instruction is delivered in English. ELLs are programmed with general education students for these classes. Every attempt is made to program these students into ICT classes for each content area to ensure that they receive the appropriate support. Transitioning and expanding students receive services totaling 275 minutes, per one of their content area classes. The ENL instructor engages in collaborative team teaching with the content area teachers in these areas. Commanding students are scheduled for two fifty-five minute periods of collaborative team teaching periods weekly. In compliance with the New York City Department of Education’s Division of Assessment and Accountability, all modifications for ELLs are implemented for city and state examinations. Explicit instruction is delivered by a certified ENL teacher to students. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Content is delivered in English in all content areas. Teachers are provided common planning time daily to meet and develop scaffolding for ELL students. Students are provided with content area glossaries and assessments in their native language, if requested. Content area instruction is delivered in English. ELLs are programmed with general education students for these classes. Every attempt is made to program these students into ICT classes for each content area to ensure that they receive the appropriate support. When available, some teachers can provide the students with native-language support. In addition, teachers provide student with native-language texts to supplement and support the English texts. Teachers give special attention to academic vocabulary and implement other strategies, such as the use of visuals, graphic organizers, and cooperative learning to provide multiple entry points for the ELLs in their classes. Newly enrolled ELL students receive an array of academic and support services. The school offers mandated tutorials in core content areas, Saturday Academy enrichment programs and a myriad of extra-curricular clubs and sports activities. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Students are provided assessments in their home language. 2018-19 CEP 41  5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a. SIFE students are encouraged to participate in our tutoring program designed to support them in their content-area classes b. As this is a transfer school, Newcomers are not admitted into the school c. ELLs who have received services from 4 to 6 years work is more rigorous and fewer scaffolds are used than would be appropriate for entering or emerging students. Higher expectations are placed on these students to ensure their transition to general education classes without ENL services. Students are engaged in reading and writing activities more closely aligned to their grade-level counterparts, with close attention to the acquisition of Tier II academic language. Tutoring is available to these students to receive additional help with their content-area classes. d. Long-term ELL instruction differs slightly from that of four to six year ELLs. While still rigorous, the program focuses on the students’ acquisition of academic language, phonemic awareness, reading and writing strategies, and organization skills. Tutoring is available to these students to receive additional help with their content-area classes. e. When possible, Former-ELLs are placed into CTT ELA classes for continued support. Teachers are made aware of the former-ELL population and modifications, such as bilingual glossaries and extra time, are made available for these students. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Teachers use a variety of instructional strategies: pair-share, self and peer assessment, rubrics, graphic organizers, scaffolding, etc. Additionally, integrated co-teaching and collaborative team teaching has been adopted as a means by which students' needs are met. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? The ENL teacher and special education teachers work together as a collaborative team teaching program. They meet weekly to discuss student progress. ELL-SWDs are programmed according to their proficiency levels. In addition to receiving instruction that is aligned with their proficiency levels, lessons are often differentiated to address the acquisition on academic language, phonemic awareness, reading and writing strategies, and organization skills. Further differentiation is provided to match the goals on these students’ individualized educational plans. Additionally, modifications are provided as required by each student’s IEP. Technology is utilized with all ENL classes through the use of SMART boards and laptop carts. To support ELLs in the content areas, bilingual dictionaries and native language glossaries are made available. When available, books on CD or textbooks in the native language are provided. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. ELL students are provided an English ELL class and then receive support services from the ENL teacher in their content subject areas. Students are provided AIS on Saturday and Wednesday and Thursday after school. During daily inter/intra departmental common-planning periods, teachers create unit/lesson plans that require students to be actively involved in learning, ask them to analyze, synthesize, and evaluate information, and develop products and performances for real audiences and purposes, authentic assessments. ENL instruction, using ENL strategies and methodologies, is aligned to the ELA Common Core/NYS Standards and Regents tasks. Discrete skills and concepts are taught explicitly and rubrics that stem from the standards and performance indicators are used as tools for assessment for all written assignments and oral presentations. Rubrics are supported with examples and anchors that illustrate the various levels of performance for students. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? 2018-19 CEP 42  English Lead, Theresa Cantatore works with the ENL teacher in developing and implementing a writing program in both content and language development. All ELL students will receive AIS after school or on Saturday. The assistant principals will engage the ENL teacher in data-based meetings bi-weekly about the progress of ELLs. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? NA 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs are afforded equal access to all school programs. ELLs have the opportunity to take part in all school/campus teams, clubs, Learn-to-Work program and CTE program. They have the opportunity to receive AIS on Wednesdays, Thursdays and Saturdays. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. All classrooms have content Spanish/English glossaries, Spanish/English dictionaries, SmartBoard, at least two desktop computers and earphones. Laptop carts, Mac carts or IPad carts are also available for classroom use. The following software programs are available for teacher and student use: Castle Learning, ESL Lounge, Boardworks, Brain Pop, LearnerPal and Edmoto. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Students have native language content glossaries and materials. If requested, translated materials in their native language is available. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. At the beginning of the school year all Teachers receive a listing of students entitled to ELL services and their data from the last three years on the NYSESLAT. In addition, all teachers receive an item analysis (REDS reports) for Regents exams taken over the past school year. As this is a transfer school, the ELLs are in 11th and 12th grades, respectively. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? All classrooms have content Spanish/English glossaries, Spanish/English dictionaries, SmartBoard, at least two desktop computers and earphones. Laptop carts, Mac carts or IPad carts are also available for classroom use. The following software programs are available for teacher and student use: Castle Learning, ESL Lounge, Boardworks, Brain Pop, LearnerPal and Edmoto. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). All students interested in attending MHCHS go through an admission process which inlcudes: attending an open house and an individual and family interview. Prior to the school year, a welcome back BBQ is planned as a meet & greet, so new students can meet current students and staff. Students also take part in an orientation. School principal, assistant principal, advisors, social workers, counselors and teachers take part. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? ELL students have the opportunity to take Spanish class in school, or they can take online classes to learn a new language of their choice. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. 2018-19 CEP 43  c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? We currently do not have a Dual Language program at Mott Haven Community High School. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? All teachers are provided a PD on the four modalities that ELL students will be assessed on the NYSESLAT, differentiated instruction, Data Driven Instruction, and best practices. The ENL teacher provides monthly professional development workshops. These workshops cover scaffolding and accessing the four modalities of reading, writing, speaking and listening. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Teachers receive professional development for 80 minutes on Mondays and 45 minutes on Wednesdays. During this time ELL-specific professional development is provided. Attendance sheets, agendas, reflection sheets and notes are kept in a binder in the Principal's office. All staff receive digital copies of all handouts and notes by email. The pedagogical and administrative staff, through PD, will learn specific strategies to use in the classroom that targets specific areas of need for ELL students. In addition, all teachers take part in common planning collaboration for one full period per day. During this time, staff members engage in case-conferencing, through which teachers share strategies that work with various students. This time is also used for presentations from faculty members about how to better serve our students, including those students who receive language support.Strategies used, but not limited to, include:• Differentiated instruction based on students’ ability, proficiency levels and learning styles• Quality Teaching for English Learners• Use of Point of Entry Model/Balanced Literacy• Varied learning modalities• Ongoing assessments• Varied assessment tools• Assessment for Learning Strategies• Scaffolding instruction across all content areasDuring daily inter/intra departmental common-planning periods, teachers create unit/lesson plans that require students to be actively involved in learning, ask them to analyze, synthesize, and evaluate information, develop products and performance tasks for real audiences and purposes, and authentic assessments. ENL instruction, using ENL strategies and methodologies, is aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards. Discrete skills and concepts are taught explicitly and rubrics that stem from the standards and performance indicators are used as tools for assessment for all written assignments and oral presentations. Rubrics are supported with examples and anchors that illustrate the various levels of performance for students. To assist ELLs as they transition from one high school to another, we provide staff with professional development to help them analyze the NYSESLAT scores and the State ELA and mathematics assessments to determine how to best address the needs of these incoming students. In addition, in content are teams, the staff will compare and contrast the reading and writing demandsbetween middle school and high school, and what instruction will best bridge the gap for our ELLs. For the minimum hours of ELL training for all staff is introduced to understand and analyze the NYSESLAT scores. Since our ELLs receive content-area instruction in general education classes, the staff is presented with best practices for ELLs in their content areas that include methods for fair assessment, as well as strategies and scaffolds that can be implemented in content-area classes. Select staff are trained on how to score the NYSESLAT exams. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? 2018-19 CEP 44  Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Individual meetings are scheduled through out the fall semester and the spring semester. Parents are involved in the process of placing students into ENL at the beginning of the school year or when new ELLs enter thesystem. Parents are invited to be a part of the School Leadership Team and Open House School events,Parental Workshops, access Community Based Organization, as well as the Parent Association meetings and additional workshops are held throughout the school year. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Parents are invited to attend monthly workshops and PTA meetings. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Our ELL population has shifted to mostly transitioning and expanding students. As a result, we are able to provide more than the requisite number of minutes for these students. 2018-19 CEP 45 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Helene Spadaccini, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 46  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Mott Haven Community HS School DBN: 07X557 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Helene Spadaccini Title Principal John McSorley Assistant Principal Sandra Generosa Parent Coordinator Wardell Minor ENL/Bilingual Teacher Judith Madera Parent Steve Pascarella Teacher/Subject Area Jacob Cespedes/Social Studies Theresa Cantatore Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Merilyn Sanchez School Counselor Paul Rotondo Glen Olga Charlotte Allinger Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Related-Service Prov Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 08/15/17 08/15/17 08/15/17 08/15/17 08/15/17 08/15/17 08/15/17 08/15/17 08/15/17 08/31/17 08/15/17 2018-19 CEP 47  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 07x557 School Name: Mott Haven Community HS Superintendent: Paul Rotondo The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Meralyn Sanchez GC yes yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. All students and families complete an in person interview as part of our intake process, during this process we assess home language, preferred language and all languages spoken at home. Whenever possible the student is assigned an Advocate Counselor who speaks the parents preferred language, which for our students is predominantly spanish. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 2018-19 CEP 48 Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral 185 93 0 67 33 0 179 99 0 64 36 0 English Spanish 0 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. none Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Parent handbook, Parent Events Calendar, Cell Phone Policy , syllabus and course offerings. Sept-June College workshops, Student , Regents Calender Sept-June Performance Flyers Sept-June Upcoming events flyers,PTA Monthly info Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Documents will be translated by Meralyn Sanchez, Guidance Counselor, Sandra Generoso, Parent Coordinator and Julissa Soriano, AP Documents will be translated by Meralyn Sanchez, Guidance Counselor, Sandra Generoso, Parent Coordinator and Julissa Soriano, AP Documents will be translated by Meralyn Sanchez, Guidance Counselor, Sandra Generoso, Parent Coordinator and Julissa Soriano, AP Documents will be translated by Meralyn Sanchez, Guidance Counselor, Sandra Generoso, Parent Coordinator and Julissa Soriano, AP 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. 2018-19 CEP 49  Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to Curriculum Night, Parent/Teacher Conferences, , report Card Nights and Awards Dinners, as well as Parent Engagement Monthly Events. Sept Report Card Nights and Awards Dinners, Oct, Dec, Feb Parent/Teacher Conferences, Nov,March May Attendance Meetings Monthly provide interpretation service(s)? Approximately half of my staff speaks Spanish will translate Approximately half of my staff speaks Spanish will translate Approximately half of my staff speaks Spanish will translate Approximately half of my staff speaks Spanish will translate 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. We will send out all calls in both English and Spanish and if necessary make one:one calls in both languages. All of our staff has a listing of which of our parents is predominantly Spanish speaking so in an emergency there is a plan in place of who will make the calls. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. On the first day staff returns in September we go over our staff a handbook which contains the pertinent Chancellor's Regs including A-633. Staff is provided a copy, it is reviewed , expectations discussed and resources provided. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Will post and mail home all advertisements Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? 2018-19 CEP 50  Parent surveys conducted during parent meetings and over the phone. 2018-19 CEP 51 
