2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 08X561 School Name: BRONX COMPASS HIGH SCHOOL Principal: BRETT ROER 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information The Bronx Compass High School 320800011561 9-12 1980 Lafayette Ave, Bronx NY 10473 School Number (DBN): 08X561 718-828-1206 Phone Number: 718-828-3732 Fax: Brett Roer broer@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: 08 Superintendent’s Office Address: Email Address: Brett Roer TBA Teresa Guidice Natalie Flores BritrieceMorgan Antonio Millan N/A District Information Carron Staple Superintendent: 1 Fordham Plaza, Bronx, NY 10458 Cstaple@Schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-741-5834 Phone Number: FSC: Bronx 718-741-7098 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) Jose Ruiz Executive Director: 2018-19 CEP 3  1 Fordham Plaza, Bronx, NY 10458 or 1230 Zerega Ave, Bronx, NY 10462 Executive Director’s Office Address: Jruiz2@Schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: (718) 828-7776 Phone Number: (917) 608-0230 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Brett Roer Leticia Domenech Teresa Guidice NikolasRodriguez Natalie Flores Thompson Antonio Millan BriteiceMorgan N/A WilliamMitchell CelinetGonzalez NikimiaBrownfield *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Parent Parent Parent 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Judith Olivero Carolyn Santana UFTMember, Secretary UFTMember, School Counselor Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Mission Statement: Section 4: CEP Overview The mission of Bronx Compass High School is to develop in each student the necessary skills to graduate college ready and be equipped to pursue a career path they are passionate about by providing rigorous instruction and real-world experiences in the classroom and on internships that socially and emotionally prepare all of our students for future success. 2018-19 CEP 9  2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. A student of Bronx Compass will graduate with: - Free college credits earned through our College Now courses on the Bronx Compass campus - Four years of weekly advisement from a Seminar leader - A personal statement that has undergone multiple revisions - Internship Experiences - Detailed resume highlighting work they published, programs they attended, internships they have completed, and awards/honors they have achieved - Acceptance to a best fit college of their choice with the greatest financial aid support allowable - Multiple college visits Strategic Partnerships : College NOW! with CUNY Bronx Community College, College Access For All Cohort II, Stone Barns Farm, TEALS (Technology Education and Literacy in Schools) 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Our school has Special Education students and English Language Learners who need support in the classroom so they can tackle the content and be successful. They need teachers who are equipped to break down the content in ways that allow them to comprehend and they need programs that will reinforce skills needed to be successful in the classroom. Bronx Compass also have students in temporary housing who need clothing, shoes, and toiletries so they feel empowered to come to school and focus in the classroom. They also need notebooks and supplies so they can be prepared everyday they are here at school. We also have students with chronic absenteeism and students who are over-aged and under-credited. They need individuals who will make home visits to make sure they are coming to school and they need teachers who can break down the content which will allow them to be successful in the classroom once they are here. They need social emotional assistance from our guidance and social worker team to assist with building confidence to keep them in school and graduate. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Areas we made the most growth last year: - Increase of 15% from Class of 2017 to Class of 2018 graduation rate - Providing students with courses that align to academic policy - Providing transparency for students and families by utilizing online grade books on Skedula 2018-19 CEP 10  Areas of focus for this year: -Developing teacher led common planning teams across the school with a focus on the Danielson Framework domains 3B, 3C and 3D - Creating unified assessments and teacher led data analysis meetings to create unified unit plans and annual planning documents - Creating strong Teacher Teams through effective protocols that impacts and enhances our instruction and curriculum -Provide vertical alignment for scope and sequence with well-defined learning targets across the grades in each core course discipline - Served the needs of our Special Education students through support of each child's IEP needs, promote greater academic access moving towards least restrictive environment - Create 9th/10th grade Academic Intervention Services after school for students to earn credits and stay on track in coursework and on end of year Regents Exams - Invite parents to individualized meetings with their child to meet with their guidance counselor and college advisors to plan their post-secondary goals Strengths & Accomplishments: - Upholding our mission and vision by providing Seminar courses to all students - Collaborative teaching programs - Strong, family-oriented culture with monthly seminars for parents and events for families, students and staff to celebrate together - Successful integration of cutting edge technology into the school program, 1-1 laptop to student ratio - Celebrating and publishing student work - Minimizing the achievement gap between general education students and special education and English Language Learner students - Academic support through Seminar after school enrichment clubs, after school academic support Challenges: - Providing scaffolding and support for struggling students while still developing students that are autonomous learners with ownership over their work process and products. -Implementing Restorative Justice and Positive Behavior Intervention and Supports practices rather than punishment-based discipline whenever possible. - Creating a cohesive vision of what teaching looks like at Bronx Compass that creates rigorous and engaging daily instruction 2018-19 CEP 11  - Supporting students with immense gaps in their reading, writing, and mathematical skills. - Transitioning special education students thoughtfully into less restrictive environments - Increasing attendance rates and providing supports for students with chronic absenteeism to become reengaged in their education 2018-19 CEP 12  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 08X561 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 457 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 7 6 5 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 10 7 8 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 75.0% % Attendance Rate 74.2% % Reduced Lunch 9.2% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.7% 62.6% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 2.0% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 1.71 8% 28% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 69% 41% 46.7% 0.0% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A NO N/A N/A NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A N/A NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES N/A N/A YES No N/A 123 124 80.7% 0.2% 26.7% 31.1% 3.3% 1.1% 6 31% 6.7 N/A N/A 61% 50% 16.7% N/A N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A NO YES N/A N/A N/A YES 2018-19 CEP 13  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. School-wide Strengths in regards to Rigorous Instruction: - Teachers have Common Planning Time and Professional Development that aligns to our Instructional Focus - Administrators coach and provide evaluative observations for 9-11 teachers each - Instructional focus supporting documents have been created for staff to work on in all subject areas over the summer that align to rigorous instruction - All teachers rated Effective or Highly Effective based on 2017-18 Measures of Student Learning using the Growth Model. - Based on Principal Roer's Measures of Student Learning, Bronx Compass High School earned an 18 out of 20 on Measures of Student Learning, deemed Highly Effective. - Based on Algebra I Regents, students growth as compared to other NYC DOE schools was 74%. - Students increased their passing rates and college readiness rates on the ELA and Algebra Regents compared to previous cohorts, in particular Cohort W. - Students increased proficiency levels on the NYSELAT exam compared to previous cohorts. - The overall four year graduation rate increased from 48% to 63% from August 2017 to August 2018. School-wide Needs in regards to Rigorous Instruction: - Developing professional development that supports our instructional focus - Providing continual, non-evaluative coaching with actionable next steps that align to Danielson Framework - Create with small teacher teams unified assessments, annual planning documents that map out the 2018-19 curriculum as a framework to create engaging, rigorous daily instruction 2018-19 CEP 14  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Goal: By June 2019, all Bronx Compass math courses will have rigorous Common Core Learning Standard aligned Unit Plans with Unified Assessments (once per quarter) and inquiry based corrective instructional plans that will result in a 3% increase in the passing rate for Algebra I Regents ( from 60% to 63%) for first time test takers in the 9th grade. 2018-19 CEP 15 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Principal and Assistant Principals will collaborate, mentor and be matched with individual teachers using the T-Eval method and supplemental coaching to refine teacher practice. Principal and Assistant Principals will evaluate teacher practice in bi-weekly coaching throughout the year to cite, discuss, and develop action steps as they relate to class-level, sub-group, and and individual student-level data. This evaluative data will be utilized to plan professional development activities throughout the school year. All teachers will engage in common planning work to: Discuss and share best practices around supporting students (specifically instructional or behavioral moves) within their grade Identify, Track and Discuss ways to reach team instructional goals Brainstorm and discuss ways different discipline teachers could support each others curriculum Engage in discussion of common student work and utilizing it to inform instructional next steps and supports All teachers will engage in data analysis cycles of Curriculum Team Work. Curriculum Teams: Teacher Teams and Students Discuss and share best practices around supporting students (specifically instructional moves) within their discipline-related courses. Engage in "Looking At Student Work" protocols to ensure authentic assessment, learn to provide meaningful targeted feedback and push student work through revision. Teachers Sept. 2018 through May 2019 (Bi-weekly) Teachers Sept. 2018 Teacher Teams and Students Principal, Assistant Principals, Peer Collaborative Teachers Principal, Assistant Principals, Peer Collaborative Teachers Principal, Assistant Principals, Peer Collaborative Teachers, Common Planning Team Leaders Principal, Assistant Principal,Peer Collaborative Teachers, Common Planning Team Leaders through May 2019 (Bi-weekly) Sept. 2018 through June 2019 (Bi-Monthly Grade Team Meetings, Daily Common Planning Meetings, Weekly Department Meetings) Sept. 2018 through June 2019 (Daily Common Planning Time, Weekly Department Meetings, Quarterly 2018-19 CEP 16 Refine scope and sequence so there is vertical alignment across grades for common core aligned learning targets Coordinate pedagogical support for struggling team members and ensure that daily lessons and assessments are well-aligned to course learning targets and that feedback to students is both actionable and specific. Provide professional development to reinforce our Instructional Focus of citing evidence to justify claims and providing analysis in both writing and discussion Teachers Unified Assessment Data Analysis) Sept. 2018 through June 2019 (Monthly PD sessions) Principal, Assistant Principals Peer Collaborative Teachers, Common Planning Team Leaders 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We have run in the past and will continue to run these workshops to support our families in understanding instruction at Bronx Compass:  Parent Empowerment Workshops  Transcript and Graduation requirement review 9-12   College Essay writing workshops  FAFSA Workshops Individual conferences for struggling or at-risk students to provide individualized support plans in and out of their homes. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Resources:  Budget to compensate additional teacher leader work  Budget to send teachers to workshops  Contractual Professional Development time for team PD Tools: ● Postings for team leaders ● Protocols for teams to use to assess their needs and set goals ● Protocols for teams to use to make decisions  A digital form (Google survey) to capture team leader reflections Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 2018-19 CEP 17  X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. After first round of coaching and observations ( Late October) discuss and review with APs where teachers are at on 3B, 3C and 3D. After 2nd round (December/January), assess which teachers have improved on 3B/3C/3D -are 60% of our teachers at Effective/Highly Effective on 3B/3C/3D. We will utilize Advance data reports on each of the Danielson components above to analyze for trends, areas of growth, and areas of little to no progress. At the midway point of the end of January our administration will analyze teacher observation scores in domains 3B/3C/3D to see if we are on target or we need to recalibrate our goal for 80%. After 3rd Round (March 2019), how many more teachers have improved on 3B/3C/3D -are 80% of our teacher Effective/Highly Effective on 3B/3C? After 4th round (May 2019), what % of our teachers have improved at least one level on 3B/3C/3D? Are 90%+ of our teachers Effective/Highly Effective on 3B/3C/3D? Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) We will utilize Advance data reports on each of the Danielson components above to analyze for trends, areas of growth, and areas of little to no progress. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 18  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? School-wide strengths in regards to Supportive Environment (w/ sources cited) - Daily phone calls made to families of absent students - Created individualized plans for all students who were Long Terms Absences (LTAs) to reengage in their own education - Held weekly attendance team meetings to address students with chronic absenteeism, and to create incentives From the school quality guide (2016-2017) it states that 90% of parents/guardians agreed or strongly agreed that school staff regularly communicate with them about how they can help their child learn. It also states that 95% of parents/guardians agreed or strongly agreed that teachers work closely with them to meet their child's needs. School-wide needs in regards to Supportive Environment (w/sources cited) : - Create incentives to target specific students to improve their daily attendance - Create intervention strategies so students do not become Long Term Absences (LTAs) in 2018-19 Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Goal: In order to impact school-wide attendance, by June 2019, targeted interventions and incentives and an improved communication system with families will be implemented, resulting in a 1% increase (from 80.6% to 81.6%) in attendance. 2018-19 CEP 19  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Creating Attendance Incentives *Create incentives for specific students including trips, meals, and opportunities to be recognized for improved attendance Weekly Attendance Meetings - Attendance Team will meet weekly to discuss individual student attendance as well as analyze attendance data by whole school, grade level, and sub groups - Receiving updates on most recent home visits and assigning the next home visits to our attendance teacher based on data and sharing anecdotal evidence Creating Strong Attendance Outreach Structures to: Students Sept 2018 * Create a system to personally contact all students absent each day * Attendance Team outreach to clear students who have left or reengage students to come back to school to June 2019 (Daily analysis of attendance to ensure timely family involvement and address 2018-19 CEP 20 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Students, Long Term Absence (LTA) Students, Long Term Absence (LTA) Sept. 2018 to June 2019 (Monthly and Semester attendance goals will be created for specific sub sets of students and for school wide goals) Sept 2018 to June 2019 (Weekly monitoring of progress for all students, and to identify potential students of concern) Attendance Team (Principal, Assistant Principals, Guidance Counselors, Attendance Team) Attendance Team (Principal, Assistant Principals, Guidance Counselors, Attendance Team) Attendance Team (Principal, Assistant Principals, Guidance Counselors, Attendance Team), Teachers, Support Staff  * Teachers contacting parents when student has pattern of significant absences. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement attendance issues from becoming chronic) How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent Empowerment Workshops Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Instructional Resources/Deliverables: ● Bronx Compass Attendance Outreach Tracker ● Weekly Attendance Meeting Agendas and Next Steps Tools: Professional Development on documented outreach for support staff and teachers Human Resources: ● Attendance Team Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Each week, analyze YTD attendance for the school, grade level, and each student. Create incentives for specific target populations, for example, students between 60% - 80% YTD attendance to improve above 80%. Monitor progress throughout the school year and provide feedback on action plans. Any student who has not met our goal of 81% attendance after the mid-year point will be assigned additional supports. 2018-19 CEP 21  Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. YTD attendance reports are analyzed each week during attendance meetings, using ATS reports including but not limited to RCUA and RPYA to ensure accurate information reflective of daily, and semester long attendance rates. Any student who has not met our goal of 81% attendance after the mid-year point will be assigned additional supports. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 22  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. School-wide Strengths in regards to Collaborative Teachers (w/ source cited): ● All teachers have selected Common Planning Time as their C-6 and our entire teaching staff will have off the same period this year while students have lunch. School-wide Needs in regards to Collaborative Teachers (w/ sources cited) : Bi-weekly coaching to improve daily instruction with a focus on 3B, 3C, and 3D that aligns to common planning goals Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Goal: In order to increase student engagement in rigorous activities, by June 2019, all teachers will have participated in daily common planning time and weekly Professional Development sessions based on teacher input and led by administrators and teacher leaders, resulting in 70% of teachers showing an increase of one rating classification in Domain 3. 2018-19 CEP 23  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All teachers will engage in (bi)weekly coaching: Teachers September 2018 through June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, Peer Collaborative Teachers * Discuss and share best practices around supporting students (specifically instructional or behavioral moves) within their grade. * Teachers will identify instructional goals they would like to improve upon and receive coaching with actionable next steps. Teachers will be visited twice before being evaluated and provided with feedback around Danielson. *Teachers will have common planning time built into their schedules so that they can plan rigorous instruction around all Danielson components. *Teachers will be visited during common planning by administration to provide feedback on planning. Intervisitations: Teachers will visit colleagues in similar grade level / content areas to provide collaborative feedback to improve instruction 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Teachers Sept. 2018 - June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, Peer Collaborative Teachers How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent Empowerment Workshops Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 2018-19 CEP 24  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Resources: ● Budget to compensate additional teacher leader work and intervisitions Tools: ● Postings for team leaders ● Protocols for teachers to use to assess their needs and set goals ● Protocols for teachers to use to take low inference notes and provide collaborative feedback during intervisitations Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. During Advance administrative meetings, we will provide feedback and monitor teacher progress in meeting our goals, and provide feedback on how to improve instruction, and what professional developments as a school should be offered based on trends in components 3B/3C/3D. Professional Development plans for Spring Term will be revised according to teacher input and trends in Danielson Advance ratings based on reports. After 2nd round (December/January), assess which teachers have improved on 3B/3C/3D -are 60% of our teachers at Effective/Highly Effective on 3B/3C/3D? At the midway point of the end of January our administration will analyze teacher observation scores in domains 3B/3C/3D to see if we are on target or we need to recalibrate our goal for 80%. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Danielson Framework and Advance Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 25  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Schoolwide Strengths in regards to Effective School Leadership (w/sources cited) During 2017-18, our school leadership added two additional administrators to support teachers, with each administrator leading one of the four core subject areas. School-wide Needs in regards to Effective School Leadership (w/sources cited) : ● Quality Review Indicator, 1.2, for pedagogy was rated developing. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Goal: By June 2019, there will be a 3% increase in the number of students earning 10+ credits in grade 9 (from 75% to 78%) as a result of implementation of an individualized programming approach ad providing Academic Intervention Services after school to Special Education students, English Language Learner students, and Lowest Third students. 2018-19 CEP 26  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? School will be programmed to ensure students take courses that align to New York State and New York City academic policy to maximize legitimate opportunities for students to graduate within four years Students September 2018 to Principal, Assistant Principal, Programming Team through June 2019 Hire teachers in licensed content areas to provide instruction to students by qualified pedagogues based on student requests Teachers Create a master schedule that allows teachers common period off (student lunch) together for common planning time Teachers (Check programs at beginning of each term based on transcripts and updates) September 2018 to through June 2019 (Reevaluate beginning of each term that we have appropriately licensed teachers) September 2018 to through June 2019 ((Check programs at beginning of each term based on Principal, Assistant Principal, Programming Team, Principal, Assistant Principal, Programming Team, 2018-19 CEP 27 Attempt to have teachers returning teach the same curriculum as previous semesters to ensure continuity and improve best practices Teachers Principal, Assistant Principal, Programming Team, transcripts and updates) September 2018 to through June 2019 (Reevaluate beginning of each term that we have appropriately licensed teachers) 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent Empowerment Workshops Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Tools:  Compensation for teachers for additional teaching periods  Skedula gradebook Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. We will monitor student progress throughout the school year on a monthly basis using Skedula gradebooks in administrative meetings,and reviewing scholarship reports each marking period and throughout the school year Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 2018-19 CEP 28  Skedula gradebooks for teachers, students and families to review in Parent Meetings, in Seminar classes with Guidance Counselors pushing in each marking period, and in scholarship report meetings at the end of each marking period and semester. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 29  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. School-wide Strengths in regards to Strong Family and Community Ties (w/ evidence cited):  Parents were invited to numerous college-readiness events School-wide Needs in regards to Strong Family and Community Ties (w/ evidence cited):  Improving parent attendance to events Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Goal: By June 2019, all families will have been invited to at least 1 parental empowerment event per month addressing a social, emotional or academic student concern, leading to a 10% increase in the number of parents corresponding with the school via Pupil Path. 2018-19 CEP 30  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Parent Empowerment Events At least one parent empowerment event will take place during the evening and/or weekends for all Parents & Guardians Sept. 2018 to June 2019 Principal, Parent Coordinator, Support Staff Parent Coordinator will mail, backpack and post a monthly parent newsletter and calendar so that parents are aware of important dates and events at our school Parents & Guardians Parent Coordinator will hold monthly SLT and Parent Association Meetings to increase parental contact and communication with school and advisors Students and Parents Create a system for tracking parents engagement in community events. Parent Coordinator Sept. 2018 to June 2019 Sept. 2018 to June 2019 Sept. 2018 to June 2019 Principal, Parent Coordinator Principal, Parent Coordinator Principal, Parent Coordinator 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. College Access For All Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. PA and SLT budgets to support parent events, overtime and per session to Parent Coordinator, Teachers, School Counselors, and Assistant Principals to facilitate, supervise, or plan for events. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other 2018-19 CEP 31  Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Each month, we will we look at phone log to assess how many contacts have been made and attendance sheets from events to see which parents attended and track the results, in addition to asking for parent feedback as to which types of events they would most like to see. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Phone logs, Sign in Sheets, Parent Engagement Spreadsheet, Student Action Plan Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 32  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Interim progress report data, requests from students or parents, referrals, IEP recommendations Mathematics Interim progress report data, requests from students or parents, referrals, IEP recommendations Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Mastery-based learning--target + personalized feedback, Reading diagnostics & personalized intervention, Graphic organizers, Wilson, Currently exploring the possibility of the Read 180 Mastery-based learning--target + personalized feedback, diagnostics & personalized intervention/study plan Science Interim progress report data, requests from students or parents, referrals, IEP recommendations Mastery-based learning--target + personalized feedback, diagnostics & personalized intervention/study plan Social Studies Interim progress report data, requests Mastery-based learning--target + Varied: global history small group 2018-19 CEP 33 Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Varied: reading small group instruction, ELA small group instruction, push-in/pull-out, ICT, afterschool, and Saturday Academy During School Day Afterschool Saturday Academy Varied: algebra small group instruction, pre-algebra small group instruction, geometry small group instruction, push-in/pull-out, ICT, afterschool, and Saturday Academy Varied: living environment small group instruction, Coursera, push-in/pull-out, ICT, afterschool, and Saturday Academy During School Day Afterschool Saturday Academy During School Day Afterschool Saturday Academy During School Day  from students or parents, referrals, IEP recommendations personalized feedback, diagnostics & personalized intervention/study plan At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Interim progress report data, requests from students or parents, referrals from SIT, IEP recommendations Advisory circle, person-centered counseling, resource alignment, non mandated counseling instruction, United States history small group instruction, push-in/pull-out, ICT, afterschool, and Saturday Academy Varied: small group, 1-1, advisory Afterschool Saturday Academy During School Day Afterschool Saturday Academy 2018-19 CEP 34  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 25 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. All students living in temporary housing will receive a book bag with clothes, school supplies, and toiletries. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 35  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 CEP 36  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Recruitment strategies: ● Teachers are hired based on holistic review of their qualifications including but not limited to: resume, cover letter, demo lesson, portfolio, round table discussion, sample unit plans/ lesson plans/ work samples. ● Teachers are hired using a common rubric to ensure that candidates align with our instructional beliefs and philosophy, and meet our expectations for all selected competencies. ● Teachers are hired based on having high expectations and willingness to provide the support to get students to those high expectations. What we also look are candidates with strengths/interests in other areas which they can then share with/teach our students continuing our innovative and engaging course offerings. Teachers are hired based on license area and will be assigned to courses based on their licensed area. Retention strategies: ● Teachers are connected with personalized opportunities to lead and participate in projects based on their strengths, needs, and interests. ● Teachers have access to regular coaching from school administrators, teacher peers, and external partners. ● Teachers are connected with professional development opportunities that align with their areas of interest or areas in need of growth. ● Teachers are treated with respect and dignity at all times. ● Teachers have a voice and role in school leadership. Teacher assignments: 2018-19 CEP 37  ● Teachers input into their assignments will be honored as much as possible. Teachers will be assigned based on their license area. Teacher supports: ● Teachers will have team members, access to coaches, access to resources, tools, and templates. ● Teachers will be encouraged to make inter-visitations. ● Teachers can gain coverages to attend professional development activities Professional Development: ● Professional development and/or peer collaboration is offered for at least 2 hour a week to all school staff. ● A 5-day summer professional development institute is held for all staff. ● Teachers can lead sections of PD to share best practices ● Teachers complete PD reflection surveys to steer future PD sessions ● Teachers are encouraged to visit other effective schools and teachers 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). ● Professional development nd/peer collaboration is offered for at least 2 hour a week to all school staff. ● Teachers can lead sections of PD to share best practices ● Teachers complete PD reflection surveys to steer future PD sessions * Intervisitations within the school and Visitations to other schools Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). 2018-19 CEP 38  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. We value teacher, student, and parent voices in our varied assessment method. Throughout the school year the various groups collaborate around selecting, utilizing, and adjusting assessments. In addition, a MOSL selection committee comprised of teachers and school administrators discuss and collaboratively determine the MOSL assessments to be utilized. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) Section 4, 5, 6, 7, 8 Section 4, 5, 6, 7, 8 Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Federal Federal Federal 354,236 n/a 12,366 x x 2018-19 CEP 39  Title III, Immigrant Federal Tax Levy (FSF) Local n/a 3,390,172 x Section 4, 5, 6, 7, 8 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs. 2018-19 CEP 40   Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 41  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. 08X561 Bronx Compass High School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students The Bronx Compass High School will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 2018-19 CEP 42  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● Engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to schools to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● Support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● Maintain a Community Coordinator and a Parent Coordinator to serve as a liaison between the school and families. ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; ● Schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● Hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; 2018-19 CEP 43  ● Encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● Supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● Providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● Developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) Bronx Compass High School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas;  providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships 2018-19 CEP 44  ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents 2018-19 CEP 45  ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Elementary and Secondary Education Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; 2018-19 CEP 46  ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 47  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP 48  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: We offer a variety of supports in our after school and Saturday academy for English Language Learners. Since we have a small ELL population in the school, around 35 students, we are able to invite all of the ELL students to participate in our Open Lab courses, our Club Season, and our Online courses with office hours. As such, all of our ELLs, from entering to expanding proficiency levels will be invited based on their specific needs. We have Open Lab, Wed through Friday, 2:45pm-4:00pm. (3 sessions a week after school). October 5th to June 16th,( 100 sessions) We have Open Lab, 9:00-12:00 Saturday Academy on predetermined dates ongoing Saturdays beginning October 14th and ending June 17th. (24 sessions). The above are pending funding and budget allocations. Open Lab includes opportunities for students to work with their teachers individually or in small groups and use school computers and supplies to progress toward mastery in their learning targets. Instructional strategies implemented: -Frayers Model with vocabulary -Task Analysis (what is the task asking you to do?) -Chunking (how to break tasks down into smaller "chunks" or action steps) -Annotation as a reading strategy -Test taking strategies -Providing sentence starters and graphic organizers -Building background knowledge though video and media -Reading aloud to build fluency -Glossaries and translation tools in multiple languages Across classrooms we promote student choice and provide rich, engaging tasks that require students to utilize language to express themselves in work they find interesting and meaningful. The Open Lab is staffed by a certified ENL teacher. There Certified ENL teacher will provide support to students with content and instruction by using the strategies listed above. We have one-to-one laptops, worksheets or textbooks/books (similar to resources offered in the regular classes. Some materials will be at cost to Title III (ie copy paper, pen and paper) All students, grades 9 to 12 are eligible for the Open Lab experience after school and saturday academy. The student to teacher ratio will be 10:1. The language of instruction will be English with native language support. 2018-19 CEP 49  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information We will communicate with parents via school messenger and backpack flyers to be brought home to students in their native languages. We will have sign in sheets and those records will be kept on file. Students will have access to 5 rooms with different content teachers that can meet their multiple core courses needs with no more than 15 students. These programs will be funded with Title III and complemented with Title I money if needed. Attendance will be monitored. Student progress will be monitored through growth of reading and literacy levels. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: address's addresses We offer professional development to all teachers based on need. Whole staff PDs are dedicated to train teachers to serve all students including ENL and SWD students. Opportunities will be provided for expert teachers, AP's and outside coaches to deliver PD's that addreses the needs of our ENL population and in general our overall student population. The Title III PD will support participating teachers in implementing instructional strategies that benefit our ENL students. Instructional strategies implemented:. PDs occur on Mondays from 2:50-4:10 from September 12th to June 19th. This may incur cost to Title III when we hire outside organizations or personnel to deliver quality PDs that serve our ENL population and the rest of our students. Attendance sheets will be kept in file in the main office. In addition, the school will send an ENL licensed teacher to attend the BFSC ENL coordinator/liason meetings and turnkey instructional strategies to staff. -Frayers Model with vocabulary -Task Analysis (what is the task asking you to do?) -Chunking (how to break tasks down into smaller "chunks" or action steps) -Annotation as a reading strategy -Test taking strategies -Providing sentence starters and graphic organizers -Building background knowledge though video and media -Reading aloud to build fluency -Glossaries and translation tools in multiple languages Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration  topics to be covered 2018-19 CEP 50  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities  name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities Begin description here: In order to create a culture where families and parents are welcome and supported we created a number of activities to engage and support parent involvement. Parent involvement is critical to foster student growth and academic success. We host a variety of activities at the school including showcase nights, family nights, game days, financial aid trainings, college application trainings, special education trainings, and parent teacher conferences. We pay staff members who are fluent in multiple languages to assist in outreach and meetings with parents beyond the regularly scheduled work day. Parents will be notified via school messenger and backpack letters sent to them by the school. All documents will be translated into native/home languages. Attendance and agenda will be kept on file in the main office. Parental engagement will be provided with the parent coordinator as well as other facilitators , the dates are to be determined. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) 12,366  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Based on our propsoed plan, currently the funding will go towards per session for staff members running the ENL support after school. and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other 2018-19 CEP 51 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. TOTAL 2018-19 CEP 52  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 08 School Name Bronx Compass High School Borough select one School Number 561 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Brett Roer Coach Fuad Chowdhury ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Anastasios Argyros Teacher/Subject Area Paul Smith Teacher/Subject Area Christine Laboy Related-Service Provider Genelly Cornelio Superintendent CARRON STAPLE Assistant Principal Kelleyann Royce-Giron Coach Type Here School Counselor Type Here Parent Tonya Morales Parent Coordinator Type Here Field Support Center Staff Member Type Here Other (Name and Title) Type Here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 3 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 2 1 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 486 2018-19 CEP 53 Total number of ELLs 74 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 15.23%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): N/A If yes, indicate language(s): N/A Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 4 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 K 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 6 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Assessment tools that are in use at Bronx Compass included Fountus and Pinnel, Wilson Foundation's and teacher-created diagnostic assessments. These three assessment tools are important in the way we drive our learning. After using some of these assessment tools, students of Emerging and Transitioning are able to decode and have pacing in their reading. Students at this level are starting to use skills that they learned at the Emerging level to enhance their comprehension. Students of an Expanding level are able to do tasks that a commanding student would be able to do, at a slightly differentiated task (i.e, identify native speech patterns, obtain central ideas with support of citing evidence). The data also provides that students at an entering level may sometimes not hear or spell certain word blends that would not be related to their home language. This data allows the ENL teachers differentiate specific tasks to work on those critical areas. This data also allows for our school to push some of these differentiated tasks into content areas in a creative way. Science and 2018-19 CEP 54  Math teachers will be able to help with understanding concepts, meanwhile in ELA and Social Studies, teachers will help support students understand how can they provide evidence to support those decisions (cross-content). 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Structures that are in place to support the efforts include daily assessments as well as weekly and bi-monthly assessments that are used to control input from students. Once teachers have collected enough data to support these efforts, teacher then place specific protocols that will help the student grow in the English Language. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? At Bronx Compass, assessment is key to English Language Learner Progress. The key to assessing the student for success is through approaching students as a whole. To do this, students are evaluated on their ELL Periodic Assessments and NYC Performance Tasks, as well as baseline and benchmarks. This said, Bronx Compass also identifies ELL students and their End of Year Scores of the Previous Academic Year. Once ELLs have been identified to be performing at grade level or below level, students are then differentiated to their proper setting. ELL students are then periodically assessed through out their course work and NYS Approved Assessments. These assessments include MOSL, NYC Periodic of ELLs Assessment, and internal periodic assessments to track student progress. With all of this said, all quantitative data is then assessed by the ENL Coordinator, in conjunction with content teachers to better support the needs of ELLs. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Students are enrolled into Rti programs, Saturday Academy, after school program, as well as extra periods in English Language development, to support the needs of the student, depending on their levels. Students may receive all or some.of the services based on what the entry, formative, as well as summative data provides to the intervention specialist at Bronx Compass. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] The school uses the data to create a RTI and Reading Intervention system. According to the 2017-2018 ELL Policy and Reference Guide for each English language learner who scores below specified levels of performance on the annual English language proficiency assessment, the school must determine the additional support services to provide the student, taking into consideration evidence such as the following: Number of years of instruction in a bilingual education or English as a new language program English and home language literacy, Content area and socio-emotional support needs of students with inconsistent/interrupted formal education (SIFE) English and home language literacy needs of long-term ELL's Results on the annual English language proficiency assessment exam Bilingual education or English as a second language teacher recommendation , Content area teacher recommendation 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. After analyzing data provided by the AMAO tool, and data reports from the City of New York, during the school year, about 18 percent of the students who took the NYSESLAT tested as Proficient. The data also revealed that of students in the lowest third, 33 percent of students move up at least one level (Entering-Transitioning, Transitioning-Expanding, Expanding-Commanding). 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? The ENL teacher will collaborate with the Principal and Intervention Specialists to pinpoint specific trends that may or may not occur and will plan in occurrence to the findings presented above. Part IV: ELL Programming 2018-19 CEP 55  Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Instruction for students at Bronx Compass is a Freestanding ENL Program. Students are heterogeneously grouped into their grade specific content classes. ENL students in each grade are given 5 integrated ENL Periods per week 5 of stand alone ENL instruction equating to 540 instructional minutes per student per week. During the ENL Periods, students are grouped together depending of proficiency levels. Beginner/Entering students receive at least a total of 360 Integrated ENL instruction and 180 minutes of standalone ENL minutes. Emerging and Transitioning students receive a total of 180 integrated ENL minutes and a total of 180 standalone minutes. Expanding and Proficient students receive a total of 90 integrated ELA/ENL minutes. ENL students travel together heterogeneously by grade level for integrated instruction. During standalone ENL instruction, students are graded and receive instruction in a heterogeneous setting. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Bronx Compass ensures that the mandated number of instructional minutes are provided according to ENL Proficiency Standards. During ENL instruction, students are delivered minutes based on proficiency level. Depending on their level, students will receive between 90-360 minutes of ENL instruction. All students receive integrated ELA/ENL instruction. During this time, students will receive between 90-360 minutes of integrated instruction. Being that Bronx Compass uses a Freestanding Program. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Core content is delivered to all students in a heterogeneous classroom. During the ENL/ELA Periods, students will work with an ENL Teacher as well as the content teacher on a modified version of Collections by HRW. Collections by HRW allows for students to be immersed into English language practice with modifications done by the curriculum itself, as well as differentiated tasks done by the teachers. Students will be taught in English, with the student flexibility and absolute freedom to use their Native Language (whether it may be Spanish, Urdu, Albanian, etc.) for further understanding of tasks. Students will work with on different collections through out the year to become grade level proficient. Students will also work with novels assigned by the English Department attached to common core learning standards. The ENL Teachers will provide modifications to promote ELL needs. Such differentiated tasks are; Listening Passages, Writing Exercises, Reading Comprehension and Reading Skill activities. Building these types of differentiated activities and integrating Collections by HRW will allow for students to foster a second language as well as meet the needs of the Common Core Learning Standards. During ENL instructional periods, students will work with the teacher to practice skills that further need developing. This skill based approach class will allow for students to work on the four modalities in ELL comprehension. Some topics that will be covered in this class are Syntax, Morphology, Pragmatics, Listening Comprehension, Vocabulary Building, and Reading Skills. 2018-19 CEP 56  4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? ELL’s are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year through the basis of home language surveys, reading/writing informal assessments, LAB-R, and the strong use of a second language during class activities. Students are also given a periodic assessment that determines if there has been any growth in the primary language. Students are also allowed to freely promote their native language use through out the year when prompted by a teacher, and when applicable, a teacher will work with the students to enhance their use of their native language through code switching. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Students of and ENL program are differentiated in multiple ways. Students of many grade levels and proficiency levels work differently in order to learn specific grade level work. SIFE students are given extra learning periods though out the week with the use of Rti. Through an RTi System that is in place, the ENL teachers work with the SIFE students to provide intensive services that a SIFE student may need. During class instruction, a SIFE student will be given differentiated work that is based on the same topic, but at a different linguistic level as per the student needs. A newcomer student will be given intensive study of the English language, while continuing to foster and promoting their native language. Students that are newcomers will also be given differentiated work in their content specific classes. Newcomers would receive translated dictionaries, translated instructions, and a high level functioning group of advanced leveled students who will help the Newcomer transition into their new setting. Differentiation for a transitioning ELL is different from a SIFE and Newcomer students. Transitioning/Expanding ELL's now need to continue their growth in learning English as their next language as well as enhance their native language. Students that are developing will continue to get intensive study during their Pull-Out push/Push-In Periods, students will work to achieve grade specific tasks in a more inclusive language orientation focusing around English. Students will be give the proper scaffolding to ensure that students perform well on grade specific tasks. Long Term ELL's will also be differentiated when it comes to content specific learning targets. Long Term ELL's will work closely with the ENL Teacher to work on specific learning targets that are holding them back from understanding the English Language. Former ELL's will be given 90 minutes of instruction a week to practice skills that they may still need to work on. This includes syntactical errors, reading comprehension, and listening enrichment. Former ELL's will continue to get ENL differentiated instruction depending on their capabilities of understanding content specific tasks. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Some instructional strategies and grade-level materials that teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas are are Fountas and Pinnell assessments and learning targets, Reading A-Z, Vocabulary learning, Ready, iReady, and other Internet based learning projects. Grade level materials that are used for an ELL-SWD is Collections by HRW. All of these assessment strategies and data trackers, as well as the differentiated curriculum put a student with a learning disability on the fast track to learning the English Language. Furthermore, to ensure that all students who hold an IEP and are ELLs are receiving all mandated service time, the ENL Coordinator in conjunction with the IEP Teacher and Special Education Coordinator meet to devise a plan and schedule times for the student to receive all their services. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Students with Disabilities and are of ELL status are given time during the day to practice their skills they learned. They are given an ENL standalone and an reading prep periods in order to support the students. Students with specific IEPs that require 2018-19 CEP 57  Resource room also receive extra time during the week to focus in on how students can learn specific content strategies and skills. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Bronx Compass's targeted intervention programs for ELL’s in ELA, Math, and other core content areas are Academic Intervention Services that is used through out the week. During this week, students are pulled out for Reading Predatory classes and that typically targets the bottom third quartile of students in a given grade. The ELL groups that are targeted in this set are normally Emerging and Transitioning Groups. Along with the intervention reading program/services, students also receive before and after school services throughout the year. This service allows the bottom third quartile to work on skills that are needed through out the year. During the summer, students of the same targeted group also are allowed to participate in an English Language Institute program. This allows students to work on skills that they have learned the previous year, as well as be exposed to new skills that will be needed for the upcoming year. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Based on the data and trands that have been provided by the 2016-2017 NYSESLAT, as well as baseline assessments, Bronx Compass will enact that all students who are English Language Learners, as well as students who are former English Language Learners will receive a minimum of 250 minutes, and a maximum of 540 required minutes. Bronx Compass has also included 2 additional ENL Teachers to help support students across content. ENL teachers can now be found in Math as well as ELA classes. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? No service will be discontinued this year. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs are given equal opportunity towards any after school program that is offered in Bronx Compass. These programs range from Academic Intervention to Sports & Arts. After school supplemental services that are offered at Bronx Compass are ELA, Math, and Science after school sessions. There is also Saturday Academy as well as Evening Academy for after school sessions. During the content after school sessions, teachers work with students on an extension of what they learned that day. Students are also given the ability to work on old skills that they still need to work on. During the ELL after school program, students work on the four modalities in English Language Acquisition. ELL students are also given the ability to take classes such as Psychology and 3D Printing, as well as computer science courses to become college ready. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Instructional materials that are used in classrooms to support ELLs are, Fontis & Pinnel, ReadyGen, Collections by HRW, Reading A-Z, Wilson Phonics, and translated reading and writing texts for lower leveled students. These all are supplementary materials that are used to help all levels of ELLs in our ENL Program. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Bronx Compass promotes the use of Home Language within the classroom and outside. Students are given the ability to work in their home language if necessary to find solutions to problems, express their ideas, and use their home language to communicate to others. All materials are offered and given in translation to students who are in need of any materials. All texts, as well as print outs will also be given in second language if necessary. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Bronx Compass ensures all required services/resources support correspond to ELL age and grade level needs. Students in the ENL program work with their grade levels through out the day. They are also able to interact with lower and upper grades when it comes to ENL instruction. Students have access to all resources on the web and are given resources in hand. Students have the ability, no matter what age group or grade level to see their teachers if needed before, during, and after school. 2018-19 CEP 58  15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Instructional materials that are used in classrooms to support ELLs are, Wilson Phonics, Ready Gen, Collections by HRW, Reading A-Z and translated reading and writing texts for lower leveled students. These all are supplementary materials that are used to help all levels of ELLs in our ENL Program. Bronx Compass works with other schools in the co-location to ensure that all students are receiving proper materials. Bronx Compass also works in conjunction with other co-locations to work on best practices that will allow for Bronx Compass to flourish. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). For students who are new arrivals, ELL have the opportunity to meet with an adviser who will look at all transcripts as well as find ways in which students can be involved in any career ready activities. Juniors and Seniors at Bronx Compass go and do work study instead of taking "filler-classes." Students who are on track for graduation will be able to leave the building and go to work and study at different internships that may please the student. All students receive credit, and it counts towards their graduation track. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? The languages electives that are offered to ELL's is Spanish. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? The professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school is devised into 2 sections. The first section involves the a monthly professional learning times dedicated to just ENL instruction. During this time, teachers will receive valuable resources and instruction on student needs and activities that they could use with ELLs. The ENL teachers who go out on professional development for content specific course will also promote turnkey professional development to involve all teachers in learning different professional needs for ELL students. The ENL teacher will also go on monthly professional development to learn new brand new methodologies for ENL instruction. The ENL Coordinator will also attend monthly meetings that revolve around making sure that Bronx Compass is in compliance to New York State, and New York City laws. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. The ENL team works together to coordinate professional development days in which teachers will leave the building, then turn key information. The ENL Coordinator works to keep track of ELL-Specific Professional Development for all ENL Teachers as well as all Content Specific Teachers. All teachers in Bronx Compass receive the minimum of 15 percent of their professional 2018-19 CEP 59  development hours. All teachers are encourage to go on professional developments that cater to English Language Learner needs. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? With the help of the Parent Coordinator and and office staff, the ENL Teacher sets up meetings to weekly during Parent Engagement Times. During this time, parents are discussed on their language development process, their results on latest diagnostic assessments, and their overall language development within the content areas. There is always a translator on standby to support the ENL teacher if they don’t speak the same language. As according to Part 154, ENL teachers also meet with ELL parents in addition to the mandated parent-teacher conferences. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. ELL parent involvement in Bronx Compass is present in the School Parent Leadership Team. There are two parents that represent the ELL community during the meetings. They are elected every year at the beginning of the school year. ELL parents also participate in Teacher/Parent Meetings and communicate concerns and suggestions that they might have for ELL activities and other student activities. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. N/A 2018-19 CEP 60 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Brett Roer, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 61  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Bronx Compass School DBN: 08X561 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Brett Roer Title Principal Kelleyann Royce-Giron Assistant Principal AA Parent Coordinator Anastasios Argyros ENL/Bilingual Teacher Tonya Morales Parent Paul Smith Teacher/Subject Area Christine Leboy Teacher/Subject Area Fuad Chowdhury Type Here AA CARRON STAPLE Type Here Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Type Here Genelly Cornelio Other Type Here Type Here Type Here Other Type Here Other Type Here Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 09/26/17 09/26/17 09/26/17 09/26/17 09/26/18 09/26/17 09/26/17 09/26/17 09/26/17 09/26/17 09/26/17 09/26/17 09/26/17 09/26/17 09/26/17 2018-19 CEP 62  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 08X561 School Name: The Bronx Compass Superintendent: Carron Staple The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this Charlene Nieves Parent Coordinator Fuad Blank Blank Chowdhury Assitant Principal Blank Blank Blank Blank conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No NO NO Blank Blank Yes Yes Blank Blank * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Based on the Home Language Identification Survey, a record of adult preferred languages for written translation and oral interpretation are maintained in ATS: Spanish - 80%, Bengali - 6%, French - 6%, Arabic - 3.0%; Other - 5%. Copies of said information are shared with our Guidance Counselor, Parent Coordinator, Community Coordinator, and others. All written correspondence between the school and students’ families is provided in the language of their choice, which most often is in their native language. As a result, we use the NYCDOE’s internal translation unit to provide translations of all school correspondence in Arabic, Bengali, French, Haitian-Creole, and Spanish including: 2018-19 CEP 63  a. Special events (Holiday Showcase, Spring Showcase ) b. Letters of concern about students’ academic performance and behavior c. Welcome packets for families explaining school rules, mission, necessary supplies, permission slips, and FAQs about school policy, which they receive upon admitting their child to our school . 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Spanish Arabic French Bengali Yes Yes Yes Yes 35% 35% 22% 24% Yes Yes Yes Yes 35% 35% 22% 24% 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. From the list presented above, Spanish, Arabic, French, and Bengali are the preferred translated languages needed through out the school year. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Special events (Holiday Showcase, Spring Showcase) 12/2018 Letters of concern about students’ academic performance and behavior 10/2018, 1/2019, 3/2019/ 5/2019 Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. For all documents, we have created a system in which office personnel, as well as the special events committee come together to work with the language access coordinator to submit the documents to a translation team 1 month in advance. For all documents, we have created a system in which office personnel, as well as the the content teams, deans, and administrative committees come 2018-19 CEP 64  Welcome packets for families explaining school rules, mission, necessary supplies, permission slips, 09/07/2018 FAQs about school policy, which they receive upon admitting their child to our school 09/2018-06/2019 Frequency as needed when we receive new admits. together to work with the language access coordinator to submit the documents to a translation team 1 month in advance. For all documents, we have created a system in which office personnel, as well as the as well as the the content teams, deans, and administrative committees come together to work with the language access coordinator to submit the documents to a translation team 1 month in advance. For all documents, we have created a system in which office personnel, as well as the as well as the the content teams, deans, and administrative committees come together to work with the language access coordinator to submit the documents to a translation team 1 month in advance. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to We hold monthly PA meetings, as well as montly SLT meetings. Monthly Dates TBD dependent on availability of SLT members and PA provide interpretation service(s)? For all documents, we have created a system in which office personnel, as well as the as well as the the content teams, deans, and administrative committees come together to work with the language access coordinator to submit the documents to a translation team 1 month in advance. Blank Blank Blank Additionally, our Parent Coordinator makes daily outreach to families in regards to communication about school events, individual student issues, etc. Our guidance counselors regularly reach out to families in regards to individual students' academic progress towards graduation. Our Dean and Social worker additionally make calls to families and meet face-to-face. Daily For all documents, we have created a system in which office personnel, as well as the the parent coordinator as well as the the content teams, deans, and administrative committees come together to work with the language access coordinator to submit the documents to a translation team 1 month in advance. 2018-19 CEP 65  Teachers are expected to maintain regular communication with families regarding students' progress. Our Community Assistant and Attendance Teacher make daily phone calls in regards to absence. Daily For all documents, we have created a system in which office personnel, as well as the the parent coordinator as well as the the content teams, deans, and administrative committees come together to work with the language access coordinator to submit the documents to a translation team 1 month in advance. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. When the school needs communication to limited-English-proficient families, the school has designed at least 1 personnel from every major language to be on standby for translation. All teachers will also have access to translation and interpretation hot line provided by New York City Department of Education. We also have skedula for translation needs in spanish specifically. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Bronx Compass will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor's Regulation A-663, the Language Access Coordinator turnkeys the essentials of the regulation. The Language Access Coordinator will also distribute and pinpoint the important sections that are needed to be shown during the turnkey. All staff members will have a hard printed copy as well as an emailed soft copy for their records. Teachers will also be able to meet with the Language Access Coordinator after school, or during "Other Professional Work Time." Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Chancellor's Regulation A-663 is a directive on the responsibility that our school system is committed to for the opportunity of equal access to all rights, opportunity, information, and participation of LEP parents in our school. A parent will never be denied access to opportunities afforded their families, or to children enrolled at our school. As a result of these regulations, we have developed systems that will meet the needs of parents of ELLs who speak the predominant second language, Spanish and less prevalent languages represented in our school, such as French, Bengali, and Arabic. 2018-19 CEP 66  Additionally, Item B of Section VII in the Chancellor's Regulations relates to the conspicuous posting of DOE covered languages for translation. This appears upon entry to the school near the Security Desk. The school's safety plan provides that parents who need to communicate with the school, does so in their home language. This is determined via the Parents Preferred Language Form, which is available as part of the Family Resources through the Office of ELLs. All school based and consultant agencies will be utilized to this end, including community based organizations that will be instrumental in meeting the language needs of our parents. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Surveys will be given and feedback solicited during monthly PA meetings regarding the quality and availability of interpretation services and of key documents translated into home languages. 2018-19 CEP 67 
