2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 10X565 School Name: HIGH SCHOOL FOR ENERGY AND TECHNOLOGY Principal: MARIE GUILLAUME 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information High School for Energy and Technology 32100001565 9-12 2474 Crotona Avenue Bronx, NY 10458 School Number (DBN): 10X565 (718)733-3080 Phone Number: (718)733-3085 Fax: Marie Guillaume mguilla@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): Email Address: Marie Guillaume BushraUmbreen Tanyalee Rodriguez Donald Sexton Tanyalee Rodriguez Katheryn LinaresSanchez Joseph Rodriguez CBO Representative: N/A District Information Geographical District: 10 Carron Staple Superintendent: 1 Fordham Plaza, Bronx, New York 10458 Superintendent’s Office Address: cstaple@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: (718) 741-5853 Phone Number: (718) 741-7098 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 CEP 3  FSC: Bronx Jose Ruiz Executive Director: 1230 Zerega Avenue, Bronx, NY 10462/One Fordham Plaza, Bronx, NY 10458 Executive Director’s Office Address: jruiz2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: Phone Number: Fax: 718-828-7776/(718) 741-8895 (718) 828-6280 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Marie Guillaume BushraUmbreem Tanyalee Rodriguez GriseldaSuriel KatherynLinaresSanchez Joseph Rodriguez N/A Michael Dibiasi Donald Sexton Timothy Robinson *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/Teacher Member/Assistant Principal Member/Parent 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Irma Farciet Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? MISSION: Section 4: CEP Overview The High School for Energy and Technology (HSET) is a 9th-12th grade learning community, committed to fostering a safe, supportive, and nurturing culture of learning in a practical program that prepares students for professional careers in engineering and technology. We balance our challenging academic program with project-based developmental learning, which is structured to teach students to harness the energy of self-confidence and reinforce the discipline of hard work. Students of HSET will graduate equipped with the knowledge, skills, and personal qualities 2018-19 CEP 9  to pursue college and/or professional careers in electrical installation and technology. Finally, our HSET graduates will serve as public ambassadors, propelled with a renewed sense of urgency to take action on a civic calling within their community, city, and nation. VISION AND VALUES: PERSONALIZATION (SUPPORTIVE ENVIRONMENT) All students are entitled to personalized attention unique to them to help them reach their maximum potential. PERSEVERANCE ( TRUST) We constantly strive to build an atmosphere of trust with our students and we will not relent in providing students the tools they need to realize their own success. ADVOCACY (STRONG FAMILY – COMMUNITY TIES) We strive to build strong partnerships and will continue to serve as advocates and allies for our students and families. INQUIRY (RIGOROUS INSTRUCTION) Student need and choice drives our instructional practice and students must have the opportunity to inquire and be challenged by our instruction. PRIORITIES Accelerate learning and instruction Partner with communities Develop people Advance equity 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. In school year 2017-2018 the High School for Energy and Technology had 405 students from grade 9 through grade 12. The school population comprised of 25% Black, 70% Hispanic, 3% Asian, and 1% White students. Boys account for 79% of the students enrolled and girls account for 21%. The average attendance rate for the school year 2017-2018 was 83.2%. 2018-19 CEP 10  The efforts of the Grade 9 inquiry team developed focused strategies for writing across the content areas. As a result of their action research, the team developed a cross curricular writing organizer and Common Core standard aligned writing rubric. The team analyzed their grade level data and student's writing samples using the ATLAS protocol. Additionally the team utilized the Performance Series system to achieve baseline and year end to determine annual growth. The practices and strategies used by the team are being analyzed and retrofitted for higher grade levels. The Career and Technical Education (CTE) electrical program successfully kicked off the new program for grades 9 and 10 simultaneously. The Work Based Learning (WBL) coordination is underway with internships achieved with our industry partners:  The Department of Citywide Administrative Services (DCAS)  Con-Edison  Construction Skills, Inc.  Division of School Facilities (DSF)   CTE Industry Scholars Program Scholars At Work (SAW)) Our Skills USA team showcased their talents and skills at the Annual Skills USA Conference and UFT Spring CTE Conference. Members of the team placed in both the city and the state in this initial year. Our team is heavily concentrated in the areas of robotics and drone technology. Members of our Skills USA team are also dually involved members of the STEM team. HSET partnered with Fordham University's College Now program to navigate our students through high school academic requirements and prepare for success in college. HSET partnered with The Ramapo for Children group to launch a series of social emotional support strategies to promote positive behavior and academic success.. Preliminary enrollment numbers project an increase number of students and a higher number of students with disabilities that require additional setting accommodations. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. The student body special populations have increased in both the number of English Language Learners(ELLs) and Students with Disabilities. The ELL population for the 2018-19 SY is 14.46% up from 13.79% in 2017-18 SY. The Students with Disabilities population for the 2018-19 SY is 26.47% up from 25.4% in 2017-18 SY. Percent of students with IEPs at this school who: 3.7% - receive Related Services only 12.04% - spend less than 20% of the week receiving Special Education classroom services - spend between 21 and 59% of the week receiving Special Education classroom services 23.15% 55.56% - spend >60% of their week in Integrated Co-Teaching (ICT) classes 5.56% - received Self-Contained services >60% of the week 2018-19 CEP 11  4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Area of Celebration: High Expectations 3.4 QR School leaders consistently communicate high expectations tied to the Danielson Framework for Teaching to the entire staff. Administrators effectively communicate expectations that are tied to college and career readiness. Teachers have mutual accountability for high expectations set by the principal by providing training and professional development to each other. Parent partnerships that lead to students being college and career ready are successful. Areas of Focus: Pedagogy 1.2 QR Classroom practices reflect how students learn best. Student work products and discussions reflect high levels of thinking and participation. These practices were observed. However, they were not evident in the vast majority of classes. Teachers, students and administrators have stated that students learn best by engagement, discussion and student led environments. Although student work results in meaningful work products, they do not take ownership of their learning. 2018-19 CEP 12  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 10X565 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 410 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 7 6 5 7 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 11 9 1 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 82.0% % Attendance Rate 81.2% % Reduced Lunch 12.2% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.7% 68.8% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 0.5% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 2.9 3% 31% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 76% 71% 61.5% 9.9% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A NO N/A N/A NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A N/A NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES N/A N/A YES No N/A 86 82 10 83.0% 0.7% 26.6% 25.9% 2.7% 2.2% 2 6% 4.1 N/A N/A 82% 70% N/A N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A YES 2018-19 CEP 13  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The High School for Energy and Technology (HSET) presently serves a multi-ethnic population of 405 students. The school serves students from low-income families many of whom are first generation immigrants. In 2017-18, the number of our ELL population has marginally increased to 13.79%, with 56 ELL students overall. While the majority of the ELL students come from Spanish speaking homes, we also have 4 students who speak French at home, 2 from Twi, 1 from Bengali, Urdu and Yoruba speaking homes respectively. Many of our students are the first in their families to receive a formal education. The 56 ELLs proficiency levels are as follows: 7 are entering, 12 each as emerging and transitioning and 25 are considered Expanding. Additionally, within our current school population, we have 11 students who are deemed commanding or former ELLs. The High School for Energy and Technology graduated 81.7% of its first cohort in June 2016. Eighty percent of the students passed the English CC regents in 2015-16. Additionally, HSET achieved a 23% increase in the number of students passing the Global History regents and a 13% increase in Algebra I Common Core regents when compared to the prior year. However, a review of the Living Environment regents data revealed a 5% decrease in the number of students that successfully mastered the exam. Each fall ELA and Social Studies teachers administer their baseline writing assessments in all grades to determine the student's current level of performance and establish growth goals for the year. Taking the form of synthesis argument writing, student assessment is evaluated with a 6 point rubric. The department will administer their baselines and adopt the grade level 6 point writing rubric to analyze student written responses to identify trends of student needs and use this needs assessment to direct instruction across the discipline. To continually gauge student performance, quarterly assessments meant to mimic the skills needed on final and state exams will be used to redirect instruction. Currently a system to triangulate student performance in producing extensive, responsive and substantiated written responses. Developing vocabulary, increase reading time, providing writing resource tools and rubrics to improve literacy across all disciplines will improve overall performance. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified 2018-19 CEP 14  priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Goal: As a result of a focus on claim, evidence, and analysis, by June 2019, there will be a 3.6% overall increase in the number of students passing the Global Regents. 2018-19 CEP 15  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? To achieve our goal in social studies, we at HSET will teach students how to statement their claims, collect/provide evidence and analyze data. All students enrolled in Global Studies September 2018 to June 2019 Teachers will receive support on topics of concern:  Learn how to sequence and prioritize curricular topics based on data analysis  Create a unit of study, with a minimum of 10 lesson plans, that make connections with the NYC Social Studies Scope and Sequence, the CCLS and the Danielson Framework Incorporating literacy and writing into social studies   Developing formative and summative assessments Support for Students with Special Needs  Saturday Academy and AM/PM Boot Camp programs to prepare students for the Global History regents.  Pre-Teach terminology, sometimes referred to as front loading vocabulary, using visual vocabulary reference materials as a strategic method that will be used to assist in scaffolding information to our lowest third and ENL students September 2018 to June 2019 Social Studies, ELA, ENL and SPED teachers. November 2018 to May 2019 All students, ELLs, overage, under-credited and lowest-third students   To support our at most at risk students, technology visual-aids, graphic organizers, pictures, videos, and charts will serve as scaffolding tools. Students will have access to writing organizer and rubrics in Spanish. In addition, reading materials and textbooks will be ordered in other languages. Students will have access to academic interventions sessions during lunch and after school programs.  Social Studies and ELA teachers are responsible for implementing these strategies. The Assistant Principal of supervision is overseeing the strategy. Social Studies teachers are responsible for implementing these strategies. The Assistant Principal of supervision is overseeing the strategy. All Saturday Academy Teachers are responsible for implementing these strategies. HSET Administration is overseeing the Saturday Academy Pre Teaching Vocabulary will be implemented by all Special Ed teachers and ESL Teachers Scaffolding tools and techniques will be implemented by all 2018-19 CEP 16 Parents October 2018 to June 2019 Parental Involvement  Parent newsletters to increase awareness in high school events, workshops, graduation requirements and post secondary options.  Online historical materials (websites, webinars, massive open online courses) will be disseminated to parents assist their students in learning the concepts needed to master the exam  Coffee and Tea with the principal , once a month, for the purpose of enhancing our partnership with our school community.  Workshop series on academic performance and curriculum resources. Access to academic and higher education financial support services. teachers. This will be supervised by AP of Supervision. Our parent coordinator, with input from school community, sends out a monthly newsletter to all parents/guardians. Coffee and Tea with the principal is attended and headed by the school's principal. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. The Parent Association (PA) in collaboration with the teaching and guidance staff, will host a series of targeted workshops aimed to increase the awareness of the academic course requirements and curriculum for credit bearing courses. Resources, tools and materials will be made available to families to increase understanding of and accessibility to content. HSET anticipates continuing its partnership with The Leadership Program and Ramapo for Children to provide parent support workshops. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. HSET will use programming resources and planning to provide teachers with time to collaborate on the best strategies to use in the instruction of ELL and SPED students. HSET has two(2) ENL teachers, two(2) specialists and four(4) social studies teachers. It is important that our teachers continuously enhance their skills and keep abreast with the latest strategies to support the development of HSET students and to deliver instruction that is culturally and linguistically appropriate for all learners. In order to accomplish this task, our teachers will attend professional development classes offered by the Division of English Language Learners and Student Support and the CSA. Our 2 ENL teachers will attend workshops offered by the Division of English Language Learners throughout the year. Our ELL liaison will attend monthly workshops offered by the Field Support Center and turnkey to all faculty staff on the latest changes and updates. In addition, all teachers will engage in inter-visitations in order to observe other successful programs and interact with colleagues in their field. 2018-19 CEP 17  Additionally, our social studies teachers will attend the social studies curriculum workshops offered by the Field Support Center to create and refine rigorous and engaging lesson plans, units of study and performance tasks. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, students will have increased their utilization of writing techniques and data analysis through the development of uniform writing templates/rubrics and small group analysis discussions as evident by a 3% increase in interim results of Mock Global exams. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Writing measurements using Performance Series software, mock regents exams, and January 2019 Global regents results. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 18  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Currently HSET’s year-to-date attendance rate is 83%. Teachers, administrators, and industry partners will work collaboratively to increase this number during the 2018-2019 school year by increasing home visits to chronically absent students and supporting our parent coordinator with additional family outreach protocols. The Attendance team has reviewed the trends of the prior and are reviewing our future calendars to plan for anticipated low attendance days surrounding shortened weeks and before breaks. A PBIS team was formed in 2017 aimed at expanding our current practices for the upcoming new year which includes incentives for individuals to maintain a high attendance rate, monthly celebrations of student achievements, challenges for improvement, and cultural event activities for students with high participation rates and improvements. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, HSET will increase its overall student involvement rate by 10% from SY2017-18, by encouraging students to participate in student government, through voting for school activities monitored by COSA and Guidance. 2018-19 CEP 19  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Guidance conferences will take place with students (and their families) who have been chronically absent during the previous school year. These conferences will take place during the first month of school.  An attendance team will convene and meet weekly to discuss students at risk. It will be comprised of the following staff members: o Principal o Assistant Principal o Attendance Teacher o Guidance Counselor(s) o Parent Coordinator o Social Worker o Teacher representatives (1-2)  An attendance contract will be instituted between these students their parents and the school. It will spell out the supports and incentives students will receive for their “on time” arrival.  Periodic celebrations of students achieving perfect and improved attendance rates.  Home visits will be made to the homes of all students absent for more than three consecutive days unless appropriate communication/documentation is received September/October 2018 September 2018 to June 2019 September/October 2018 September 2018 to June 2019 Students in each grade level identified as “approaching on track” and “off Track”. Students in each grade level identified as “approaching on track” and “off Track”. Parents and families, Students in each grade level identified as “approaching on track” and “off Track”. Parents and families, Students in each grade level identified The attendance teacher, attendance committee members, guidance counselors and the administration. The attendance teacher, attendance committee members, parent coordinator guidance counselors and the administration. The attendance teacher, attendance committee members, parent coordinator, guidance counselors and the administration. Attendance teacher parent coordinator, guidance 2018-19 CEP 20 indicating the necessity to miss school (death in the family, illness, etc.) Designated staff will participate in Professional develop sessions sponsored by the DOE including sessions focused on: 1. Developing a school wide approach to reduce chronic absenteeism 2. How to develop effective attendance plans 3. Exploring attendance plans and best practices for improved school attendance 4. Learning how to support students in temporary housing as “approaching on track” and “off Track”. The attendance teacher, attendance committee members, parent coordinator, guidance counselors and the administration. September/November 2018 Positive Behavioral Interventions and Supports (PBIS) team will develop a positive behavior reward system to incentivize good traits, actions and qualities of individual students. Students will receive points for: Students in each grade level September 2018 to June 2019 counselors and the administration The attendance teacher, attendance committee members, parent coordinator, guidance counselors and the administration The teachers, PBIS committee members, guidance counselors and the administration. 1. Attendance in classes 2. Prompt arrival to school 3. Prompt arrival to classes 4. Academic performance 5. Adherence to Citywide Behavioral Policy 6. Adherence to school wide rules and procedures 7. Attendance at before and after school programs Involvement in teams and clubs 8. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Daily outreach to families regarding student attendance and late arrival will be conducted by close of day via automated messaging system. Support staff will reach out daily on students that are chronically late or absent. The PBIS team will reach out to families via the monthly newsletters to promote responsible behavior at school and at home. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2018-19 CEP 21  Planning time and resources will be given to the attendance and PBIS committees to effectively plan, allocate and install interventions and supports for students. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, there will be a 5% increase in HSET's daily student participation rate as measured by program attendance data. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. HSET's program attendance rate as measured by the School Attendance List Report. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 22  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The NYC School Quality Guide (2017-18) revealed that the over 85% of the students feel that teachers and staff strongly respect students cultural backgrounds and all students are provided an equitable educational experience. While the teacher survey indicates strong collaboration efforts to design instructional programs/lessons with a conscious effort to coordinate teaching across the disciplines, the data also shows a lack of commitment to implement new strategies to improve practices across the school. According to the school's 2017-18 scholarship and credit accumulation reports, 24% of the students in grades 10 and 11 are deficient in English Language Arts( ELA) credit accumulation. During the prior school year, the Grade 9 Inquiry team developed new writing organizers and adopted a grade wide rubric which resulted in an 89% ELA course passing rate. In the 2018-19 school year, teachers teams will work together to develop grade specific variations of the 9th grade writing resources that increase in rigor as students advance to higher grade levels. By implementing advanced the inquiry team's writing practices and resources school wide, the school will achieve higher ELA passing rates thereby closing the scholarship gap and improve student writing across the disciplines. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, our staff will engage in inquiry work focused on creating a supportive environment for all students with a focus on increasing student engagement in Social Studies, resulting in an increase in a combined January and June Regents pass rates of 4% from 36.36% to 40.36% on the Global Regents, and a 3% increase from 71.55% to 74.55% on the U.S. History Regents. 2018-19 CEP 23  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Meetings will be conducted by our guidance counselor with all impacted students and their parents by the end of September 2018. Meetings will include an evaluation of transcripts and attendance and the development of their Individual Graduation Plans (IGP) to earn the academic/Regents credits needed. Step Two: Regular attendance in school and in the following support programs (as indicated on their IGP). Students will participate in Saturday Regents Prep Academy (SRPA)  College/Career Readiness   HSET PM School  HSET Supervised Study (Daily extra help/tutoring)  Respect for All Bullying, positive Social interactions)  Counseling (Bi-Weekly/Monthly as prescribed). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Targeted 11th grade students and their parents. September 2018 to June 2019 Assistant Principal and/or Principal, and Guidance Counselors. Targeted 11th grade students and their parents. September 2018 to June 2019 Assistant Principal, and/ or Principal, and Guidance Counselors. In order to support our students with disabilities, English Language, Learners and other high needs support groups, we will provide the following academic supports: 1. Access to HSET’s supervised study program providing daily tutoring and homework help. 2. Regents preparation support during our Saturday School program which will run on the following dates: November 2018 – April 2019 Assistant Principal and/ or Principal Teachers as assigned ENL, students with disabilities and other high need students in grade 11 Fall Regents Prep November - January   NYSESLAT from March - April  Sprint Regents Prep April - June 2018-19 CEP 24 ENL teachers SPED teachers Core Content teachers September 2018 to June 2019 Assistant Principal and/ or Principal Teachers as assigned Professional develop activities for teachers will include: 1. Training in the development of thematic units of study in line with increasing student proficiency levels 2. Training in understanding the requirements of the NYSESLAT and planning lessons that address the rigorous linguistic demand 3. Development of a successful model for co-teaching with core content teachers 4. Strategies to increase student engagement 5. Strategies to increasing questioning and discussion 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Grade level teachers will communicate all additional support and intervention programs available throughout the year. Announcements will be made via closed-circuit TVs, Internet, monthly parent newsletters, special invitations, weekly outreach regarding before, after and weekend supplemental programs. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. HSET's guidance counselors will have planning time and resources necessary to effectively institute interventions as necessary. Teachers will be provided additional per session time to conduct courses and tutoring before and after school, during lunch sessions and on weekends. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 100% of our students Initial Graduation Plan's will be created/updated accordingly and the guidance department will monitor the Progress to Graduation Tracker and Scholarship Reports. 2018-19 CEP 25  Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. By October 2018, the guidance department will disseminate our color-coded report card system in order to monitor student progress. Our Color-Coded Report Card system will indicate student progress as follows  Green indicates passing all classes  Yellow indicate failing one (1) class  Red indicates failing (two) or more classes The resulting credit accumulation will be identified on out Scholarship Reports and the Progress to Graduation Tracker. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 26  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Effective schools are institutions in which the teaching and learning is paramount. HSET is committed to being one of these institutions by providing ongoing support and professional development to our teachers, in order to ensure that they acquire and utilize best practices, strategies and instructional materials to promote and sustain student engagement. According to the Quality Review for the 2014-2015 academic year, the school received a Well Developed for school culture: a school that establish a culture for learning that communicates high expectations to staff, students, and families and provide supports to achieve those expectations. The principal shares her vision with all stakeholders on a regular basis. Her message “I can see the end, and it is amazing” is a constant beacon of light as we strive to positively change and inspire in our learning community. The results of the 2017-18 School Survey show a substantial increase in trust and the effectiveness of school leadership. School leaders consistently communicate high expectations tied to the Danielson Framework for Teaching to the entire staff. Administrators effectively communicate expectations that are tied to college and career readiness (Quality Review 2017-18). Teachers have mutual accountability for high expectations set by the principal by providing training and professional development to each other. Parent partnerships that lead to students being college and career ready are successful (Quality Review 2017-18). As a result, HSET completed the 2017-18 school year with an 81.7% graduation rate for its first graduating cohort. HSET staffed its vacancies with a number of new teachers resulting in the need for additional teacher support in developing classroom management skills and implementing positive behavioral interventions and supports. Adjustments will be made to this year to enable us to show consistency and maintain/improve our student success rate. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 2018-19 CEP 27  By June 2019, all HSET teachers will receive professional development in PBIS to improve the classroom environment and school culture , resulting in a 5% increase in the number of teachers rated Effective or Highly Effective in the Danielson component 2D: Managing Student Behavior. 2018-19 CEP 28  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? The principal and assistant principals will complete the required observations and provide timely feedback. The administrations will perform quarterly walk through to norm the observation process and to provide additional feedback to the teachers. ALL HSET teachers. The school will use data and inter-visitations to teacher goals and assess instructional effectiveness. All HSET teachers The school will promote continuous improvement in teaching and learning at the school and departments levels by using to develop SMART goals and utilizing common planning periods to meet or exceed department goals with an emphasis on sub-populations of students. All HSET teachers September 2018 to June 2019 September 2018 to June 2019 September 2018 to June 2019 The Principal and assistant principal. The Principal and assistant principals. The Principals and assistant principals Teachers Leaders will perform inter-visitations to assist administrations in providing teachers with frequent, constructive and timely feedback. Teachers will also receive targeted professional development which focuses on Danielson 2A. In addition, teachers will share best practices and provide demonstration lessons from for the other teachers. All HSET teachers September 2018 to June 2019 The Principals and assistant principals. The school will promote an increased level of school community and school pride to develop a environment with a positive climate and culture for learning. All HSET teachers and students September 2018 to June 2019 The Principals and assistant principals. PBIS committee, guidance counselors, teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. The Parent Association (PA) in collaboration with the teaching and guidance staff, will host a series of targeted workshops aimed to promote parent leadership. Resources, tools and materials will be made available to families to increase parent engagement in support of their children at home. HSET anticipates continuing its partnership with The Leadership Program and the Lehman Arts Program to provide parent support workshops. 2018-19 CEP 29  Members of the PA/SLT were invited to collaborate with HSET faculty and administration during its Spring Planning Sessions. This level of shared decision making involvement has spearheaded an aggressive recruitment of parent families at events and meetings. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. HSET will allocate planning time and resources for observations, walk-throughs, sharing best practices and professional development. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 100% of the teachers will receive observations that evaluate the teacher’s classroom environment with timely feedback and expectations for improvement of creating an environment of respect and rapport . Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Teacher evaluations will be used as the instrument of measure. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 30  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. HSET believe that a strong and active partnership with our parents is a key component to our students’ success. According to the 2017-18 NYC School Survey, the school staff regularly communicates with parents/guardians about how parents can help students learn. Ninety-five percent of the parents/guardians surveyed indicated they are greeted warmly when they call or visit the school and say that their school communicates with them in a language and in a way that they can understand.. Additionally, the survey indicated an increases in the percentage of families that feel well-informed by the communications they receive from their school and say that teachers work closely with them to meet their child's needs (NYC School Survey, 2017-18). During the 2017-2018 school year, HSET sought to strengthen our relationships with families and increase their participation in all aspects of our school community. To this end, HSET developed a strong core base of families who participated in our Parent Association, School Leadership Team and attended student achievement events, conferences and themed workshops. The school hosted its annual staff retreat wherein two parent members joined the team to develop school goals, calendars and events. HSET will seek to further increase parent participation in our Parent Association, School Leadership Team, Parent Conferences and annual STAR Awards Ceremony and Banquet, Curriculum Night, Senior Night and themed workshops. In addition we will seek volunteers to introduce new family oriented activities such as cultural arts evening, talent shows, game/movie night. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. As a result of increasing parent outreach, by June 2019, HSET will increase its overall parent participation at parent events by 4% from 26% to 30% as measured by parent attendance at all school events. 2018-19 CEP 31  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Increasing parent involvement will begin with expanding the number of families which are represented in our Parent Association, School Leadership Team and during our parent conferences. An outreach campaigned will be lead by the parent coordinator and supported by our staff, teachers and administrators. School pride incentives will be given to students whose parents/ guardians attend parent meetings, participate as members of the SLT and /or attend school events. The administration will host workshops of interest during meeting times as well as introduce new family oriented activities such as Curriculum Night, Senior Night, Paint Night, and Game Night. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Parents of HSET student Throughout the 2018-2019 school year HSET parent coordinator, teachers, staff, and the administration. Parents of HSET student Throughout the 2018-2019 school year HSET parent coordinator, teachers, staff, and the administration. Parents of HSET student Throughout the 2018-2019 school year HSET parent coordinator, teachers, staff, and the administration. The Outstanding Parental Contributions Award will be established and presented to a deserving recipient during the annual STAR Awards Ceremony and Banquet. Parents of HSET students May 2019 HSET parent coordinator, teachers, staff and the administration. Implement and introduce and language translation broadcast system that will allow for two languages two be simultaneously transmitted through individualized communications devices. Parents of HSET students Invite parent leaders to collaborate with the HSET faculty at annual planning sessions and retreats. Parents of HSET students Throughout the 2018-2019 school year HSET parent coordinator, teachers, staff and the administration. Throughout the 2018-2019 school year HSET parent coordinator, teachers, staff and the administration. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement 2018-19 CEP 32  If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. The use of translation services to operate and translate at events will be utilized. The Leadership Program and Lehman Arts groups will continue to be providers of parent workshops in conjunction with staff and guidance counselors. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The following resources will be necessary for the implementation of the stated goal. ● Workshops of interest with guest speakers for parents. ● Database of parent contact information including home address, phone number(s) and , e-mail address. ● Per-session for administrators, teachers, guidance and staff facilitating these workshops and activities. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, there will be a 5% increase in the number of parents who participate in parent teacher conferences when compared with the same period during the 2017-2018 academic year. Parent engagement will also be garnered through the implementation of a monthly newsletter as well as other forms of parental outreach. Progress towards this goal will be evaluated on an ongoing basis and supports will be adjusted when necessary. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The instrument of measure will be the attendance at PA meetings and Parent teacher conferences. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 33  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.)  8th grade ELAscores Levels 1 and 2  Course culminates in Regents  Enrichmentquery from students  Performance Series  8th grade ELAscores Levels 1 and 2  Course culminates in Regents  Enrichmentqueryfrom students  8th grade ELAscores Levels 1 and 2  Course culminates in Regents  Enrichmentqueryfrom students  8th grade ELAscores Levels 1 and 2  Course culminates in Regents  Small AISELA classes Skills-building Scaffolding    Textual evidence  SmallAISELAclasses Skills-building Scaffolding    Textual evidence  SmallAISELAclasses Skills-building Scaffolding    Textual evidence    SmallAISELAclasses Skills-building Scaffolding Instructional   Tutoring  One-to-one instruction Instructional   Tutoring  One-to-one instruction Instructional   Tutoring  One-to-one instruction Instructional   Tutoring  One-to-one instruction  During  the school day (lunch) Saturday Academy  Before/After school boot camps  During  the school day Saturday Academy  Before/After school boot camps  During the school day Saturday Academy  Before/After school   During the school day Saturday Academy  2018-19 CEP 34  Enrichmentqueryfrom students  Performance Series (ELA) We will reference the students' I.E.Ps to determine services At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) SETSS   15:1 class instructional model Speech   Mandated Counseling    Instructional individualizedcounseling session Small group counselling  Before/After school  During the school day Saturday Academy  Before/After school  2018-19 CEP 35  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. There are two students. We are providing targeted guidance and attendance outreach. A counselor will be responsible for providing all resources to help these students succeed. A school uniform and book bag with school supplies is provided for all STH. The Morris Heights Health Center(MHHC), is a partnership in the community to improve the well being of children and families by providing on-site access to health care. This also includes, but not limited to, mental health and health education services. In addition to on-site health and dental care services, the MHHC health team educates parents about obtaining health insurance for their children and the entire family. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 36  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 CEP 37  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. HSET uses a variety of methods to acquire, retain and support highly qualified teachers: 1. recruitment of experienced teachers to serve on the school’s planning team and subsequently full-time staff, 2. recruitment of qualified teachers from the phase-out school in the building, 3. new teachers via programs like New Teacher Finder, Teaching Fellows, Teach for America, and current staff member recommendation. HSET believes in nurturing teachers by providing frequent and consistent supervisory support. Coach one day a week provided by our partner, the Institute for Student Achievement, and various opportunities to assume leadership roles in department teams, curriculum writing, and social emotion support of students. HSET believes in providing our staff with external professional development aligned to citywide expectations. To ensure staff retention we provide ongoing differentiated professional development opportunities in an effort to build capacity. We work closely with our Network to provide staff with avenues for leadership within the Department of Education. The Principal’s Secretary works closely with the network Human Resources point person to ensure that anyone who is not deemed highly qualified submits all required documentation and meets assessment deadlines. HSET Mentors are assigned to support first year teachers in curriculum development, classroom management and professional enhancement. Content Area Specialists are assigned to assist teachers with the implementation of new Department of Education curriculum mandates. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). 2018-19 CEP 38  School-based staff provides ongoing learning workshops on data-driven instruction, supporting diverse learners, Socratic seminars, best practices, Life Space Crisis Intervention (LSCI) and Positive Behavior Intervention Supports (PBIS), etc. Our partners and our district network have been conducting coaching workshops on targeted instruction based on teacher practices observed in the classroom. The following represents activities and strategies for high quality professional development:  Professional development in the research of David Conley in using Habits of Mind to prepare students for college and careers.  Professional learning community inquiry projects centering on the formation of student tasks will be designed  to provide modification for SWD and ELLs, as well as provide multiple entry points for all students. Inquiry projects designed by Professional Learning Communities (PLC) will focus on student tasks and their relationship to student achievement. Refinement of task and modification of curricula at integral to the PLC process to impact student achievement.  Teq centers on instructional technology strategies, blended learning, Google Apps. IO(Datacation) centering on online assignments, assessments and anecdotal portal.   Ramapo for Children to support teacher and staff development of socio-emotional learning and their strategies toolkit.  Additional professional learning workshops will be offered based on the Professional Development Committee analysis of student and teacher data, surveys and classroom observations. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 2018-19 CEP 39  4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Various teams have been implemented at HSET to facilitate teacher participation in the decision making process. These teams include, the inquiry teams, professional learning committees, the Leadership Consultation Team (LCT). Committee team members take an active role in determining instruction and assessment measures required to meet student needs. The inquiry team is responsible for reviewing assessment data to identify areas of strength, areas for improvement, and implementation of appropriate instructional strategies. These areas of strength and areas for improvement are used to determine which assessments will be used for measures of student learning. Identified areas of improvement are reviewed and communicated to teachers after which, teacher leaders and administration design professional development for the academic school year. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) Section 5A Title I Part A (Basic) Federal 309,486 Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Federal Federal Federal 0 0 0 Tax Levy (FSF) Local 3,070,974.00 X N/A N/A N/A X Section 5B Section 5D Section 5E Section7 N/A N/A N/A Section 5A Section 5B 2018-19 CEP 40  Section 5C Section 5D Section 5E 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the 2018-19 CEP 41  participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 42  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. High School for Energy and Technology, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) Act, is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students The High School for Energy and Technology will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 2018-19 CEP 43  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community. Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; 2018-19 CEP 44  ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) The High School for Energy and Technology, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. 2018-19 CEP 45  Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) ; Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; 2018-19 CEP 46  Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; Parent Responsibilities: II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities 2018-19 CEP 47  ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; 2018-19 CEP 48  ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 49  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP 50  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: The High School for Energy and Technology presently serves a multi-ethnic population of 403 students. The school serves students from low-income families many of whom are first generation immigrants. In 2017-18, the number of our ELL population has marginally increased to 13.79%, with 56 ELL students overall. While the majority of the ELL students come from Spanish speaking homes, we also have 4 students who speak French at home, 2 from Twi, 1 from Bengali, Urdu and Yoruba speaking homes respectively. Many of our students are the first in their families to receive a formal education. The 56 ELLs proficiency levels are as follows: 7 are entering, 12 each as emerging and transitioning and 25 are considered Expanding. Additionally, within our current school population, we have 11 students who are deemed commanding or former ELLs. A total of 18 of those students were classified as ELLs and Special Education. The grade level breakdown for ELLs in our school is as follows: in grade 9, we currently have 7 entering, 8-Emerging, 5-Transitioning, and 7- Expanding. In grade 10, we have 1 Entering, 3 -Emerging, 4-Transitioning, and 9- Expanding. In grade 11 we have 1-Emerging and 9 Expanding. In grade 12 we have 2-Expanding. The Commanding or Former ELLs breakdown is thus: in grade 9 we 4 students, whiles grade 10 and 11 have 2 students each and grade 12 has 3 students. Therefore, during the 2017-18 school year, we expected to serve a total of 56 current ELLs and 11 former ELLs in grades 9-12. Analysis of Regents and NYSESLAT data indicate that this population has struggled in core content classes which require a lot of reading and writing, needing supplemental assistance with comprehension and complementing tasks. During tutoring sessions, students will get support from their ENL teachers as well as their peers to help build the skills necessary to successfully complete classes and the Regents exam. Statistics show that many ELLs in NYC struggle to pass the NYS Regents exam. This grant will allow ENL teachers to provide the extra support after school and/or during Saturday school to ensure that students acquire the skills needed to be successful in their classes and on standardized assessments. Incorporating an online reading program such as Google classroom and Edmodo will help assess, target and boost the reading levels of ELL students; increasing their literacy skills, while assisting them with developing listening, speaking and writing skills. It will also help to support their advancement towards reading proficiency and performing on grade level. In order to improve outcomes on standardize exams for ELLs especially among the Entering and Emerging levels, the bilingual teacher will train students to be able to use the bilingual versions of the Regents exams. Two (2) certified ENL teachers and one(1) certified ELA teacher will deliver the planned instructional practice for ELL achievement. Instruction will be carried out using visual aids, reading comprehension materials, writing tasks and peer to peer structured communication. We plan to implement into our school's schedule a total of 7 Saturday Regents Prep classes that will begin on November 19th, 2018 and run until January 21st, 2019. During these classes ELL students will receive additional supports to prepare them for the January 2019 Regents Examinations. 2 certified ENL teachers will provide these supports for students to ensure that they gain all the necessary skills to pass the exams. The language of instructions will be English 2018-19 CEP 51  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information however, students will be provided with the translated versions of the exam, glossaries and various visuals aids to enhance their comprehension. To prepare students for the NYSESLAT Spring 2019 Administration, we plan to include a total of 7 Saturday NYSESLAT Prep classes that will begin on March 3rd, 2019 and run through April 28th, 2019. During these classes students will gain vital skills about test taking strategies and learn about the linguistic demand needed towards attaining the highest level of academic success and English language proficiency. NYSESLAT measures the linguistic demands necessary for students to meet the discipline-specific standards at the corresponding grade-band level, therefore these classes will be tailored specifically to help students towards reaching these goals. Two ENL teachers will provide instruction during these classes with the use of the Finish Line: New York ELLs Bilingual Common Core workbooks, listening CD and teacher guides. Saturday Academy will begin on April 28th and run until June 9th, 2018. During this program the students will be able to prepare for their June 2019 Regents Examinations and this will include Saturday Language Labs (SLL) classes where students who may not have computer access at home will learn about the usage of various applications and educational software. Many ELLs do not practice the skills they obtain in school at home or in their communities. Saturday Language Lab's will allow students to build on their listening, speaking, reading and writing skills. Our goal is for our students to master English to the best of their ability and obtain a Regents diploma. In addition to these programs, on Wednesday and Thursdays our school will have an extended day. The program designed for ELLs will provide activities that involve targeting the areas of language proficiency, literacy and writing. To achieve this, we will institute programs designed to assist them in acquiring the skills needed to successfully complete both academic coursework and standardized testing expectations. We also want to get more parents involved by helping them better understand both our high school graduation requirements as well as the post-secondary options available to their child. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: It is important that ENL teachers continuously enhance their skills and keep abreast with the latest strategies to support the development of ELL students and to deliver instruction that is culturally and linguistically appropriate for all diverse learners. In order to accomplish this task, our teachers will attend professional development classes offered by the Division of English Language Learners and Student Support and the CSA. Therefore, our 2 ENL teachers will attend workshops offered by the Division of English Language Learners throughout the year. Our ELL liaison will attend monthly workshops offered by the Field Support Center and turnkey to all faculty staff on the latest changes and updates. In addition, all teachers will engage in inter-visitations in order to observe other successful programs and interact with colleagues in their field. Additional professional development opportunities will be provided in house by our Assistant Principal and outside vendors. 2018-19 CEP 52  Part C: Professional Development Teachers will participate in professional development sessions throughout the school year attending a minimum of three DOE sponsored workshops/meetings. Our inter-visitation schedule will include visiting programs at two schools twice each. PD sessions with the Assistant Principal will occur every other month during our designated Monday time slot from 2:45-3:55 PM. Additional professional development may occur, however, this will be at no additional cost to the school. Topics to be covered (but not limited to) TEQ SMART software training for creating ENL lessons and applications for ELLs, Danielson Group linking CCLS to ENL instruction, ENL Instruction : Stand -alone vs Integrated, Essential Components for ELLs Instruction in Math Classroom, Practical Tools to build Academic Language across Content areas. By attending these various PDs and workshops ENL as well as teachers across the board will learn about strategies and tools they can use in their classrooms in order to provide the best supports to their ELL population. ENL teachers will have a better understanding about Integrated Teaching model and its implementation in the classroom. At each Professional Development offered in house, teachers will receive agendas that will be kept in a binder along with the copies of the materials. Attendance sheets on a school's letterhead will serve as a record to keep track of Professional Developments. A spreadsheet of Professional Developments attended throughout the school year will be kept on file to track the number of total PDs attended. Teachers attending outside the school PDs will bring copies of the agendas and materials distributed during workshops. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: High School for Energy and Technology will hold three (3) workshops for parents of our ELL students to inform them about relative information including our curriculum, post-secondary opportunities and the support services the school provides for our ELL students. These meetings will take place in the evenings from 6:00PM - 7:30 PM and will occur three times throughout the school year. At these meeting parents will be able to asks questions that raise their concerns, learn about the progress their children make in school, address the questions of accustoming to a new school culture etc. In addition, on Tuesdays during our Parental Outreach that takes place from 2:40-4:00pm, the ENL teachers will reach out to parents of ELLs to inform them about their children's progress in school and the supports they need. Also, the parents of ELLs will have the opportunity to meet with the ENL teachers during the regular citywide in school Parent -Teacher conferences held in September from 5:00-8:00pm, November evening session from 5:00-8:00pm/afternoon session from 1:00-3:00pm, March evening session from 5:00-8:00pm/afternoon session from 1:00-3:00pm and May evening session from 5:00-8:00pm. The year will begin with a first meeting in September where families will familiarize with our curriculum and expectations for successful completion of each grade level. In addition it will review the ELL identification process and the ENL programs currently available at our school. The second workshop in mid January will focus on supporting students assimilate into a new country and the institution of high school: credit accumulation, promotion status and the 2018-19 CEP 53  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities standardized assessments their students will be expected to take and pass in order to progress in our school. The second workshop in mid-January will focus on supporting students assimilate into a new country and the institution of high school: credit accumulation, promotion status and the standardized assessments their students will be expected to take and pass in order to progress in our school. The final workshop in mid-March will be a presentation by ELL students showcasing the skills and knowledge they have acquired throughout the year. Students will lead their parents through a sample of the exercises utilized with them to enhance their development. The families will be notified by phone calls, emails and newsletters about these workshops. Our guidance department along with parent coordinator, ENL teachers and support staff will take a part in these workshops. All workshops will be facilitated by our ENL teachers and our Assistant Principal or Principal. Guest speakers may be added as necessary; however this will be at no additional cost to the school. Parents will be notified about all workshops via mail, email and telephone calls in their preferred language. The records i. e. agendas, attendance sheets and invitations in parent's preferred language will be maintained and kept in a separate ELL Parent's binder. In addition, parents will be notified about the Division of Family and Community Engagement conferences such as Learning Together: Spanish Language ELL Family Engagement Conferences, New York Public Libraries' ESOL Classes, Adult Basic Education Classes and Drop- in English Conversation Classes that are available at no cost to parents. Parents of ELLs will be invited to attend a CUNY/Financial Aid Workshop, held in October, facilitated by our guidance department to learn about CUNY colleges, Admissions Criteria, Special Programs and FAFSA. Our bilingual guidance counselors, Parent Coordinator and support staff will help the parent of ELLs to information provided to them. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, $ 9,021.00 3 teachers x 14 sessions x3 hours x $47.73 = $6,014 1 teacher x 21 sessions x 3 hours x $47.73 = $3,007 $ 0 $ 1,000.00 Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Teachers to work with students after school and on Saturdays. Professional development for this project will include ELL trainers, webinars and PDs. Finish Line: New York ELLs 9-12 Bilingual Common Core ($500) Core content textbooks in native languages. ($500) 2018-19 CEP 54  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) $ 1,245.00 Travel Other TOTAL 0 $1,100 $12,366 We are considering the following programs: Achieve 3000 and MindPlay. Travel expenses if incurred will be at no cost to the school. Parent engagement activities will include workshops to assist parents with acclimating their children to their new high school and/or country. N/A 2018-19 CEP 55  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 10 School Name High School for Energy and Technology Borough Bronx School Number 565 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Marie Guillaume Coach Marc Newman ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Anthony Owusu Asirifi Teacher/Subject Area Yesmery Sanchez/ ENL Teacher/Subject Area Brian DiCarlo/Social Studies Related-Service Provider Nikiya ScottSpecial Education Superintendent Carron Staple Assistant Principal Donald Sexton Coach type here School Counselor Samson Pena Parent Tanyalee Rodriguez Parent Coordinator Stephanie Martinez Field Support Center Staff Member Rosa Florentino Other (Name and Title) Stephanie Semidey, Asst Princi C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 1 0 2 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics 2018-19 CEP 56  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 403 Total number of ELLs 56 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 13.90% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 4 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 6 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? High School for Energy and Technology administers diagnostic examinations in all grade levels. These assessments are teacher-created and are designed to gather data on students’ level of language acquisition in the four modalities of listening, reading, writing and speaking. The insights that the data provides about our ELLs include information on students strengths and areas of deficiency in both literacy and content area skills so that the pedagogical staff can develop intervention strategies to hone in on the required skills/content that needs to be further developed to increase student proficiency levels. The NYSESLAT data reveals that approximately 45% of our ELL population displayed Expanding, while 13% were identified at Entering and 21% were classified as Emerging, and 13% at Transitioning levels. The data further revealed that students particularly displayed deficiency in the areas of gathering evidence and supporting details, which in turn impacted their reading and writing levels. A school wide approach to address this concern was developed by the inquiry committees to address writing deficiencies of all 2018-19 CEP 57  students, and in particular ENL students' ability to support arguments or claim with evidence. The instructional focus for all ENL students will be to increase their skill base through a range and variety of instructional strategies designed to support their academic language acquisition skills. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Grade team meetings and inquiry teams will used to plan the course of action and support this effort to increase the skills base of the ELLs. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? The High School for Energy and Technology reviewed NYSESLAT data from the prior school years to build upon the foundations we have developed. At HSET we utilize the Habits of Mind (HOM) in every classroom which allows consistency for all students. Habits of Mind assessments are administered at the beginning and end of the year to analyze progress. An additional assessment of teacher and student progress involves looking at student work at regularly scheduled intervals in Teacher Team and Inquiry Team meetings. The focus of our assessments not only provides information about the four modalities but also displays deficiency in the areas of gathering evidence and providing supporting details, which in turn impacted their reading and writing levels. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Once the summative data has been gathered, the various intervention options will be discussed at the faculty meetings and the specific strategies or intervention plans will be taken up by the grade-team and inquiry team levels. All NYSESLAT students are mandated to attend our Saturday Academy to improve their English language skills and prepare for the NYSESLAT. The Saturday Academy is an intensive 3-hour program that allows students to practice and strengthen their English skills in all modalities towards realizing proficiency or mastery of the language. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] This is N/A because we are a high school. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The data patterns across proficiency levels have revealed from the 2017-2018 NYSESLAT that reading and writing component are the areas where students display the greatest deficiency across all grade levels. In total we have 56 ENL students in our school. Following administration of the NYSESLAT data reveals that approximately 45% of our ELL population displayed expanding while 0.13% were identified at entering and 43% fall into emerging and transition levels respectively. According to the data we need to strengthen reading and writing with ELL students. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? The findings will be disseminated through various forms such as the email, faculty, and grade team-meetings. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). 2018-19 CEP 58  a. Freestanding ENL program. Instruction is delivered through the following models: Our organizational models are integrated ENL (Team Teaching) and Free Standing ENL. This is done in accordance to the mandates stipulated in the new CR-Part 154.2. The program model is ungraded, heterogeneous groupings and students of mixed proficiency levels. Standalone ENL - Entering or Emerging ENL are placed into a standalone ENL class. They receive either 180 minutes or 90 minutes depending on their level of proficiency. Integrated ENL- The ENL teachers push into core content (mostly ELA and social studies) classes with ELL students. Students receive up to 180 hours depending on their level of proficiency. b. TBE program. If applicable. Not applicable c. DL program. If applicable. Not applicable 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? All ELL students receive the mandated minutes of instruction according to their level of English proficiency as per CR Part 154.Entering ELLs receive a minimum of 3 units of study (540 minutes of ENL instruction, 1 unit of standalone instruction, 1 unit of integrated ENL/ELA and1 unit of integrated content instruction with ENL teacher); Emerging ELLs receive the minimum of 2 units of study ( 360 minutes of ENL instruction, .5unit of standalone instruction, 1 unit of integrated ENL/ELA instruction, .5 units of integrated content instruction with ENL teacher); and Transitionstudents receive 1 unit of study in ENL (180 minutes of instruction, .5 unit of ENL/ELA instruction and .5 unit of integrated content instruction with ENLteacher). Expanding ELLs receive 1 unit of study in ELA with ENL teacher (180 minutes of instruction). Commanding ELL will receive .5 unit of integratedELA/Content area with ENL teacher (90 minutes of instruction). We mostly have team teaching in both ELA and social studies where the ENL teachers push-in to those classes. Thus our integrated ENL utilizes two ENL certified teachers who co-teach in both ELA and Social Studies. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Instructional programs with high levels of rigor and support result in higher academic achievement for ELLs. Effective strategiesused across all content areas include: differentiation, small group instruction, explicit academic vocabulary instruction, scaffolding (modeling,bridging, contextualization, schema building, metacognitive development, text re-presentation). Our school focus is on reading and writing with specificemphasis on vocabulary across all content areas. Studies show that native language development accelerates literacy gains in both the native language andEnglish. As such, we offer language development and support for content instruction in the native language (or with native language support).The ENLteacher works collaboratively with the content area teachers in social studies, science and mathematics. This year the NYCDOE instructional focus as outlinedin the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) is on reading and analyzing informational texts and writing opinions and arguments in response to textsacross the content areas of ELA, math, science, social studies and the Career and Technical Education (CTE).The programs provide lessons which aredifferentiated to meet the students varying levels of ability and offer support in the development of language skills in the modalities of listening, speakingreading and writing. These are reinforced in every lesson. Lessons are also scaffolded in several ways, allowing all students multiple entry points andopportunities for success. Students work either independently or in homogeneous or heterogeneous groupings depending on the task as well as their abilities.Students also have access to bilingual dictionaries and glossaries. 2018-19 CEP 59  4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? ELLs are evaluated in both English and their native language. ELLs have the option to participate in alternative assessments intheir native language. This is facilitated in all content areas as all ELL students are provided with the opportunity to sit in class assessments as wellas the NYS Regents examination in their native language. Apart from the ELA Regents, ELL students have the option of testing in their native language (LOTE)and are given this opportunity to do so in class assessment as well as on State assessments. The rationale behind this approach is that we believe thatproficiency in the native language supports efficiency in the second language acquisition process. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Differentiated instruction for ELL subgroups: a. SIFE – SIFE students are grouped based on their skills to receive intervention during the school day as well as for additional instruction during and after school. SIFE students are supported through the push in model in their content area classes. Student progress is assessed each marking period in order to evaluate and revise interventions as appropriate. Students work in small homogeneous groups for teachers to ensure that students grasp concepts and in heterogeneous groups to encourage participation in discussions with peers in order to support their comprehension of a given topic or assignment. Teachers across all content areas use research-based instructional strategies to include: activating prior knowledge, providing a print-rich environment, engaging students in hands on activities, using realia, props, model activities, activating higher order thinking skills through sorting, categorizing, charting, diagramming and also through explicitly teaching vocabulary. b. NEWCOMERS – The primary objective is to simplify language while amplifying the content. Students are provided with hands on, demonstrations, opportunities for role play, journal writing, using native language or pictures and also using the workshop model to scaffold basic skills in language development. This form of intensive instruction approach prepares ELLs for ELA testing in not only the NYSESLAT but also the NYSED ELA Regents examinations. c. ELLs receiving service 4-6 years – explicit vocabulary instruction, intensive academic literacy skills building. d. LONG TERM ELLs (6+ years) – The focus is on developing social and emotional support in the language acquisition process. This is in addition to all the other instructional services provided to all other ELLs. Long term ELLs also receive support through scaffolding and differentiation of tasks and class activities. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? In order to provide ELL-SWD with access to academic content areas and accelerate their English language development, teachers implement the following instructional strategies: checking for understanding, grouping, activating prior knowledge by building background, providing a print rich environment, engaging students in hands on activities, using props, model activities, manipulative, activating higher order thinking skills through sorting, categorizing, classifying, sequencing, charting, diagramming, teaching context clues skills and also explicitly teaching vocabulary. SWD as they provide differentiation of tasks and activities. Students are evaluated through the use of level set testing and activities are generated to meet their specific instructional needs. Universal Design for Learning strategies are utilized in all areas to support student learning. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Our school makes every effort to meet the diverse needs of ELL-SWDs within the least restrictive environment. Our certified ENLteachers' schedules are flexible enough to allow them to provide ENL instruction to ELLs during the regular school day 2018-19 CEP 60  (through regularly scheduledclasses). Additionally, they are able to collaborate with the Special Education team, and grade inquiry team to monitor individual ELL-SWD's progress in coresubject classes and by grade. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, Math, Global Studies, Science, & other subject matter are provided through after school programs and Saturday programs (NYSESLAT Academy and Regents Prep) they are designed to achieve the following: a. Literacy Development across the content areas (All teachers are reading teachers-not just content instructors) b. Use of technology, visual, auditory, and tangible realia/materials regarding the delivery of instruction c. Strong native language support for beginning students who have recently arrived to the country d. Peer tutoring Program. All interventions are offered in English with strong native language support. Both ELL teachers work closely with content area teachers to provide best teaching practices and strategies for our English as New Language students. e. Students entering the 9th grade are enrolled in common core math class, as well as math functions class to develop skills to be successful when taking the common core algebra math regents. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Based on our analysis of the NYSESLAT results, we found out that most students had difficulty in the reading and writing portion of the NYSESLAT. We will accordingly focus on those areas in order to facilitate improvement in their English language acquisition skills. Mandatory after school and Saturday tutoring have been established as additional academic interventions for our ELL students. Instructional team inquiry projects focus on all students including ELL's with evidence based writing. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? Currently at this time there is no programs and services that would be discontinued. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. a. ELLs are afforded equal access to all school programs. ELL students are invited to participate in all PSAL activities, student government, National Honor Society, etc. Throughout the regular school day ELL receive service as per the CR Part 154. They participate in the freestanding ENL program and in most cases receive above and beyond the minimum service hours required in push-in classrooms(mostly in Social Studies and ELA). ELLs are encouraged to attend tutoring, enrichment, athletic and general school activities. All communications, flyers, notifications to parents/students are distributed in English and in students’ preferred native language. We also conduct parental outreach through K-12 Alerts (automatic phone call system), which is also done in the students native language. 2018-19 CEP 61  12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. To support our ELLs, the school has provided alternate texts in English and history, which are more accessible. Alternate textbooks are available for history, with grade appropriate language, but more accessible for our ELL students. The ELA classes have classrooms sets of 'Collections" textbook and then utilize libraries with a variety of genres, and we will get more books in the native languages, spoken by our ELL populations. We incorporate technology (Google Classroom and Edmondo) into the curriculum smart board instruction, Brainpop ENL, Mastery Learning and the Wizard Online Program. This creates new opportunities to meet students needs. All content area teachers offer tutoring for all students on a regular basis during the day , PM school and in after school programs. A Saturday program will be offered to all students including ELLs starting in the spring (depended on the budget). There is also mandated counseling offered to all special education students, including our special education ELLs. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Native language support comes from bilingual a paraprofessional, buddy system, translations, word-to-word translated materials, bilingual dictionaries,glossaries and on-line translation programs as well as staff members who speak majority of our students' native languages. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. All required services support and resources correspond to our ELL population ages and grade levels. The school religiously follow the mandates in the new CR-Part 154. The curriculum is therefore aligned to the NYS Common Core Learning Standards, which embeds grade and age appropriate standards. As the ENL teachers plans and designs lessons for the ELL students close attention is given to the learning goals for each student and benchmarks are established which will be used to closely monitor the progress of the ELL student. These benchmarks are based on what is age and grade appropriate as per the NYS Common Core Learning Standards. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? High School for Energy and Technology actually shares the Grace Dodge building with two other schools. There is one library which is supposedto be shared by all three schools but it is currently not in used. We indeed share the gym and cafeteria with those schools. However, that do not in any wayhinder our support for the ELLs. In order to support our ELLs, the school has provided alternate texts in English and history, which are more accessible.Alternate textbooks are available for history, with grade appropriate language, but more accessible for our ELL students. The ELA classes have classroomlibraries with a variety of genres, and we will get more books in the native languages, spoken by our ELL populations. We incorporate technology into thecurriculum smart board instruction, Edmondo, Achieve 3000, Brainpop ENL, Mastery Learning and the Wizard Online Program. This creates new opportunitiesto meet students’ needs and not being dependent on campus wide resources. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). The school offers a rolling information session in June for newly enrolled students at HSET. Additionally the school organizes two freshman orientation in June and during the last week of August to acquaint all parents with procedures, protocols and activities within our school community. We also have an ELL parent orientation in October to ensure a smooth transition into a new school year. At each of these events, we plan to have an informational session for all our incoming and returning ELL students. At the ELL parent orientation, we show the ENL video that is part of the LAP tool Kit. During the ELL parent orientation, we keep ELL parents abreast with the mandates of the new CR-Part 154 and services available to ELLs. Activities include a get-to-know-you game with teachers and ELL students/parents as part of the informational sessions. Present at these events are the Principal, the Assistant Principal, the Attendance Teacher, Parent Coordinator, and the teaching staff (including the ENL teachers). We have an active parent population and the parental involvement will be ongoing, with special encouragement for the parents to attend school events such as Parent Association meetings, College Night, etc. We conduct a needs assessment survey of our ELL parents to see what their needs and interests are and how they are willing to contribute to the school community. We strive towards having an ELL parent on our PTA, if possible. We plan to partner with community organizations and our Parent Coordinator will be actively involved in these outreach efforts. 2018-19 CEP 62  17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? ELL students are offered Spanish as their language elective. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? The ENL teachers and designated pedagogues attend PD offered by the OELL, RSETAC, QTEL. All school personnel including Assistant Principals, secretaries, parent coordinator, office staff, are trained in ELL identification and are familiarized with ELL instructional strategies in order to fully identify and support our ELLs. After ENL teachers go to any ELL specific workshops, they turnkey the information to all content teachers in order to provide the needed support for our ELL students. The school provides Monday afternoon professional development series where best practices are shared and when any ELL professional development is offered by the DOE, our teachers attend. Teachers and non-pedagogic staff receive ongoing professional development and participate in workshops sponsored by the DOE, Professional organizations and in-school throughout the academic year. Teachers and other staff members alike are also encouraged to participate in any external workshop they may identify on their own. Teachers in all departments meet daily to ensure curricula are aligned to CCLS. Teachers work in Inquiry Teams to develop instructional strategies targeted to support instruction among our ELLs and other students. This current year our ENL teachers attended many PDs which helped to infuse a lot of best practices strategies in all departments. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. We provide our staff with the following supports to assist them with their work with ELLs. To assist ELLs with transition from middle to high school, the school creates a student profile of each ELL student which is shared among the support team. Background information is gathered from ATS as well as student bio/file (cumulative record). The information gathered is used to develop a spreadsheet which is compiled in-house and provides a snapshot on the student. It includes each ELL student's OSIS number, grade level, official class, years of service, official language, modality report, NYSESLAT decision, SIFE status and X-coded status. A breakdown of their exam status is also available in this spreadsheet. Teachers receive training on howto use this data to support instruction as they determine the language needs of the ELL students and provide services accordingly. Once in high school the ENL teacher learns how to use the information from the ELL assessments to identify strengths and areas of need the student may have and is therefore able to plan instruction based on the information gathered. ENL teachers will be encouraged to go to DOE and non-DOE training on best ENL practices. Non-ENL teachers will receive professional development from ENL teachers on best practices for their classes, as well as be encouraged to attend any available outside ENL PDs in their subject areas. A record of all PD's and informational sessions both in and out of the building are kept in school files including agendas, sign in sheets and materials where applicable. ENL 2018-19 CEP 63  teachers also keep a record of all PD hours in a binder that contains the agendas from the PD’s they attend to ensure they get 50% of their 175 mandated hours. All other teachers keep agendas from any PD sessions regarding ELL’s in their own personal binders as well to ensure their 15% of their 175 mandated hours. All teachers will attend PD that are dedicated to language acquisition, including a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for ELL’s. ENL teachers will also attend PD’s in language acquisition in alignment with core content area instruction, including a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for ELL’s. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? We have a Parent Association and a School Leadership Team and recently a bilingual parent coordinator. We believe in active parent involvement which will be encouraged continuously through newsletters, phone calls, emails, and family evenings. We organize activities based on the parental feedback and needs surveys. Through our PTA and SLT meetings we have invited parents to meet and discuss student needs. We hold a curriculum night where parents of ELLs are invited to attend the informational session during the fall semester and spring semester. In addition, the school offers an information session in October and an orientation in August where an ELL component is included. We plan to survey ELL parents to see what their needs are, and continue to have an ELL parent representation in our PTA. We currently partner with community organizations such as the Committees for Hispanic Families and Children and our ENL teachers are actively involved in these outreach efforts. Translation services are conducted through our bilingual staff as follows: Our ENL teacher, Ms. Sanchez, Parent Coordinator, Ms. Martinez, our bilingual counselor Mr. Pena, and Ms. Warfield, school payroll secretary speaks Spanish. We also utilize our bilingual ENL teacher/Coordinator, Mr. Owusu who speaks Twi. We additionally use the services of the DOE translation Unit if the need arises. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Our school strives to raise parent awareness of services available to students and families within the community as well as to increase parent involvement in all school related activities. We encourage our ELL parents to be part of the PTA to make sure they have a voice in the school. In addition to the ongoing New ELL-Parent Orientation, we conduct ELL parent orientation meetings twice a school year and schedule parent-teacher conferences as well as informational meetings for parents throughout the school year. Our parent coordinator is part of the school’s PTA and reaches out to our ELL parents about any impending or future events. She calls the parents as well as sends out flyers in their preferred native languages. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. N/A 2018-19 CEP 64 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Marie Guillaume, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 65  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: High School for Energy and Tec School DBN: 10x565 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Marie Guillaume Title Principal Donald Sexton Assistant Principal Stephanie Martinez Parent Coordinator Anthony Owusu-Asirifi ENL/Bilingual Teacher Tanyalee Rodriguez Parent Yesmery Sanchez/ENL Teacher/Subject Area Brian DiCarlo/Social Studies Teacher/Subject Area Marc Newman Coach Coach Samson Pena School Counselor Carron Staple Rosa Florentino Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Stephanie Semidey Other Assistant Principal Nikiya Scott Other Related Services Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 6/30/18 6/30/18 6/30/18 6/30/18 6/30/18 6/30/18 6/30/18 6/30/18 6/30/18 6/30/18 6/30/18 6/30/18 6/30/18 2018-19 CEP 66  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: x565 School Name: High School for Energy and Technology Superintendent: Carron Staple The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Stephanie Martinez Parent Coordinator No Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. The information from Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS), the ATS reports such as RHSP(Individual Student Profile), and surveys conducted by HSET provide us with the data about the primary language spoken by each parent as well as the preferred language of communication among the parents. For instance, HSET utilizes Student Emergency Contact cards and Home Language Identification Survey to collect pertinent home language information from the parents. Additionally, the Parent Coordinator who doubles as the Language Access Coordinator, Guidance Department, and our ENL Compliance Specialists coordinate the gathering and dissemination of this information which is vital for keeping parents informed and involved. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 2018-19 CEP 67  Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral English Spanish Urdu French Bengali Albanian Twi Wolof Fulani 285 200 1 8 5 1 1 1 1 56.66 39.76 .02 1.59 .99 .02 .02 .02 .02 423 197 1 8 5 1 1 1 1 57.26 39.17 .02 1.59 .99 .02 .02 .02 .02 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency How do you Distributed to Families Annually Monthly Monthly plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Many of Spanish language newsletter and calendars are completed in house. Professional services are hired for The annual issue of Entitlement Monthly newsletter Monthly Calendar New York State testing information Academic/Intervention services Blue emergency cards, Lunch forms 2018-19 CEP 68  Parent Teacher conferences, report cards, Progress reports Any board of Education documents/circulars Entitlement letters Continuation entitlement letters Welcome to the school year flyer . face-to-face conferences and open house sessions. Teachers use the DOE phone translators for weekly parent outreach sessions. DOE and NY State forms are available in multiple languages. January, June, August October, November, February as needed 4 times a year as needed as needed August 2018-19 CEP 69  2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school Freshman orientation ELL parent orientation Fall open house, Parent teacher conference Spring open house. Academic meetings to inform parents of their child's progress towards graduation. Honor roll ceremony Disciplinary conferences Tuesday afternoons for parent engagement session with student and their teachers. plan to provide interpretation service(s)? Professional services are hired for face-to-face conferences and open house sessions. Teachers use the DOE phone translators for weekly parent outreach sessions. August September September November, March May/June As needed HSET plans to pilot a translation broadcasting system for transmitting two simultaneous languages at open forums. May/June As needed 2018-19 CEP 70  Weekly 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. The school uses the automated robo-calling system for emergency announcements which utilizes the preferred language information stored within the DOE biographical systems to disseminate information using the preferred languages of each student. In addition, we would utilize a pool of in-house volunteers (bilingual teachers and staff) to reach limited English proficient families. If an on site translator is unavailable, we would utilize the Translation and Interpretation Unit from the DOE. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. The staff is provided a copy of the Chancellor's Regulations during the opening week professional development session. The access to the translators by phone procedures is provided in the Staff Handbook which is disseminated during the opening week and available on our online collaboration systems. HSET plans to pilot a translation broadcasting system for transmitting simultaneous languages at open forums and parent meetings. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) At the beginning of each school year, multilingual posters and signage from DOE T&I unit will be posted in highly visible locations throughout the school. These posters will provide LEP parents instruction on where and how to obtain interpretation services. Parents will be made aware that the T&I Unit also makes available, on its website, additional multilingual resources for their benefit. HSET will make available to parents the Parents’ Bill of Rights and A Parent’s Guide to Special Education in the covered languages. Both documents make parents aware of their rights to languages services. These documents are distributed to parents at the beginning of each school year and can also be accessed on the DOE’s website (www.schools.nyc.gov). Awareness about these and other services will be made known and clearly expressed to parents throughout the school year during any parent engagement events (i.e. PTA meetings, Parent-Teacher conferences, international parent’s night, etc..) 2018-19 CEP 71  Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? HSET ensures that the quality of our language services is critical to communicating effectively with our LEP parents. As a result, HSET works in collaboration with T & I Unit to ensure the successful implementation of its language access initiatives. We would therefore gather feedback from parents through School Survey for Parents – This survey would be made available to all school-aged parents to assess whether or not our school is communicating with the parent in their native language. Also, we will monitor to make sure that the school has the required multilingual welcome posters among others are visibly posted at the entrance and other vantage points in the school. We therefore continuously utilize feedback from parents and the T&I Unit to rectify any implementation problems we would encounter throughout the year. 2018-19 CEP 72 
