2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 11X566 School Name: PELHAM GARDENS MIDDLE SCHOOL Principal: DENISE WILLIAMS 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Pelham Gardens Middle School 321100010566 6-8 2545 Gunther Ave., Bronx, NY 10469 School Number (DBN): 11X566 (718) 794-9750 Phone Number: (718) 794-9756 Fax: Denise L. Williams Dwillia8@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Denise L. Williams Email Address: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Joalleyne Weathers Tisha Daniels Michael Morgan Iris Elmore n/a n/a n/a District Information Geographical District: 11 Superintendent’s Office Address: Meisha Ross Porter Superintendent: 1250 Arnow Ave., Bronx, NY 10469 MRoss@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-519-2620 Phone Number: Bronx-District 11 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) Jose Ruiz FSC: Executive Director: 2018-19 CEP 3  Executive Director’s Office Address: 1 Fordham Plaza, Bronx, NY JRuiz2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-828-7776 Phone Number: 718-828-6280 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Denise L. Williams Joalleyne Weathers Tisha Daniels Sharon Gaymon Iris Elmore n/a n/a n/a Justin Bonti Anne Hennessey *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Amy Mascunana Brittany Russo Sandra Mollette YaniraFerreira AnuoluwaMorenigbade TamikkaAbramson-Hatcher Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Mission Statement Section 4: CEP Overview Pelham Gardens Middle School is a collective community of educators dedicated to building students’ intellectual curiosity and belief in themselves. Our goal is to create strong advocates who are critical thinkers prepared for higher education and a changing world. 2018-19 CEP 9  2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Partnerships and Special Initiatives ASPIRA - The ASPIRA after school program services up to 123 of our students five days per week for three hours each day throughout the school year. It serves as a pathway to success for youth in grades 6-8. Structured like clubs, the model offers our students a choice in how they spend their time after school. Options include sports and arts and also requires youth leadership through service. Delta Sigma Theta Sorority Incorporated - Delta Gems girls enrichment program primary goal is to prepare young girls for full participation as leaders in the 21st century. The enrichment program is designed for females ages 11-14 to enrich and enhance the education that they receive in school. Specifically, they are provided with opportunities to provide service in the form of leadership through service learning defined as the cultivation and maintenance of relationships. AIM HIGH Empowerment Initiative- The AIM High Empowerment Institute was created to provide male and female students with the opportunity to engage in activities that will aid in the improvement of their academic, personal, professional and social conditions. The program works by pairing Student Members with coaches/mentors from AIM HIGH and from within the school community to provide multi-layered support, guidance, and academic advisory to small groups of 3-5 students each in order to develop academic and social-emotional skills with a growth mindset. MSQI - The goal of the Middle School Quality Initiative is to ensure that all students are reading on grade level by the time they graduate from the 8th grade. In order to support schools who are part of this initiative in achieving this goal, MSQI provides funding to support literacy in the building. Those funds are used to purchase high interest texts to enhance our classroom libraries and foster independent reading, Leveled Literacy Intervention kits for teachers to utilize when engaging in guided reading, intervention programs such as Wilson: Just Words and the Wilson Reading Intervention system, as well as assessment programs like the DRP, which will provide teachers with in-depth reports on each student’s reading comprehension ability levels. MSQI also provides a coach who works with the MSQI Coordinator at our school to design and provide professional development on literacy instruction through guided reading as well as cross-content literacy strategies with the science and social studies departments. College Access for All: Middle Schools: - The College Access program will allow all of our students to have the opportunity to visit at least one college campus this year as well as receive both student and parent workshops around high school, college, and career success. Twelve of our 7th-grade students serve as “College Access Interns” who meet weekly with our College Access Coordinator to plan workshops and other activities to support college awareness throughout our school community. Pelham Gardens was one of the original 22 schools who piloted the “College Access for All” program in New York City. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. The percentage of students with disabilities enrolled in our school is 24%. These students will likely require additional supports to meet the expectations of our curriculum as they move from 6th grade until they are promoted into high school. Many of these students require additional support with reading comprehension. As a result, we have three teachers and two paraprofessionals who have been trained in Wilson: Reading Intervention System and/or Wilson: Just Words so we can provide this intervention for those students whose reading levels qualify them for this type of support. We have also built in additional supports for mathematics instruction including a math comprehension pull-out intervention, whole class fluency program, weekly number talks and problem of the week assessments focused on increasing students overall ability to understand mathematical concepts in order to effectively engage in mathematical discourse and problem-solving as evidenced by a 4% increase of the total number of proficient students on the New York State Math Exam. Additionally, although our students exceeded the district and citywide in ELA progress on the 2017-18 NYS exam, an analysis of disaggregated data revealed that 37% of our black girls were proficient, as compared to 24% of our black 2018-19 CEP 10  boys. This data resulted in us continuing our Equity Focus Initiative surrounding understanding and engaging black boys in improving their literacy skills. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. The elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which we made the most progress were, "Supportive Environment" and "Collaborative Teachers." With respect to Supportive Environment we received a well developed on the QR indicators 1.4 and 3.4 on our 2018 Quality Review. Additionally an average of 83% of our students and teachers responded favorably on the NYC Survey to questions regarding this element of the framework. We exceeded the city average in every category and exceeded the target in safety, classroom behavior, personal attention and support, peer support for academic work and guidance. Another element in which we made significant progress was Collaborative Teachers. We received a well developed on QR indicator 4.1 on our 2018 Quality Review. Additionally an average of 93% of our teachers responded favorably on the NYC Survey to questions regarding this element of the framework. We exceeded the city average in every category and exceeded the target in cultural awareness and inclusive classroom instruction, peer collaboration and innovation and collective responsibility. Based upon our results we made improvement across all areas of the Framework for Great Schools. However, our key areas of focus for the current school year are as follows:  Rigorous Instruction  Supportive Environment We selected Rigorous Instruction as a result of student performance on the 2017-2018 New York State Math Exam. Only 16% of our students were proficient and 52% of our students scored a Level 1. In order to address this area of focus, by June 2019, we will have implemented a math comprehension pull-out intervention, whole class fluency program, weekly number talks and problem of the week assessments focused on increasing students overall ability to understand mathematical concepts in order to effectively engage in mathematical discourse and problem-solving as evidenced by a 4% increase of the total number of proficient students and a 10% decrease on the number of students scoring a level 1 on the New York State Math Exam. We selected Supportive Environment as an additional area of focus as a result of only 67% of our students responding favorably on the NYC School Survey in regards to Preventing Bullying and only 75% responding favorably regarding Classroom behavior. Only 80% of students responded favorably regarding Personal Attention and Support. In order to address this area of focus by June 2019, we will have created a team of administrators, teachers, and classroom advocates who are trained in the RULER social-emotional learning program focused on helping students develop the emotional intelligence skills needed to make sound decisions and foster healthy relationships resulting in a positive shift in school culture. This will be evidenced by achieving a minimum score of 4.5 in both the measures of Classroom Behavior and Personal Attention and Support on the School Quality Guide. 2018-19 CEP 11  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 11X566 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 451 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 46 43 9 10 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 27 26 6 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 76.0% % Attendance Rate 71.6% % Reduced Lunch 6.7% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 2.2% 30.6% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 4.2% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 6.25 3% 20% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 30.9% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES N/A YSH YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A NO N/A N/A NO High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 52 50 89.1% 1.8% 25.3% 59.0% 3.5% 2.7% 4 29% 5.1 16.4% 41% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No YES N/A N/A N/A YES NO N/A N/A NO NO YES N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 12  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Our school's strengths with regards to this Framework element include: - Common Core shifts in literacy - Common Core shifts in math These strengths are evidenced by us receiving a 98% positive and a 91% positive respectively for the categories listed above on the 2017-2018 NYC School Survey. Our Framework Element Score for "Rigorous Instruction" on the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide was 4.03. On our 2017-2018 Quality Review, we received a "Well Developed" for section 1.1. The findings from our 2017-2018 Quality Review regarding Rigorous Instruction can be found below: Across classrooms, instructional expectations are aligned to the Danielson Framework for Teaching and require teachers to structure instructional blocks in order to maximize student think time. High levels of student participation are reflected as students provide “glows and grows” during peer-to-peer or small group discussions. Impact Although teachers are implementing lessons based on the school’s set of beliefs about how students learn best, not all lessons succeed in engaging all students in meaningful discussions and allowing them to show ownership of their learning by taking part in discussions. Supporting Evidence Across classrooms there are uniform structures and protocols that are part of the school wide belief system about how students learn best. As part of this expectation, teachers include standards-based learning targets and success criteria in each lesson, which allow students to clearly understand the purpose of the lesson and the criteria they need to meet in order to be successful. Also, lessons engage students in at least 30-minutes of think time, with students working in small groups, pairs, or individually. In visited classes, all teachers started lessons by introducing learning targets and success criteria, ensuring that students understood what they were expected to accomplish. Student interactions revealed that they were familiar with these protocols and most students were able to articulate their expected outcomes for the lesson. In a seventh grade social studies class, the teacher and students went over the “I can” learning targets--I can draw conclusions about slavery in America-- and success criteria--I can cite text-based evidence to support my understanding of the text. Then, in small groups, students engaged in a think time activity to examine a chart and map about enslaved Africans during the middle passage. A similar process was 2018-19 CEP 13  observed in most classes. As a result, students have a clear understanding of what is expected in order to produce quality work products. Across classrooms, discussions reflect high levels of student thinking and participation. For example, in a co-teaching seventh grade math class, students were engaged in solving a two-step inequality in small groups and were asked to identify multiple strategies to solve proportional relationship word problems. Students also used the micro lab discussion protocol, accountable talk stems, and academic vocabulary. As part of the protocols used to accomplish their task, students gave “glows” and “grows” to their peers. For example, one student glow was, “You isolate the variable by adding three from both sides of the inequality,” and a grow was, “Perhaps you need to check your calculations when using negative numbers.” After the group work, students engaged in whole class discussion. However, effective group and peer interactions have yet to be fully implemented in few classes, where interaction was mostly teacher-led. This resulted in classrooms with limited student-led conversation and few opportunities for students to share each other’s thinking. In an eighth grade English Language Arts (ELA) class, students were observed identifying and analyzing John Steinbeck’s use of foreshadowing in Of Mice and Men. Students led discussions using accountable talk stems as they shared their thoughts on the ending of chapter three. In their interactions, students demonstrated high levels of engagement and used textual evidence to support their arguments. During whole class discussion, students facilitated their interactions. A similar approach was seen in the seventh grade ELA class, where students had discussions about “approaches taken in ending discrimination.” Across classrooms, student discussions reflected high levels of thinking. In some classes, though, there were a few missed opportunities to deepen thinking and foster student voice and conversation. As a result, some students are prevented from making their thinking visible and taking ownership of their learning process. Our priority needs for this school year include: - "Quality of Student Discussion" as evidenced by the 2017-2018 NYC School Survey which states only "65% of teachers say that students build on each other's ideas during class discussion." (Q19a) and only "65% of teachers say that students provide constructive feedback to their peers and teachers." (Q19d) - "How well does the school assess what students are learning?" as evidenced by us receiving a score of 3.50 for section 2.2 on our 2017-2018 Quality Review. Our action plan for improving the "Quality of Student Discussion" includes incorporating Reciprocal Reading in ELA, Science and Social Studies classrooms. Our MSQI Coach will be facilitating workshops on implementing Reciprocal Reading as a protocol for students to engage in when discussing text. He will also be conducting demo lessons and providing on-going support and feedback to teachers throughout the year. Reciprocal Reading refers to an instructional activity in which students become the teacher in small group reading sessions. Teachers model, then help students learn to guide group discussions using four strategies: summarizing, question generating, clarifying, and predicting. The math department has implemented "Number Talks" into their curriculum in order to promote student discussion.. Number talks are brief discussions (5–15 minutes) that focus on student solutions for a single, carefully chosen mental math computation problem. Students share their different mental math processes aloud while the teacher records their thinking visually on a chart or board. "Number Talks" take place at least twice a week in each class. In order to improve how well the school assesses what students are learning, we will be implementing the use of a "Learning Targets Mastery Tracker" which is a document that teachers use to indicate the learning target and 2018-19 CEP 14  accompanying success criteria for each lesson and then rate students on their level of mastery with each success criteria. This document will be completed for students that teachers meet with for targeted, small group instruction. With regards to co-taught classes, this document will be completed daily for the entire class. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we will have implemented a math comprehension pull-out intervention, whole class fluency program, weekly number talks and problem of the week assessments focused on increasing students overall ability to understand mathematical concepts in order to effectively engage in mathematical discourse and problem-solving as evidenced by a 4% increase of the total number of proficient students and a 10% decrease on the number of students scoring a level 1 on the New York State Math Exam. 2018-19 CEP 15  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Partner with Middle School Quality Initiative to improve access to high interest texts, assess reading progress, and provide structured interventions. The MSQI program will also assist in providing professional development on cross- content literacy strategies such as Reciprocal Reading for ELA, Social Studies and Science teachers. Teachers will partner with the Algebra for All initiative to receive training on providing supports for mathematics instruction including a math comprehension pull-out intervention, whole class fluency program, weekly number talks and problem of the week assessments focused on increasing students' overall ability to understand mathematical concepts in order to effectively engage in mathematical discourse and problem-solving. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers, Students Sept. 2018 - June 2019 MSQI Coordinator, Model Teachers, IEP Teacher, Assistant Principal Teachers, Students Oct. 2018 - June 2019 Model Teacher, Math Teachers, Principal IEP Teacher, ESL Teacher, one Special Education Teacher and two Paraprofessionals have been trained to implement Wilson and Just Words programs to target students below grade level in small group interventions. Students Oct. 2018 - June 2019 IEP Teacher, ESL Teacher, Assistant Principals Model teachers engage in cycles of improvement with select teachers in order to improve their pedagogical practices. Students,New Teachers, Model Teachers Oct. 2018-June 2019 Model Teachers, Classroom Teachers, Assistant Principal Model teachers post an inter-visitation schedule in the weekly school newsletter that allows their colleagues to see the specific days/periods in which they will be engaging their students in various types of learning activities, so teachers know when they can visit to see specific practices. Model Teachers, Classroom Teachers Oct. 2018-June 2019 Model Teachers, Classroom Teachers, Assistant Principal 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent Coordinator will plan a workshop in conjunction with the Assistant Principal for ELA to inform parents of our literacy initiatives and to provide them with strategies that they can use at home to support student learning. Additionally, we will share DRP data with parents at the November Parent-Teacher Conferences. 2018-19 CEP 16  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. MSQI funding used to purchase high interest texts, Wilson and Just Words Materials. Tax Levy Textbook money allocated to purchase Ready Texts and Teacher Toolkit to provide materials for strategic intervention. Tax Levy and Title I TA funds used to fund model teacher salary differentials. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy Title I SWP X Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Baseline Assessments September 2018 -- DRP Assessment #1 October 2018 -- Fall Math MOSL Assessment Mid-Point Benchmark Assessments January 2019 -- DRP Assessment #2 January 2019 -- Math Midterm January 2019 -- ELA Midterm End of Year Benchmark Assessments May 2019 -- DRP Assessment #3 May 2019 --Spring Math MOSL Assessment Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Student progress on the Degrees of Reading Power Assessment will be monitored in January and May to assess progress. 2018-19 CEP 17  Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 18  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Our school's strengths with regards to this Framework element include: - Guidance - Social Emotional These strengths are evidenced by us receiving a 94% positive and a 91% positive respectively for the categories listed above on the 2017-2018 NYC School Survey. Our Framework Element Score for "Supportive Environment" on the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide was 4.03. On our 2017-2018 Quality Review, we received a "Well Developed" for sections 1.4 and 3.4. The findings from our 2017-2018 Quality Review regarding Supportive Environment can be found below: Through the school’s theory of action aligned to their core values, school leaders and teachers create an environment of discipline, safety, and emotional support. Structures such as advisories, an attendance team, and partnerships with organizations ensure that each student is known well and receives personalized support. Impact As a result of a safe and inclusive school culture and structures to support student learning and personal development, students are adopting effective academic and personal behaviors. Supporting Evidence The school maintains a supportive learning environment and has high expectations for learning and behavior that are shared with parents and students. These high expectations for learning, behavior, and attendance result in continuous learning and personal growth by students and staff. The school’s theory of action around school culture is based on collaboration, reflection, advocacy, friendship, and thinking, which was designed by teachers and school leaders to support a quality school culture. This culture builds capacity among all stakeholders to create a positive climate of excellence and high expectations that prepare, motivate, and inspire all students, with emphasis on African-American and Hispanic males. This is supported by a positive reward system used across grades, with monthly grade-level assemblies which are held to acknowledge and reward individual student academic achievement, progress, growth, and exemplification of character and core values. As a result, the Online Occurrence Reporting System (ORRS) report data shows a reduction of incidents in classrooms and common areas, comparing data from SY 2017 to 2018. Each class elected two students to represent their class as advocates, playing a meaningful role during the school day. Advocates are responsible for modeling social and behavioral expectations, routinely facilitating student-led discussions in afternoon advisory sessions, reviewing daily homework assignments with students, and distributing home-school communication notices and letters. They also greet guests and inform visitors of the current learning target and task. These students represent the voice of their peers at bi-weekly class advocate meetings, by gathering data and information on targeted questions involving student wants and needs related to school events and student 2018-19 CEP 19  concerns. They initiate, develop, and lead school fundraising efforts and participate in selecting instructional field trips. Also, multicultural activities are promoted throughout the year to address the school’s diversity, in both curricular and non-academic activities. Students and parents reported that the school ensures that everyone is respected and valued regardless of ethnic backgrounds, nationalities, religion, or gender. Thus, the mid-year mock student survey shows a significant increase in classroom behavior and social-emotional learning categories compared with the 2017 School Survey results. The Advisory program is designed to foster a positive relationship and connection between teacher and student, based on each student’s personalized academic and social-emotional needs and the student’s ability to feel comfortable and safe in school. Lessons focus on school core values: friendship, collaboration, reflection, grit, social-emotional learning, work habits, organizational skills, and effective communication. Advisory groups assigned to support student academic and personal behaviors meet daily. Students reported that in the event they need support, they can go to their advisor or to any adult in the building. An attendance team works with school leaders and counselors to support at-risk students, especially chronically absent students, developing individual attendance plans and monitoring the student's’ academic performance. As per attendance reports, cohorts of students are showing improvement in attendance, decreasing year to year absences. Our priority needs for this school year include: - "Classroom Behavior" as evidenced by the 2017-2018 NYC School Survey which states only 60% of students say that most students behave well even when the teacher isn't watching. (Q6e) and only 68% of teachers say that students listen carefully when the teacher gives directions. (Q20b) - "Preventing Bullying" as evidenced by the 2017-2018 NYC School Survey which states only 64% of students say that students rarely or never harass, bully, or intimidate each other because of other differences, like disability or weight, at their school. (Q8d) The policies, practices and structures in place to ensure we are supporting the whole child include: By June 2019, we will have created a team of administrators, teachers, and classroom advocates who are trained in the RULER social-emotional learning program focused on helping students develop the emotional intelligence skills needed to make sound decisions and foster healthy relationships resulting in a positive shift in school culture. Student Advocates will meet bi-monthly with RULER Social-Emotional Consultant to develop leadership skills to develop their emotional intelligence skills Weekly classes will be held for 6th grade students, focused on social-emotional learning and anti-bullying lessons. Weekly activities around social-emotional learning and anti-bullying will be provided daily during PM Advisory sessions across all grades. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the 2018-19 CEP 20  identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we will have created a team of administrators, teachers, and classroom advocates who are trained in the RULER social-emotional learning program focused on helping students develop the emotional intelligence skills needed to make sound decisions and foster healthy relationships resulting in a positive shift in school culture. This will be evidenced by achieving a minimum score of 4.5 in both the measures of Classroom Behavior and Personal Attention and Support on the School Quality Guide. 2018-19 CEP 21  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? RULER Social-Emotional Training Consultant will provide weekly training, classroom observations with administrators, and ongoing feedback on improving the staffs' emotional intelligence skills Admin, Teachers Sept. 2018 - June 2019 Principal, Consultant Student Advocates will meet bi-monthly with RULER Social-Emotional Consultant to develop leadership skills to develop their emotional intelligence skills Students Nov. 2018 - June 2019 Weekly classes for 6th grade focused on social-emotional learning and anti-bullying lessons. Weekly activities around social-emotional learning and anti-bullying provided during PM Advisory sessions across all grades. Students, Teacher, Parent Coordinator Sept. 2018-June 2019 Principal, Grade Level Administrators, Grade Team Leaders, Consultant RULER teacher (6th grade), Guidance Counselor, Grade Team Leaders, Teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. In addition to providing parents with a workshop outlining our social-emotional initiatives in January, student advocates will take an active role during parent-teacher conferences as an opportunity to practice their leadership roles as well as inform parents regarding the importance of developing emotional intelligence skills. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Tax Levy funds were allocated to hire the RULER consultant. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other 2018-19 CEP 22  Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. In January 2019, students and teachers will complete a mock survey assessing the schools' progress in improving school culture using the questions from the Classroom Behavior and Personal Attention and Support sections from the NYC School Survey. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The percentage of positive responses on the NYC School Surveys in the sections on Classroom Behavior and Person Attention and Support sections. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 23  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Our school's strengths with regards to this Framework element include: - Cultural Awareness and Inclusive Classroom Instruction - Peer Collaboration These strengths are evidenced by us receiving a 95% positive and a 99% positive respectively for the categories listed above on the 2017-2018 NYC School Survey. Our Framework Element Score for "Collaborative Teachers" on the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide was 4.23. On our 2017-2018 Quality Review, we received a "Well Developed" for section 4.1. The findings from our 2017-2018 Quality Review regarding Supportive Environment can be found below: Areas of Strength: All of our teachers are organized in department teams to engage in inquiry-based professional collaborations using common protocols to review student work and assessment data on a regular basis. Teachers have opportunities to voice their ideas and take on leadership roles throughout the school. Impact Teacher team collaborations engage teachers in discussing best pedagogical practices and making targeted curricula refinements to address the academic needs of their students. Teachers have a voice in key decisions which affect student learning across the school. Supporting Evidence During teacher team meetings, teachers are required to discuss and document how teacher teamwork promotes the school’s instructional focus and what supports are needed to continue student progress, which includes the analysis of student work using the ATLAS protocol. As part of this process, each teacher rotates as the presenter, and the department focuses on analyzing three pieces of student work: high, medium, and low. In addition, teacher teams have collectively created instructional strategies in both literacy and math that support the instructional shifts. Such practices include the use of “think marks,” a strategy used by students to code their thinking as they annotate text, which builds their ability to comprehend complex texts, and the CUBES strategy (circle the numbers, underline the question, box the key words, evaluate, and solve) in math to build students’ conceptual understanding and procedural skills and fluency. Consequently, another outcome of these collaborations is a strategic team approach which creates common strategies across the school, enhancing the instructional capacity of teachers by having them facilitate their own learning and refine their instructional practices. School leaders ensure teachers have several opportunities to engage in professional collaborations, such as weekly common planning for one period. During common planning meetings, teachers alternate between planning and 2018-19 CEP 24  revising curriculum and using examples of student work to assess strengths and weaknesses and then discuss instructional strategies to address weaknesses and hold students accountable for being precise and accurate. At the end of these meetings, teachers agree upon their next steps in regards to differentiating lesson activities to address misconceptions. In addition, they have Monday professional development time. These supports have resulted in teachers having a deeper understanding of the demands of the curricula, a better understanding of student progress, and a way to share best practices to improve planning and delivery of instruction. School leaders develop and promote teacher leadership. For example, the steering committee is comprised of grade team leaders, department leads, and model teachers. This committee engages in managing resources, planning professional development, and researching innovative ways to enhance the school’s social and academic culture. The decision-making committee meets monthly with the principal to voice issues of concern to the staff and to encourage teacher initiatives in problem-solving. One school-wide initiative created by a teacher leader in the ELA department in conjunction with the Assistant Principal for that department, was the implementation of "Think Marks" across ELA, Social Studies and Science classrooms. The model teacher who assisted in developing this strategy, led a PD series for teachers across departments to explain how students can use "Think Marks" to annotate text and code their thinking. After the initial workshop, teachers in the Science and Social Studies departments were tasked with continuing this work for their respective departments and serving as lab classrooms so their colleagues would be able to observe the way they implemented this strategy into their instruction. Constant school progress is taking place as a result of teachers actively taking part in developing instructional programs and systems in collaboration with each other as well as school leaders. This is evidenced by us receiving a 4.23 in the framework element of "Collaborative Teachers" on the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide. At Pelham Gardens, teachers value each other's experience and knowledge base and are very receptive to teacher-led school initiatives. This is evidenced by "100% of teachers say that teachers respect other teachers who take the lead in school improvement efforts" and "100% of teachers say that teachers respect those colleagues who have a specific expertise" as stated in the 2017-2018 NYC School Survey Measures. During the 2018-2019 school year, teachers will engage in a professional development cycle around implementing "Culturally Responsive Teaching" practices into their instruction. The cycle will include a book study around the text "Culturally Responsive Teaching and The Brain" by Zaretta Hammond. Throughout the school year, teachers will have opportunities to read portions of the text and engage in discussions with their colleagues using various thinking protocols. They will also be given time to design lessons that incorporate Culturally Responsive Teaching practices and will have multiple opportunities to inter-visit with their colleagues and engage in debrief discussions afterwards. All teachers will participate in a PD series called "Courageous Conversations with Educators about Race," in which our "Equity Team" engages the staff in a series of workshops that address issues of race and equity with the staff and how it impacts our students. Select Equity Team members will participate in an after school, CCER workshop series sponsored by the "Expanded Success Initiative" and the NYU Steinhardt School of Education. This school year we will be continuing our initiative of Cross Content Literacy Strategies. A PD series on "Reciprocal Reading" and "Reading Like a Historian" will by lead by our MSQI Coach, ELA Model Teacher and Social Studies teacher leader. This PD series is designed to improve literacy outcomes for all of our students, with a particular emphasis on our black boys. We will assess the impact of this strategy by analyzing the growth of our black boys on the DRP exam from the Fall assessment to the Spring assessment. Our average growth for black boys was 5.5 DRP points during the 2017-2018 school year. Our goal is to increase the average growth to 6.0 points for the 2018-2019 school year. Priority Need: 2018-19 CEP 25  According to the 2017-2018 NYC School Measures Survey, 50% of teachers say that they had opportunities to work productively with teachers from other schools on professional development. One of our goals we have for the 2018-2019 school year is to provide more opportunities for teachers to engage in professional development with teachers from other schools. In support of this we, have selected 5 teachers to participate in the "Algebra for All" PD series with other math teachers from across the district. Two sixth grade teachers will be participating in the district-wide Instructional Focus Collaborative to observe and provide feedback to teachers from other schools in District 11. Two of our Social Studies teachers will be participating in the "History by Design" workshop series that allows Social Studies teachers to connect with their colleagues from around NYC. Our ELA model teacher is a member of the District 11 Literacy team and will be collaborating with literacy teachers from across the district to plan and refine district-wide literacy initiatives. One Science teacher and one Social Studies teacher will be attending multiple MSQI workshops on disciplinary literacy in which they will get to learn about literacy strategies for their respective content areas and design learning activities with colleagues from across New York City. We are expecting the expanded number of professional development opportunities we are providing to teachers this year will increase the percentage of teachers who believe they have opportunities to work productively with teachers from other schools on professional development. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all teachers will have participated in a professional development series using Culturally Responsive Teaching and the Brain as an anchor text. Teachers will engage in planning and inter-visitation cycles based on their shared reading of the text. Teachers will then work in triads to design and facilitate a workshop on aligning culturally responsive teaching to a specific Danielson component. This will be evidenced by an average increase of .25 pts. on each teacher’s overall Measure of Teacher Practice score. 2018-19 CEP 26  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Administrators and consultant will conduct observations to assess the usage of culturally responsive teaching practices and content within classrooms. Provide professional development series focused on incorporating culturally responsive teaching practices into instruction, via a book study of the text, "Culturally Responsive Teaching and the Brain." Teachers will work in small groups to discuss the text and then design learning activities that include culturally responsive teaching practices. Teachers will inter-visit with each other and engage in debrief conversations afterwards to provide feedback to their colleagues. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers Teachers Nov.. 2018 - Nov. 2018 Principal, Assistant Principals, consultant Nov. 2018 - June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, Model Teachers, Consultant Administrators and consultant will continue to observe and provide feedback on the inclusion of culturally responsive Teaching practices and content during instruction. Teachers Dec. 2018 - June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, Model Teachers, Consultant MSQI Coach and ELA Model Teacher will lead a PD series on Cross Content Literacy strategies including "Reciprocal Reading" and the "Notice and Note" strategy. ELA, Social Studies and Science teachers will attend this PD cycle so they can implement common literacy strategies across department areas. Teachers Nov. 2018 - June 2019 MSQI Coach, Model Teacher Teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent Coordinator will arrange a workshop in conjunction with the administration and Model Teachers to inform parents of our focus on, and the importance of, culturally relevant teaching. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Tax Levy and Title 1 TA funds allocated for Model Teachers. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 2018-19 CEP 27  X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP X Title I TA 21st Century Grant SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. At the conclusion of each round of observations, we will monitor teachers' ratings on component 1e and provide additional supports as necessary. We will also use this data to adjust our professional development calendar in order to ensure teachers are receiving relevant instructional support. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. We will use teachers' Advance ratings in component 1e to measure progress towards this goal. We will also use teacher feedback from professional development sessions to monitor our progress. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 28  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Our school's strengths with regards to this Framework element include: - Inclusive Leadership - Instructional Leadership These strengths are evidenced by us receiving a 94% positive and a 91% positive respectively for the categories listed above on the 2017-2018 NYC School Survey. Our Framework Element Score for "Effective School Leadership" on the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide was 3.91. On our 2017-2018 Quality Review, we received a "Well Developed" for section 1.3. The findings from our 2017-2018 Quality Review regarding Supportive Environment can be found below: Area of Strength: At PGMS all staff members are included in the creation and implementation of new initiatives. We often leverage the talent we possess within the building to increase the capacity of the whole school and to create an environment where teachers teach and learn from each other routinely. School leaders and teachers have developed engaging, rigorous curricula aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards and strategically integrate the instructional shifts, offering meaningful learning experiences where higher order skills are emphasized and tasks promote college and career readiness for all students. The school maintains a supportive learning environment and has high expectations for learning and behavior that are shared with parents and students. These high expectations for learning, behavior, and attendance result in continuous learning and personal growth by students and staff. The school’s theory of action around school culture is based on collaboration, reflection, advocacy, friendship, and thinking, which was designed by teachers and school leaders to support a quality school culture. This culture builds capacity among all stakeholders to create a positive climate of excellence and high expectations that prepare, motivate, and inspire all students, with emphasis on our black and brown males. This is supported by a positive reward system used across grades, with daily end of day advisory sessions which are held to acknowledge and reward individual student academic achievement, progress, growth, and exemplification of character and core values. As a result, the Online Occurrence Reporting System (ORRS) report data shows a reduction of incidents in classrooms and common areas, comparing data from SY 2017 to 2018. 2018-19 CEP 29  School leaders and teachers have strategically developed a uniform process for designing Common Core-aligned unit plans across grades and content areas using a backward design approach. Instructional planning includes summative tasks for each unit based on the standard(s) being addressed, the anchor student learning targets, the sequence of key learning activities, and the strategies to ensure students with disabilities and English Language Learners (ELLs) have access to the curriculum. Instructional coherence is created by using school-wide templates for unit planning, lesson planning, and co-teaching, guided by the work of the Center for College and Career Readiness and Webb’s Depth of Knowledge (DOK) levels. School leaders convey high expectations via this instructional focus: “If teachers engage in professional learning on “Culturally Responsive Teaching” and in critical analysis of the impact of “implicit bias”, they will be better prepared to develop supportive relationships, design rigorous cognitive challenges that recognizes and incorporates familiar cultural information, and create critical social awareness within their students.” School leaders utilize weekly newsletters (C.R.A.F.T Chronicles), one-on-one meetings, and other professional learning sessions to reiterate expectations, including class work, homework, and assessment expectations with regards to culturally relevant teaching. Frequent cycles of observations and feedback are also aligned to professional development. Professional development related to culturally relevant teaching is created from admin and teaching staff members. Additionally, professional development offerings outside of culturally relevant teaching have been identified by staff and will be facilitated by staff members who have been recognized by their peers and admin as being capable of sharing their best practices related to that area during PD sessions. Priority Need: According to the 2017-2018 NYC School Measures Survey, only 76% of teachers say that at this school, once that start a new program, they follow up to make sure that it's working. This is below the District average of 79% as well as the City average of 81% positive responses. One of our goals for this school year is to create ongoing feedback loop cycles for staff through a book study of the text, Culturally Relevant Teaching and the Brain by Zaretta Hammond. Staff members will be placed in collaborative learning communities, which is a small group of no more that 6 peers representing different content areas, grade levels, and years of experience. These groups will engage in learning via four part cycle as follows: initial Professional development sessions, opportunities to include in their instruction, peer group intervistitation, and walkthroughs by the model teachers and admin to provide more targeted feedback. Each cycle will run for three weeks before another PD session on culturally relevant teaching will be presented. To ensure that we are able to cover all identified items related to culturally relevant teaching we have mapped out the professional development cycles through early June where we plan to celebrate the work our staff has completed with their peer group. We expect that continuous feedback and monitoring from peers, model teachers, and admin will strengthen our ability to follow up with new initiatives and that they are attempted with fidelity. Additionally, we expect these peer feedback groups will also allow for added teacher accountability to their peer group and the school community for the work that all are tasked to do as presented in professional development sessions. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we will have refined our observation protocol to more effectively monitor teachers’ implementation of the next steps and strategic supports they receive. This refined protocol will focus on leveraging internal resources (teacher leaders and other colleagues) to share and model best practices as indicated in the Danielson rubric. This will be evidenced by achieving a minimum score of 4.0 for this component on the School Quality Guide. 2018-19 CEP 30  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? School leaders will set goals with teachers after the first round of observations. Teachers Sept. 2018 - Oct. 2018 Principal School leaders will participate in district-wide courageous conversation about race and equity during monthly professional development. Assistant Principal School Leaders Oct. 2018 - June 2019 Principal, District Personnel Assistant Principals School leaders will identify teachers who will present best practices for their colleagues during department-wide, after school PD workshops and or common planning periods. School Leaders, Teachers Oct. 2018 - June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, School leaders will schedule inter-visitations both within and across departments in order to provide teachers with opportunities to view their colleagues and provide feedback to each other. School Leaders, Teachers Principal will organize a data team charged with analyzing disproportionality data across the school and creating strategies to improve mathematical outcomes for the subgroup of black boys. Steering committee will discuss topics for professional development and other systems for supporting teachers as well as overall school improvement. School leaders and lead teachers will participate in the district-wide Instructional Focus Collaborative. Teachers will work in small learning communities to complete a book study of the text, Culturally Relevant Teaching and the Brain and observe each other implementing strategies presented in the text. Admin, Teachers, Students Admin, Teachers, District Personnel Admin, Teachers, Assistant Principals Teachers Teachers Principal, Oct. 2018 - June 2019 Assistant Principals, Teachers Sept. 2018 - June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, Teachers, Students Sept. 2018 - June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, Teachers Oct. 2018 - June 2019 Admin, Teachers, District Personnel Assistant Principals Nov. 2018 - June 2019 Principal Assistant Principal 2018-19 CEP 31  3b – Parent and Family Engagement Model Teachers How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Teachers will create a syllabus for each upcoming unit that will be distributed to both students and parents in order to ensure all members of the school community are aware of the unit timeline, essential question, purpose/rationale, essential understandings, key classroom tasks and homework assignments as well as the formative and summative assessments. Each syllabus will be created collaboratively as a department during common planning periods. The unit syllabus will be given to students and sent home for parents on the first day of each new unit. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Tax Levy funds will be used to support per session activities and the purchase of materials to implement this initiative. Based on mid year benchmark the steering committee will review the allocation of funds in January. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. At the conclusion of each round of observations, we will monitor teachers' ratings on components 3b, 3c and 3d and provide additional supports as necessary. We will also use this data to adjust our professional development calendar in order to ensure teachers are receiving relevant instructional support. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. We will use teachers' Advance ratings in components 3b, 3c and 3d to measure progress towards this goal. We will also use teacher feedback from professional development sessions to monitor our progress. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 32  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Areas of Strength School leaders and teachers share expectations for student achievement with parents at the beginning of the school year during orientation sessions and regularly scheduled parent workshops, where teachers provide parents with curricula and ensure they can access an online grading system to monitor student progress. Parents enthusiastically reported that access to the system facilitates productive conversations with teachers and informs timely detection of students facing challenges in meeting their grades. This results in the development of collaborative plans to help students at school and at home. Students are supported in their high school research and application process through high school visits, fairs, and high school presentations at the school. Former students also attend and share high school experiences. In addition, the school conducts a College Week, where each teacher leads a lesson focusing on a range of topics, such as campus life, paying for college, and local colleges. The College Access for All initiative helps students build their college knowledge and enables families to help their children navigate the college process. Also, the guidance counselor works with families throughout the year to provide them with all necessary high school articulation information. As a result of these activities, parents are aware of the academic and social-emotional progress of their children as well as their paths for colleges and careers. We received a framework element score of 3.44 for "Strong Family-Community Ties" on the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide. According to the 2017-2018 NYC School Survey: - 89% of families say that teachers work closely with them to meet their child's needs. (Q1d) - 92% of families say that they feel well-informed by the communications they receive from their school. (Q1e) Priority Need "81% of families say that they get opportunities to visit their child's classroom, such as observing instruction or participating in an activity with their child" as reported in the the 2017-2018 NYC School Survey During the 2018-2019 school year, we will increase opportunities for parents to visit their child's classroom to observe instruction and/or participate in activities with them. The parent coordinator will begin inviting parents to attend quarterly meetings in which they will receive a course syllabus for each class which contains information on the content that their children will be engaging in for the upcoming unit in each class. The parent coordinator will conduct surveys of parents throughout the school year, in order to identify specific activities that parents would like to engage 2018-19 CEP 33  in at Pelham Gardens. Each month parents will be able to participate in at least one of the activities that they collectively decided upon. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, parents will have participated in our College Access For All Middle School Initiative parent presentations, visited or observed academic class, or volunteer their time at school resulting in a shared set of beliefs as evidenced by an average of 90% overall positive response from parents on the related questions on the NYC School Survey. 2018-19 CEP 34  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? The School Leadership Team (SLT) will coordinate meetings between parents and staff to create new school-wide events including opportunities for parents to visit classrooms and/or volunteer in the school. Parents and families Sept. 2018 - June 2019 SLT, Principal, Parent Coordinator, After-school director The school will create a team to research and establish additional partnerships to support our students social-emotional development and college & career readiness. New Partners, Students Sept. 2018 - June 2019 Create a year long plan to build college awareness through all subject areas. Teachers, Students Sept. 2018 - June 2019 College Access for All: Middle Schools partnership will coordinate three opportunities for parents to explore and build their understanding of how to help get their students prepared for college. All Students Sept. 2018 - June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, Selected Teachers, Community Coordinator Principal, Assistant Principals, Selected Teachers Principal, Assistant Principals, Selected Teachers, Parents, CAFA Partner Teachers will create a syllabus for each upcoming unit of study that outlines the particular content, classroom tasks and assessments that students will engage with throughout the course of that unit. Parents will receive a syllabus for each class at the quarterly meetings held by the parent coordinator. Parents, Students Oct. 2018 - June 2019 Teachers, Parent Coordinator The parent coordinator will conduct surveys of parents throughout the school year, in order to identify specific activities that parents would like to engage in at Pelham Gardens. Parents Oct. 2018 - June 2019 Parent Coordinator 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. ASPIRA AIM HIGH Empowerment Initiative Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 2018-19 CEP 35  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Per session funds will be allocated for the creation of teams to create additional school-wide events, establish new partnerships, and to apply for grants. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. January Benchmark— SLT Review Meeting/Instructional Cabinet Meeting March Benchmark— SLT Review Meeting/Instructional Cabinet Meeting June Benchmark-- SLT Review Meeting/Instructional Cabinet Meeting Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. January/March and June Benchmark— SLT Review Meeting/Instructional Cabinet Meeting/Assessment Data Reports/Advance Reports/Attendance Reports. We will review the above data reports to continuously monitor our progress toward the stated goal. As a result of the feedback provided by parents and/or the Instructional Cabinet as well as participation numbers for all of our parent events, we will modify our action plan to ensure parents are provided with multiple activities to participate in school activities that they are interested in attending. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 36  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) DRPAssessment Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Guided Reading Small Group During School Day As Programmed F&P Running Records Wilson: Reading System Small Group WIST TOSWRF Interim Assessment Data Wilson: Just Words As Programmed and One on One As Programmed Small Group After School Small Group Academic Success After School Program Saturday Small Group Saturday Test Prep ASPIRA Small Group Small Group After School 2018-19 CEP 37  Mathematics Fall Math MOSL Saturday Test Prep Small Group Saturday After School Number Talk Performance Analysis Academic Success After School Program Small Group Interim Assessment Data Math Fluency Whole Class Small Group During School Day As Programmed Science Interim Assessment Data Differentiated Readings. Small Group During School Day Scaffolds/Resources including graphic organizers, vocabulary reference sheets etc. Differentiated Readings. Scaffolds/Resources including graphic organizers, vocabulary reference sheets etc. Counselors Small Group During School Day Small Group During School Social Studies Interim Assessment Data At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Teacher and Parent Referral 2018-19 CEP 38  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 12 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Provide students with uniforms Provide Students with school supplies Give these students preference in being a part of our after school program-ASPIRA Provide social emotional support through advisory Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). n/a 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 39  n/a 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. n/a 2018-19 CEP 40  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. Schoolwide Program (SWP) X Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Recruitment ● Informational Sessions to expose potential recruits to our staff culture and expectations. ● Establish professional relationships with collegiate teacher preparation programs. ● Professional networking through fellowship programs, conferences and DOE sponsored professional ● development workshops. ● Review open market and attend DOE sponsored hiring fairs. ● Attend NYCDOE hiring fairs beginning in the spring through the summer ● Formulate a Hiring Team to screen resumes, perform phone calls and interview candidates Retention ● Mentorships/All new staff members receive a buddy teacher to help them acclimate to PGMS ● Principal/Assistant Principal/Instructional Coach/Model Teachers work collaboratively to build leadership capacity ● Providing continuous feedback through formal and informal observations to promote professional growth ● Professional Development (Internal and External) ● Creation of internal leadership track through lead teachers, department chairs, event coordinators, and grade team leaders. 2018-19 CEP 41  ● Creation of online platforms (Google Docs) for professional dialogue, planning, and sharing of resources. ● Provide qualified staff with opportunities to develop capabilities for future administrative roles. ● Maintain an open door policy and create opportunities to engage in one on one conversations around teacher support Assignments/Programming ● Programming teachers to allow for common planning time ● Reduced class size through co-teaching and creating an additional section to reduce teachers' student caseload ● Distribution of preference sheets to identify teachers preference for subject and/or grade level 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Principal Professional Development -Attend District 11 Superintendent Professional Development meetings -Inter-visitation with schools in District 11 to view best practices -Instructional Consultant hired to plan professional development, coach teacher leaders and admin on improving instructional practices -Attending national conferences such as ASCD, NCTM, Big Picture Learning and Courageous Conversations -MSQI District Literacy Team Teacher Professional Development -Weekly Department Meeting -Consultant to provide personal coaching to three model teachers -Weekly 80 Minute Professional Development Sessions -Middle School Quality Initiative (coaching for ela/science/ss/ell teachers 2018-19 CEP 42  -Three model teachers who provide coaching in cycles Paraprofessional Professional Development -Weekly Meetings with Special Education Department -Weekly 80 Minute Professional Development -Teacher College Professional Development Workshops -Teachers attending CCER Workshops on race and equity. -Special Education consultant who will be facilitating workshops and working with teachers and paraprofessionals individually. Support Staff Professional Development -Weekly Professional Developments Meeting -External Opportunities for Professional Development -District PD workshops for Parent Coordinators -District CEC meeting to gather information and learn how to implement effective support strategies Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. ● Pull-Out ESL Program-instructional support for Ells given via a full time pullout ESL teacher ● Guidance Counselor-social emotional support for SWDs to develop academic and personal behavior associated with College and Career Readiness ● Mathematics Coach-to provide instructional support to mathematics teachers on designing and developing team ● Curriculum and Staff Development-per session opportunities for all teachers to engage in curriculum development and to create common assessments. 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). ● ESL Provider pushes into ELA classes across all three grades weekly and works along side classroom teachers to develop strategies for students while in class as well as when serviced during pullout. ● Mathematics Coach provided in class support as well as targetted feedback outside of the classroom 2018-19 CEP 43  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). n/a 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. At Pelham Gardens Middle School teachers are at the forefront of decision making. During professional development, common planning as well as during summer planning time teachers work alongside admin to design, create and organize school wide assessments and time lines for assessing students. Teacher teams meet weekly as an entire department as well as in smaller grade specific teams to analyze students data in order to make shifts in their instructional practices. The ATLAS protocol is used across subject areas and grades as the tool to evaluate student work and teacher lesson plans. As a result of this work teachers are provided next steps and report their progress in subsequent meetings. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 2018-19 CEP 44  1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated: 2018-19 CEP 45   Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 46  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Pelham Gardens Middle School (11X566) , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students -Providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology. -Providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children through Parent Association/parent Coordinator sponsored workshops. -Providing targeted academic support to Title I students through Academic Intervention, Small Group Instruction and Saturday "Panther Prep" Academy. 2018-19 CEP 47  -Provide parents with instant access to their child's current level fo performance through teh use of Skedula iO Classroom. -Purchase chrome books to ensure title one students have access to high quality technology that allow them to receive feedback on the assignments via Google docs. -Purchase of school uniforms to support students in temporary housing with clothing needs. Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; 2018-19 CEP 48  ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. 2018-19 CEP 49  School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) Pelham Gardens Middle School (11X566) , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Elementary and Secondary Education Act (ESSA); Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; 2018-19 CEP 50  ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; 2018-19 CEP 51  ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; Parent/Guardian Responsibilities: II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms, and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation, and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; 2018-19 CEP 52  Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 53  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP 54  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: The results of the 2015-2017 NYSELAT exams showed that ENL students tended to fall into one of two groups: entering/emerging students who are newcomers, sometimes SIFE, or expanding students who have plateaued at this level. Roughly 1-2 children per grade will reach commanding. Therefore in order to ensure growth in second language acquisition and for more students to move up levels from entering/emerging and reach commanding when feasible we've come up with a plan to "divide and conquer." Essentially, we will split our after school time with these two groups of students. To start the year, newcomers will attend an after school program with the ENL teacher over roughly 16 weeks between mid November - late January. This program will focus on various aspects of the US Department of Education Newcomer Toolkit and include some project based learning regarding family, school, culture, etc. The program's secondary purpose is to help students acclimate to schooling in the United States. The second half of the year, also roughly 16 weeks, from late January - mid May, will run more like a traditional test prep program. Both programs will run on Thursdays from 2:45-4:15. Students will utilize NYSESLAT test prep materials with a focus on the writing. Instruction will be delivered in both after school programs by a certified ENL teacher. Finally, in order to move students at the Transitioning and Expanding levels to Commanding, we will provide eight three-hour Saturday Test Prep sessions in ELA. These sessions will be designed by the ENL teacher and 3 ELA content teachers using test prep materials in order for these students to build the skills necessary to move to test proficient, through either exit criteria. The goal is to simultaneously build the students' capacity in English with skills transferring to both the ELA and NYSESLAT exams. In order to accomplish this goal, the ENL teacher will rotate for one hour to team teach with each of the three certified ELA teachers. Additionally, instruction will be delivered in English with native language support in the forms of bilingual dictionaries/glossaries and appropriate grouping. Additionally, in order to provide targeted and differentiated instruction to our Entering and Emerging students we use the Imagine Learning online software. We will also build our ENL classroom library based on students' reading levels and interests. Our library will be expanded to include more texts that are newcomer friendly. Attendance and student's progress assessment documents will be monitored and kept on file, in the school's Title III LEP Binder. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Our ENL teacher will be joining the Professional Development Committee in response to a demand from our teachers for more ELL related professional development. This is to address our 2018-19 CEP 55  Part C: Professional Development growing ELL population, specifically our Newcomers/SIFE students. All teachers will attend these PDs during weekly Grade Team Meeting time. These PDs will positively impact the progress of our ELL students by allowing teachers to more effectively provide the required instruction and engage with students. The PDs will focus on both the process of language acquisition, strategies for differentiation, as well as translation resources for teachers to use. These will all be provided by our ENL teacher. To continue to grow her capacity, we will also release our ENL teacher to attend district, borough, and central workshops so that she may receive ongoing professional development throughout the year. Over the summer, she will also attend PDs provided by the field centers, such as ELL scaffolds and ELL writing. She will also attend MSQI PDs focused on building Academic Vocabulary and Student Discussion. The goal is that these PDs will be relevant to moving the Expanding level students. Records and agendas will be collected and maintained by the ENL Coordinator in our schools ENL binder. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: In order for parents to understand the process and stages of second language acquisition, our school will provide the following supplemental Title III parent activities. Parents will participate in four one-hour workshops (in December 2018 and January 2019) that will introduce parents to their child's NYSESLAT results including a breakdown of how their child is doing in the four areas assessed; speaking, listening, reading and writing. The workshops will be conducted by the ENL coordinator in December 2018 and January 2019. The ENL coordinator will provide translation in Spanish and translations for other languages will be provided (based on pre-registration) by seeking parent volunteers who are proficient in both languages or calling for the translation department. The ENL coordinator will also plan, with the parent coordinator, a Culture Night potluck with all parents at the end of the state exams as a celebration, in May 2019. Lastly, in June, the ENL coordinator will hold a workshop with parents with various strategies for their students to continue their language acquisition over the Summer. Parents will be notified about these activities via school phone messenger and a school school mailing prior to each session. Additionally, to expand our engagement with ELL parents, our Parent Coordinator has been designated as the Language Access Coordinator. This role will allow him greater reach in terms of language support so that he may more thoroughly engage our ELL parents in the variety of workshops that he runs, including exam nights for all exams, self defense, etc. The ENL coordinator will attend at least 4 of these events and provide Spanish translation. The hope is that the translation and the ENL coordinator presence will encourage more ELL parents to attend as she is their most frequent point of contact at the school. Food will also be provided at these events to encourage attendance. Records (agendas, attendance and invitations) will be collected and maintained by the ENL Coordinator in our schools ENL binder. 2018-19 CEP 56  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem $8,976 The after school cost of the program that exceeds the total allocation will not be charged to Title III. Purchased services  High quality staff N/A Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. 1 teacher x 32 sessions x 1.5 hours @ $60.65 (including fringes) = $1,456 1 teacher x 4 parent nights x 1 hour @ $60.65 (including fringes) = $243 3 teachers x 8 sessions x 3 hours @ $60.65 (including fringes) = $5,822 N/A and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL $1120 $1790 NYSESLAT Books for Students Update ENL Classroom Library $150 x 18 students N/A Approximately $100 per ENL meeting for food costs. N/A $2700 (Imagine Learning) N/A $1,000 $14,986 The after school cost of the program that exceeds the total allocation will not be charged to Title III. 2018-19 CEP 57  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 11 School Name Pelham Gardens Middle School Borough Bronx School Number 566 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Denise Williams Coach Randi McCrane ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Amy Mascunana Teacher/Subject Area Debra Hendry Teacher/Subject Area type here Related-Service Provider Tanya Rios Superintendent Meisha Ross Porter Assistant Principal Joseph Biernat Coach type here School Counselor Ayana Bryant Parent Lynette Perez Madiera Parent Coordinator Tyrone Leader Field Support Center Staff Member Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 1 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 468 2018-19 CEP 58 Total number of ELLs 44 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 9.40%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 4 K 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 6 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Currently, we use the Scholastic Phonic Survey to gauge what basic letter recognition and phonic skills our Entering (beginner) and Emerging (low intermediate) students have. We also utilize the TCRWP High Frequency Word Lists to track the word sight word acquisition of our Emerging and Transitioning (high intermediate) students. These lists are also used as our Entering students begin to read words. The early literacy skills of our ELLs are severely lacking (basic phonics, decoding), even for those that have been in the country for many years. They've learned to read words more through memorization and less through decoding them. They also struggle to make meaning of unknown words. Going forward, we'd like to use full Running Records for our Expanding (advanced) and Commanding (proficient) to better measure their literacy skills. Across the school, including for our ELLs, we use the DRP and i-Ready diagnostic. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 2018-19 CEP 59  This summer, our ELL teacher attended a 5 day training through the AFT in best practices to support ELLs. Additionally, she attended a Tier III Wilson Reading Program, which we will use to increase the literacy of our Entering and Emerging ELLs. We have structured periods for this teacher to run this program for our standalone class. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? We use the DRP and the i-Ready as our major assessments for literacy. These exams are given periodically throughout the year. The DRP serves as our baseline and progress. The i-Ready helps inform our areas of need by giving us specific categories that every student needs to work on, such as phonics, vocabulary, literature comprehension, informational comprehension, etc. Last year we conducted weekly ELA "simulations" with released state questions. These simulations tell us specifically what standards students continue to struggle with. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Based on DRP data, students were given a second round of assessments known as the WIST and the TOCW. This assessment was given across the school, including the ELLs. These assessments, coupled with running records, helped to determine if a student was eligible for Tier 2 Just Words or Tier 3 Wilson Reading. ELLs who did not qualify for either program were placed into guided reading groups within their classes. This is their academic intervention, providing them with structured and strategic literacy help. These groups will be adjusted as the DRP is given again throughout the year. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Not applicable. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. NYSESLAT data shows that our students are getting stuck at specific levels and have trouble moving from those levels. They are improving in terms of total points, but not significantly enough to move levels. Their language acquisition is essentially plateauing. Of particular note was that this year, we recognized that our children are struggling on the listening section, which is unusual since this skill tends to development faster in ELLs than writing. However, overall, our students are making strides in their writing. NYSITELL data shows that our ELLs are coming in either as SIFEs with no Engish language skills and little literacy in their own home language or quite advanced. Many were able to score an Advanced on the NYSITELL. Both of these points are true across grades. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? We have received a copy of our EDAT and are using this document to make more informed data decisions. Going forward to plan to schedule professional development time for our ENL teacher to disseminate the findings to teachers, who can then use the data to inform their instruction. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Our Freestanding ENL program is delivered according to the mandated minutes as laid out in CR Part 154.2. All general education ELLs at all proficiency levels are block grouped within a specific class per grade. These students 2018-19 CEP 60  receive the prescribed number of minutes within their ELA content class. Students who required standalone ENL are pulled at a separate time for their ELL services. The ENL teacher is scheduled for 180 minutes within the ELA content class for each grade, 6th, 7th, and 8th. Since all students are grouped with a certain class, the ENL teacher works strategically with small groups of students. Additionally, we a use hour long blocks in our school, which helps in programming and scheduling the required number of minutes. b. TBE program. If applicable. Not applicable c. DL program. If applicable. Not applicable 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? We currently have only a Freestanding ENL program, therefore our students receive standalone and/or integrated content instruction, based on their proficiency level. Standalone services are straight forward ENL. Integrated content occurs during the ELA content class. Each student is programmed in STARS for their specific course depending on their proficiency level. Within the ELA content class, teacher works with groups on guided reading. Additionally, teacher differentiates course work to make it accessible for students, through differentiation, adapted text, scribing for students, etc. During ELA, Entering and Emerging ELLs also work using the Imagine Learning program as a resource for ELA. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. We currently offer only Freestanding ENL, which is taught in English as required. Our ENL teacher is bilingual in Spanish and when necessary, use the language to assist students. Within our integrated content classes we use a co-teaching model. The various co-teaching styles (parallel teaching, team teaching, etc.) are employed as necessary and appropriate. Both the ENL teacher and content teacher are responsible for differentiating for ELLs within their classroom and ensuring that students can comprehend material. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Spanish speaking students are given the Spanish LAB exam upon entry to the school system. Students who require a translated state exam are provided with such. Additionally, students who request a translated Math MOSL exam are provided with the exam. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Tasks are differentiated for subgroups mostly through the use of various modalities. This year, SIFE and Newcomer students will be receiving instruction via the Tier 3 Wilson Reading Program. These students also use the Imagine Learning technology program. Developing students receive more differentiation and supports such as graphic organizers, adapted or translated texts, vocabulary lists, outlines, writing strategies, sentence starters, etc. Almost all of our Long Term ELLs are also SWDs and they receive the same supports, but in smaller groups. Former ELLs are blocked into the same classes as current ELLs to ensure that they receive continued support. These students are given choice for these scaffolds and modifications. They are always welcomed to work with the ENL teacher and can request assistance at any time. Additionally, these students receive testing accommodations on state exams for the required 2 year period. Throughout the year, these students, along with the current ELLs, may request additional work time on an assignment to accommodate their language development. 2018-19 CEP 61  6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Our ELA department currently uses Expeditionary Learning, which includes a plethora of instructional strategies, protocols and appropriate grade level materials for our ELLs. Teachers of ELL-SWDs also graphic organizers, adapted or translated texts, vocabulary lists, outlines, writing strategies, sentence starters, etc. Teacher models repeatedly and may scribe student responses. Whenever possible, teachers use graphic novels or videos in conjunction with class anchor texts. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. As a school we currently use Just Words and Wilson Reading Program for our ELLs. i-Ready Teacher Toolbox also provides targeted instructional strategy resources for students based on their i-Ready scores. This is available to both ELA and Math teachers. Teachers can select specific skills which the data says students are lacking in to promote learning and provide remediation. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Our ELLs continue to struggle with reading so as part of a school wide initiative, they will receive guided reading instruction. Additionally, as we have noticed that our students are struggling with listening, teachers will be asked to push listening related activities once the NYSESLAT data has been disseminated. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? We currently offer only Freestanding ENL and will not be discontinuning this program. We do not have enough students or sufficient interest to open any other programs at this time. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs are invited to join our ASPIRA after school program, which includes both an academic and activity component. They are also given consideration for our Academic Success program, during which students can make up missing work for their classes to improve their grades. Finally, ELLs who take the ELA are invited to our Saturday Academy prep program. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. We currently use: EngageNY, which has a multitude of ELL strategies; Translated GoMath books in Spanish; and Teacher Toolbox, which provides test prep like materials for specific skills. For technology, we use the Imagine Learning iPad program and Castle Learning. Imagine Learning is specifically designed to meet students where they are and provides instruction in all four modalities. It also allows students to record their own voices. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? We currently offer only the ENL program model. Within that model, students who receive standalone classes have a word wall that includes our English, Spanish and Arabic. The ENL teacher also uses the SayHi app to speak with these students and Google Translate for those able to read their native language. Developing and Former ELLs are placed strategic student pairs (so that students who speak the same language within the class can assist in translating) and translated editions of any available materials. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Paste response to question here: 2018-19 CEP 62  15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Going forward, it is our goal to create a group comprised of the ENL teachers and coordinators from all three schools within our building. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). We currently offer a 6th grade orientation in the summer for all students, including ELLs and SWDs. The entire 6th grade staff team is involved in this orientation. ELLs are invited to all trips, parent workshops and high school workshops. Our Parent Coordinator runs these workshops and works in conjunction with the ENL coordinator whenever ELL parents RSVP to the workshops. Our guidance counselor works in conjunction with the ENL coordinator to plan trips to ELL-focused high schools and provide translated materials to students. This year, we are also looking into planning ELL only trips. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? We currently offer no language electives in our school to any students. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Not applicable Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Going forward, much of our professional development will revolve around the co-teaching models in our school. As our ENL teacher is co-teaching in all grades, it is essential for these teachers to be able to deliver instruction effectively to ELLs. Non-pedagogic staff is being trained in proper ELL identification to streamline the ELL registration process. They've also been taught how to call for translation services. This year, our ENL teacher will be attending the ELL liaison monthly meetings. She is also a part of the UFT ELL focus group during her personal time and will turn key this professional development. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. As a school, we hold an open house in June to welcome our incoming 6 th graders. At this open house, parents and students are given a rundown by the principal about school norms, uniform and discipline policies, etc. The Parent Coordinator is also present to introduce himself and explain about the type of workshops we as a school offer to parents. The Guidance Counselor also attends, as well as any available 6 th grade staff. We plan to seek translators for our future open houses. With regards to high school, we hold a High School Night in September, during which time the high school handbook is given out. Our Guidance Counselor explains that high school admissions process to the parents and students a like. Translators will also be sought out for future meetings. From October to December, we invite various high school students to meet with our 8 th graders during their weekly grade town hall meetings. The Guidance Counselor also attends these meetings as necessary to provide any pertinent information. Approximately a third of our ELLs are SIFE students or students new to the US school system. For them, 2018-19 CEP 63  the transition is less about elementary to middle school and more about transitioning into a school environment. Our LLL teacher meets informally with teachers on a as needed basis to discuss cultural sensitivies, language development and general content knowledge acquisition for these students. Whenever possible, she provides resources for these teachers. We are in the process of planning our Professional Development calendar to ensure that we are in compliance with the requirements of CR Part 154.2. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Our school uses the Skedula system to log important interactions with both students and parents across the school. For the upcoming school year, we have created an anecdotal label known as ELL Parent Contact. This anecdotal label will be specific to ENL and will be used by the ENL teacher to track and log the mandated one-to-one parent meeting, as well as calls home and any other meetings with parents about their child's progress. Translation services are called as necessary by ENL teacher, who is also our Language Access Coordinator. A generic agenda will be created to serve as a record and again, the meetings will be logged using Skedula. The meetings will be data driven, explaining where on the language progression a student is and their growth across modalities. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Unfortunately, our ELL parent involvement is not as high as we would like. It is something that the ENL teacher has discussed with the Parent Coordinator. For the upcoming school year, they will work together to come up with strategies to increase parental involvement for our ELL parents. One idea is to hold more workshops on ELL friendly topics, such as the NYSESLAT, resources for immigrant families, etc. The ENL teacher will also attend the workshops on other state exams (ELA & Math) to encourage more ELL participation. Sign in sheets and agendas are provided at each workshop and flyers are always distributed repeatedly prior to the actual meeting. As necessary our ENL teacher, who is also our Language Access Coordinator, will also utilize the translation unit as necessary. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 2018-19 CEP 64 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Denise Williams, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 65  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Pelham Gardens MIddle School School DBN: 11X566 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Denise Williams Title Principal Joseph Biernat Assistant Principal Tyrone Leader Parent Coordinator Amy Mascunana ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Ayana Bryant School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 2018-19 CEP 66  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 11X566 School Name: Pelham Gardens Middle School Superintendent: JeremyKabinoff The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Amy Mascunana ENL Teacher No Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Data is collected primarily from the HLIS and Blue Emergency Cards. Both ask the parent's language preference. The RAPL ATS report is used to monitor changes and trends in the preferred langauges of our parents. The RHLA ATS report is also helpful in viewing a snapshot of the home languages of our students, as they generally reflect the languages preferred by their parents. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 2018-19 CEP 67  Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Arabic Bengali Italian English Portuguese Spanish Twi Yorub 8 2 4 557 1 58 3 1 1.26 .32 .63 87.85 .16 9.15 .47 .6 7 2 4 557 1 59 3 1 1.1 .32 .63 87.85 .16 9.31 .47 .6 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency How do you Distributed to plan to Letters home to parents (including but not limited to: Families translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. All letters are sent home in 2018-19 CEP 68  -PTA meetings -Parent Teacher Conf. /Open School Nights -Holidays & school closures -After School & Saturday program information -Special Events /Dress Down Days/Fundraisers -State Exam Dates (incl. ELA, Math, NYSESLAT, Science, Regents) -Monthly -Quarterly -Monthly and as necessary -Approx. December/January -Monthly -Beg. early March through June both English and Spanish. Letters are sent home a few days prior to the event in question, as they come up. They are translated in house in Spanish by a bilingual staff member. Any ELL related documents are gotten from the DOE website and generated as necessary for our ELL parents specifically. We will continue to utilize DOE Language Interpretation Service to further translate written materials to all parents an necessary. We do not yet provide any newsletters, handbooks or information regarding curriculum. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. 2018-19 CEP 69  Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings -Parent Teacher Conference and Open Houses are held 4 times a year, as per the teacher contract. -Quarterly held 4 times a year, as per the teacher contract. These dates are held on the designated dates provided by the Department of Education. -IEP Meetings -As necessary, generally weekly across the school How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? -We rely primarily on a Spanish bilingual staff member to interpret as necessary during the majority of our conferences. When necessary, we will call the Translation Line. -Held by the school based support team who seeks out a translator as needed. Whenever possible, a Spanish speaking staff member who is known to 2018-19 CEP 70  the family is used. -Informal face to face meetings occur as deemed fit by staff. If a translator is needed to notify a parent we generally notify a Spanish bilingual staff member to make the contact whenever possible or use the translation services number. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. The school follows all Citywide Emergency Protocols and DOE policies, including having a Building Response Team, School Safety Plan, etc. The school also follows all regulations regarding the number and frequency for all drills (fire, soft lockdown, hard lockdown). The vast majority of the families that cannot communicate in English are ELL families with whom the ENL teacher has a good relationship. Therefore in case of an emergency, she would reach out to those families. She has direct contact with them and the vast majority have a direct line of access to her if necessary, via cellphone, ClassDojo, and Skedula. We would also utilize our Spanish speaking secretary to help communicate. We have a few families that can communicate a bit in English and again, although not ideal, these families would be called if necessary in a true emergency by the student's advisor. Although not ideal, in case of a true emergency, we would ask students to use their personal cell phones to contact their parents as well, with their advisor providing the information they should be communicating/translating. Lastly, the family/kin network amongst our Arabic speaking families is fairly strong and we would ask them to continue to reach out to each other in an emergency situation only. 2018-19 CEP 71  Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. The Language Access Coordinator has created a Google Slide presentation outlining the regulations and resources available. The presentation outlines all the regulations in A-663 and resources available via the DOE and the online Portal system. The presentation contains direct links to these resources and phone numbers. This presentation will be shared across Grade Team Meetings in mid-October and then shared on the school's Google Drive account for future reference. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) We are in the process of requesting a new LAP kit so that we may fulfill our parental notification requirements. These documents will be hung accordingly in the main office and Parent Coordinator office. The Parent Coordinator has previously served as the LAC and is aware of the various responsibilities surrounding language assistance and will ensure that meetings are in accordance with policies. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Our Parent Surveys are given out during Parent Teacher Conferences to ensure we reach as many parents as possible. We designate a room with computers so that our parents may complete the survey as they meet with teachers. Translators are requested as needed. To incentivize our parents, we hold a raffle that parents may enter only after they have completed the survey. Students whose parents complete the survey as allowed to wear jeans with their uniform shirts as an incentive. We are in the process of creating a Google Survey to be used during Parent Teacher Conferences. This survey will be used to ask parents about their interests and specific upcoming events. This is being developed by the School Leadership Team. The LAC coordinator has requested to include a brief section related to language services. This section would be available in the languages spoken predominantly by the families. 2018-19 CEP 72 
