2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): School Name: 08X583 P.S. 583 Principal: GLORIMER LOPEZ 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: PS 583 320800010583 Pre-Kindergarten - 1st Grade Grades Served: School Address: 1028 White Plains Road 929-348-4960 Phone Number: School Number (DBN): 08x583 929-348-4964 Fax: School Contact Person: Email Address: GlorimerLopez glopez6@schools.nyc.gov Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: GlorimerLopez Robin Barron JamilaChowdhury Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: N/A N/A N/A N/A District Information Geographical District: 08 Superintendent’s Office Address: Dr. Erika Tobia Superintendent: 1230 ZeregaAvenue, Bronx, NY 10462 etobia@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-828-2440 Phone Number: 718-828-6280 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 CEP 3  FSC: Bronx Executive Director’s Office Address: Jose Ruiz Executive Director: 1 Fordham Plaza Bronx, NY 10456 jruiz2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: (718) 828-7776 Phone Number: 718-828-6280 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) GlorimerLopez Robin Barron JamilaChowdhury AdarlenyRosario N/A N/A N/A N/A Colleen Lawlor FiorellaMejia SayemaJamila *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable/ Member/Teacher Member/Teacher Member/Parent 2018-19 CEP 5  NasrinAktar ZakiFahmida AndreaReyes Soma Saha Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Teacher Member/Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Students, staff, families and the community of PS 583 are explorers of knowledge through history, are active critical thinkers and engaged community members. PS 583 students will become active participants in the discovery and exploration of issues surrounding the making and meaning of history. Through experiential learning that involves reading, writing, speaking, and listening, students will engage in inquiry around historical topics and concepts. Through collaboration and partnerships with cultural 2018-19 CEP 9  institutions students will develop their critical thinking skills and make meaning of their world past and present to prepare them for the future. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. PS 583 is a newly constructed zoned elementary school in District 8 located in the Soundview area of the Bronx. The school opened in September 2017. For the 2018-2019 Academic Year, the school will enroll, Prek, Kindergarten and `1st Grade Students. In its full inception, PS 583 will serve grades Prek through 5th grade with an average total enrollment of 420-480 students. PS 583 is a result of a re-zoning plan to reduce overcrowding at two neighboring school (PS 119 and PS 152). PS 583 is a Readers and Writing Project school for Literacy. PS 583 is committed to our continued learning of Reading and Writing by having a dedicated TC Coach that will support and collaborate with Administration and staff to improve upon our learning and teaching practices. Identified teachers will attend Professional Learning through Teachers College in order to support the Lucy Calkins units of study in reading and writing. Professional Learning opportunities will provide teachers with learning experiences on developing instructional plans, inclusive of rigorous instruction, assessment based performance tasks, use of rubrics for assessing student writing and checklists to support student engagement and improve reading and writing outcomes. PS 583 has a dedicated with a Universal Literacy Coach assigned through the Department of Education Initiative to have all 2nd grade students reading on grade level. ULit Coach provides additional Professional Learning opportunities to our teachers in the Components of Balanced Literacy, Phonics Instruction, Phonemic Awareness and Phonological Awareness, Guided Reading, F&P Running Records, Readers and Writers Workshop and data analysis to inform instruction. PS 583 will continue to collaborate with the following Learning Partners: 1. New York Historical Society. The New York Historical Society will provide learning activities for parents, students and staff on the incorporation of history and historical events through instructional tasks. 2. Marquis Studios. Our partnership with Marquis Studio will provide our Kindergarten and 1st Grade students with opportunities to explore Visual Arts through art projects that incorporate history and historical events. 3. Education through Music - Students at PS 583 will receive direct music instruction three times (3x's) a week. Music instruction will be provided by a certified teacher and will incorporate music, movement, language development through songs in order to support our ENLs. 4. Yale Center for Emotional Learning - PS 583 will continue to partner with YALE in its implementation of RULER, the Mood Meter and Emotional Intelligence strategies. Training will be provided to new staff on the use of RULER and the mood meter in order to continue to improve and support student's social/emotional development. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. 2018-19 CEP 10  PS 583 has a current enrollment totaling 190 students. Students with special needs and ENL students both comprise 11.6% of the total population. Our attendance rate for 2017-2018 school year was 88.3%. PS 583 has incorporated ELA and Math programs to support the needs of ENL's and Students with Special Needs. These programs include a new TC phonics program to insure that our K and 1st grade students are given support at their individual levels. We are using the Wilson program to support children at the Tier II level in phonics and phonemic awareness. Our ENL students are strategically placed in classrooms across all grades. Our part-time ENL provider utilizes a push-in and pull-out program to support Literacy and Math. This model is used 3x a week. Push in, pull out services will be provided based on NYSESLAT data in order to identify needs and provide scaffold that is individualized and differentiated. Special education teachers provide differentiated instruction by creating reading groups in K and 1st grade in both the self-contained and collaborative team teaching classrooms, further supporting our students by addressing their literacy and math IEP goals while providing equity and access to grade level curricula. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. The 2017-2018 Fountas and Pinell Running record (end of year) data showed that 55% of Kindergarten students scored on or above grade level in reading (level C or higher). A total of 28 Kindergarten students (45%) did not meet the benchmark in reading. The area of focus for 2018-2019 will continue to be Rigorous Instruction. The 2017-2018 The 2017-2018 NYC School Survey (and School Quality Guide/Early Childhood) survey results show that PS 583 scored a 76% under Rigorous Instruction. The 2017-2018 NYC School Survey results show that PS 583 scored highest in the Areas of Supportive Environment (92%); Strong Family Ties (94%) and Trust (91%). PS 583 opened its doors in September 2017. Teachers and Administration developed all literacy and math curriculum units through collaborative inquiry and data analysis. Our students were provided a supportive environment through the use of RULER strategies and PBIS activities. Throughout 2017-2018, our first year of inception, all staff members shared in the mission and vision of the school, and supported each other in developing curriculum, analyzing assessment, using data to inform instruction and developing strong ties with our community. PS 583 will continue to strive for improvement in all areas, especially Strong Family/Community connections by offering various Workshops for parents in the areas of ELA, Math, Physical Fitness, Health and social/emotional well being. 2018-19 CEP 11  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 08X583 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 115 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient N/A % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance N/A # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 85.0% % Attendance Rate 77.4% % Reduced Lunch 12.2% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 4.3% 33.9% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 7.8% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 1.25 N/A N/A # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A N/A 88.3% 5.2% 10.4% 13.0% 39.1% 6.1% 0 N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 12  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. A review of Fountas and Pinell data of June 2018, shows that 55% of our K students scored on an above grade level in Reading (level C or higher). A total of 28 Kindergarten students (45% of the Kindergarten enrollment) did not meet the benchmark for Reading. Our subgroup data showed that 8 out of 28 Kindergarten students (28%) who did not meet the benchmark, were also ENL students. Furthermore, 9 out of 28 students (32%) Kindergarten students who did not meet the benchmark for Reading were identified as students with special needs. Analyzing the running record data and End of Year and Beginning of Year benchmark data, there is an area of need related to improving decoding skills and phonemic awareness in our students who did not meet the Reading benchmark. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all Kindergarten and First grade teachers will design curriculum that will provide students with daily learning opportunities in phonics instruction resulting in an increase of two reading levels as measured by beginning of year (BOY) and end of year (EOY) Fountas and Pinell running records data. 2018-19 CEP 13  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Principal and Teachers will engage in Outside Professional Learning opportunities through Teachers College Writing Project as assigned by Administration to support Balanced Literacy Components, Phonics Instruction and Reading/Writing Units of Study. Principal, Teachers and Grade Leaders will engage in Data Dialogues and Inquiry meetings with the focus on student reading and writing using student running records, TC Phonics Assessment Data, Fundations Data, BOY and EOY benchmarks, writing samples, to assess weaknesses and strengths and inform curriculum development. Principal and Teachers will be provided with opportunities for Professional Development through in-house coaching provided by TC Coach in order to improve best practices along curriculum planning and assessment in Reading. Principal, Teachers and Grade Leaders will use Google Drive (Google Apps for Education) as a tool to collaborate on the development of lesson plans, for Reading, Phonics and Writing and to develop tools for tracking and analyzing Reading data.  Teachers  Principal Sept. 2018 - June 2019  Teachers  Principal October 2018 - June 2019  Principal  TC Coach  Peer Collaborative Teacher  Principal  Teachers  ULit Coach  Peer Collaborative Teacher  Grade Leaders  TC Coach  Teachers  Principal October 2018 - May 2019  Principal  TC Coach  Peer  Teachers  Principal Sept. 2018 - June 2019 Collaborative Teacher  Grade Leaders  Ulit Coach  Principal  TC Coach  Peer Collaborative Teacher  Grade Leaders  Ulit Coach 2018-19 CEP 14  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents and families will be supported in understanding Rigorous Instruction by engaging in various school sponsored activities, such as Open School Night, Fundations Workshops, TC Phonics Workshops, and Reading Workshops. Parent Workshops will be provided on Tuesdays to support parent understanding, expectations of the curriculum, Common Core and additional ways that families may support students at home. Administration will work with The New York Historical Society to schedule and provide parents with additional learning opportunities for understanding Rigorous Instruction and Common Core expectations. Workshops will be identified beginning October 2018 and will be included in the Parent Monthly Calendar and discussed at the monthly SLT Meeting and PA Meeting. Key personnel responsible for this implementation will include the Principal, Teachers, TC Coach, ULit Coach and our school secretary. The Timeline for these activities is October 2018 through June 2019. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Budget will be aligned to support the instructional program and to purchase materials such as Laptops/Ipads, read aloud books, independent reading libraries to support the workshop model. School schedule will reflect common planning periods for each grade, as well as cross-grade common planning periods. Mondays and Tuesdays Professional Learning time will be utilized to develop curriculum units, analyze reading data and student work samples, utilizing and norming of rubrics and instructional strategies to improve student reading outcomes. The Teachers College Instructional coach and additional resources through the TCRWP website will be utilized to support the development of instructional plans and Units of Study in Reading and Phonics. Professional Development opportunities offered through Borough Field Support Center (BFSC) and District 8 will be used as additional resources for Teachers to gain best practices in Instructional Strategies, SDI (Special Education Teachers), assessment analysis and Inquiry Protocols. The 2018-2019 Budget will include the following allocation of funds:  Per Session funding to support curriculum and assessment development  Per Diem funding to support substitute coverages for internal and external professional learning opportunities  TC Coach  Purchase of Units of Study and TC Phonics  Purchase of additional Fundations kits 2018-19 CEP 15   Materials for Parent Workshops Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP X Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, Fountas and Pinnell Running Record student data will be analyzed to assess student growth in reading levels. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Fountas and Pinnell Student Running Records and Guided Reading assessments. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 16  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? PS 583 will continue its collaboration with District 8 and Yale University's Center for Emotional Intelligence to build upon the beginning of our school wide implementation of the RULER strategies. We will continue in the 2018-2019 school year to build a stronger school community where staff and students use personal and instructional strategies to enhance social emotional intelligence and learning, in order to support our families, our staff and our students. A PBIS system which will include invite only after school activities (such as Arts and Crafts, Movie Afternoons, Physical Movement Activities) and in-school rewards will be planned and implemented through the use of Class Dojo points. Through this program, students will earn incentives, prizes and after-school activities for displaying positive school behaviors, such as, homework completion, wearing uniforms daily, respect for rules and expectations, and attendance. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 90% of teachers will implement a PBIS System and use RULER Strategies that will result in a 10% increase in student participation in the PBIS after school activities (such as Arts and Crafts, Movie Afternoons, Physical Movement Activities, etc.) as evidenced by student sign in sheets. 2018-19 CEP 17  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Implementation of PBIS program into our school culture. Through the use of the PBIS program all staff will be able to recognize and reward students when displaying positive behaviors and meeting expectations throughout the school.  All Staff Oct. 2018 - November 2018  Principal RULER Implementation Team PBIS Team  Principal RULER Implementation Team  All Staff Sept. 2018 - Nov. 2019 Sept. 2018 - June 2019  Principal  RULER Implementation Team  District 8 RULER Initiative Team  Principal  RULER Implementation Team  Teachers o Principal  Teachers Principal Nov. 2018 - December 2018 School Aides, Paraprofessionals, Clusters Related Service Providers All staff members will participate in RULER implementation training facilitated by District 8 and/or assigned RULER Implementation Team staff at PS 583. Professional Development will be provided through District 8 RULER initiative to selected Teachers and Principal in order to support further implementation of emotional intelligence information and strategies to parents and community members. Principal and Teachers will participate in developing a timeline for teaching students about RULER and Emotional Learning opportunities in every day activities in the school. Discussions and teaching will center around the Mood Meter, and Meta-moments for de-escalating situations. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement 2018-19 CEP 18  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. The PBIS Team and the RULER implementation team will collaborate on providing Parents with workshops in November, February and April to support in their understanding of RULER concepts and improve their knowledge of Emotional Intelligence. Workshops will be advertised via Class Dojo, Letters via Backpacks and Flyers. Teachers and identified RULER Implementation Team staff members will provide parents with workshops on Super Tuesdays. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The 2018-2019 Budget will include the following allocation of funds:  Per Diem funding to support substitute coverages for internal and external professional learning opportunities  Materials for Printing Flyers and Advertising Events Class schedule will reflect common planning periods to support professional development. Monday professional learning time will also be used to support professional development opportunities. Selected Chancellor's Professional Development Days, Bronx Borough Field Support Center (BFSC) and District 8 Professional Learning Opportunities will also be used. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP X Title I TA C4E 21st Century Grant SIG Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, there will be a 5% increase in student participation in PBIS activities and incentives/rewards as evidenced by PBIS After-school sign in sheets and Class Dojo points. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. PBIS Invitations and Sign-In sheets; Class Dojo Report Data Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 19  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. At PS 583 Teacher Collaboration is vital and an essential factor of our school culture. Together, both Teachers and Administration collaborate on curriculum development, assessments, analyzing data, groupings and AIS/RTI supports for all Kindergarten students. The 2018-2018 School Quality Guide/Early Childhood demonstrated that 96% of Teachers at PS 583 felt positive about Peer Collaboration and 97% felt positive about Innovation and Collective Responsibility. Our priority for 2018-2019 is to continue to collaborate on Curriculum Unit Plans, using Inquiry Protocols to analyze student work , discuss problems of practice and implement instructional plans. and AIS/RTI supports for Kindergarten and 1st Grade students, with a focus on supporting ENL and Students with special needs. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 90% of teachers will engage in structured, inquiry team collaborations, using protocols to analyze student data/student work artifacts, identify a problem of practice and create an action plan, which includes RTI/AIS supports and evaluate impact on student learning based on Fountas and Pinnell Running Records and Pre/Post Benchmark Assessments.. 2018-19 CEP 20  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Monthly Inquiry Meetings with Peers and Grade Leaders to analyze student data/student artifacts, identify a problem of practice and create an action plan which includes AIS/RTI in 8 week cycles. Professional Development on Inquiry Protocols Student Data Analysis Protocols, Identifying Problems of Practice in Classrooms/School Developing Action Plans Evaluating Action Plans Planning and Incorporating (Tracking) AIS/RTI Supports Identification of Data Analysis Leader who will be responsible for developing tracking systems, collecting data, communicating with Teachers, Coaches and Principal Tuesday Workshops for Parents will be provided on additional strategies families can use at home in order to improve student learning outcomes.  Teachers Sept. 2018 - June 2019  Principal  Grade  Principal  Teachers  Peer Collaborative Teacher  Leaders- Peer Collaborative Teacher Sept. 2018 - June 2019  Principal  Grade Leaders- Peer Collaborative TeacherTC Coach  ULIT Coach  Teachers Sept. 2018 - November 2018 October. 2018 - June 2019  Teachers  ULit Coach  Principal  Grade Leaders- Peer Collaborative Teacher  TC Coach  ULIT Coach  Principal  Grade Leaders- Peer Collaborative TeacherTC Coach 2018-19 CEP 21  3b – Parent and Family Engagement  ULIT Coach How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents and families will be supported in understanding Student Outcomes and Expectations by engaging in various school sponsored activities, such as Open School Night, Fundations Workshops, TC Phonics Workshops, and Reading Workshops. Parent Workshops will be provided on Tuesdays to support parent understanding, expectations of the curriculum, Common Core and additional ways that families may support students at home. Workshops will be identified beginning October 2018 and will be included in the Parent Monthly Calendar and discussed at the monthly SLT Meeting and PA Meeting. Key personnel responsible for this implementation will include the Principal, Teachers, TC Coach, ULit Coach and our school secretary. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The 2018-2019 Budget will include the following allocation of funds:  Per Diem funding to support substitute coverages for internal and external professional learning opportunities  Materials for Printing Flyers and Advertising Events Class schedule will reflect common planning periods to support professional development. Monday professional learning time will also be used to support professional development opportunities. Selected Chancellor's Professional Development Days, Bronx Borough Field Support Center (BFSC) and District 8 Professional Learning Opportunities will also be used. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP X Title I TA C4E 21st Century Grant SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Progress monitoring in February 2019 will include a review and analysis of action plans, agendas of Inquiry Team meetings, classroom observations on the use of RTI/AIS plans for selected students and collection of data and evidence of student impact. 2018-19 CEP 22  Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Student Data, Action plans, small group AIS/RTI plans, Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 23  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. PS 583 will continue to implement Teachers College Reading and Writing Units of Study, a new Teachers College Phonics Program, Envisions Math Curriculum, Amplify Science Curriculum and Passport Social Studies. The school leader is an essential member of the learning community and oversees the effective implementation of teacher practices in all classrooms. The Principal will take part in Professional Development with teachers, lead professional development opportunities and seek out additional professional development opportunities outside of the school. A focus on Instructional Leadership will be through the lens of observing and providing meaningful, actionable feedback in Domain 1, which is specific to Planning and Preparation (1e) and Assessment (3d). Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, teacher MOTP Services in Domain 3 ( Component 3c and Component 3d) will improve by .3% as a result of timely, meaningful, and actionable feedback through coaching after informal and formal observations. 2018-19 CEP 24  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Principal will attend selected and strategic Teachers College Reading and Writing Project Professional Development Days with the focus on Instructional Leadership and support for Reading, Writing and Phonics Instructional plan development.  Principal  Teachers Sept. 2018 - June 2019  Principal  TC Coach Principal and Peer Collaborative Teacher will work in collaboration to assign teachers peer inter-visitations as per Feedback given after an observation.  Principal Teachers November 2018 - June 2019  Principal  Peer Collaborative Teacher Principal will schedule rounds of observations to provide timely feedback and next steps to teachers on instructional practices in curriculum development and assessment. Professional Development will be provided on Developing Instructional Plans and developing assessments through the use of Rubrics and Checklists.  Principal Teachers Sept. 2018 - May 2019  Principal  Principal  Teachers Sept. 2018 - June 2019  Principal  TC Coach  Peer Collaborative Teacher 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will be supported in understanding the school's curriculum in Reading and Writing through various school sponsored activities and workshops, such as Phonics Make and Take Activities; Fundations Workshops; Read Alouds and Shared Reading/Writing, and Publishing Parties. Teachers and Administration will identify September's Open School Night and additional selected Tuesdays to provide parents with workshops on various topics around the curriculum and assessments. Key personnel will include the Principal, TC Coach and Peer Collaborative Teacher. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 2018-19 CEP 25  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The 2018-2019 Budget will include the following allocation of funds:  Per Diem funding to support substitute coverages for internal and external professional learning opportunities for Teachers  Class schedule will reflect common planning periods to support professional development and curriculum planning and assessment  Monday professional learning time will also be used to support professional development opportunities. Selected Chancellor's Professional Development Days, Bronx Borough Field Support Center (BFSC) and District 8 Professional Learning Opportunities will also be used. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP X Title I TA C4E 21st Century Grant SIG Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Progress monitoring in February 2019 will include a review and analysis of Teacher Danielson Ratings in Doman 3 (component 3c and component 3d) with an expected increase of .2% as a result of timely and actionable feedback. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Teacher rating data on Advance in Danielson Component 3c and Component 3d Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 26  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. PS 583, in its 2nd year of inception, will continue to focus on the development of a welcoming and nurturing environment for our parents, families and students. We have an active PA Board but there is room for improvement in involving all parents in school activities. According to the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide/Early Childhood, parents felt 93% with the level of Parent Involvement at PS 583. We will organize Tuesday workshops for parents, in-class Perfect Attendance celebrations, PBIS school-wide incentive activities in order to support strong family and community ties. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be 2% increase in parental participation at school sponsored activities focusing on academics, social/emotional supports and celebrations of culture, as evidenced by event parent sign-in sheets. 2018-19 CEP 27  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Host Monthly workshops for parents (including Prek) in all content areas. Workshops will be promoted via ClassDojo, Parent Calendars and Flyers  Parents Sept. 2018 - June 2019 Wellness workshops will be held for parents by our Physical Education Teacher and outside CBOs to promote healthy living and healthy eating  Parents Sept. 2018 - June 2019 Principal will meet with PA Body and SLT parents to share instructional focus, attendance goals, upcoming workshops  Parents Sept. 2018 - June 2019 Principal and District 8 Parent Liaison will compose and distribute a family survey to parents in order to gain further ideas on topics for workshops and additional support for Families  Parents Sept. 2018 - June 2019  Teachers, Principal, School Secretary   ULit Coach  Phys Ed Teacher  Principal  Outside Vendors  Principal  District 8 Parent Liaison  Principal  School Secretary  District 8 Parent Liaison 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. PS 583 will engage families and support their understanding of instructional focus and how the school is supporting student outcomes through various Workshops. The workshops will focus on academic expectations, instructional strategies that parent can utilize at home, and common core. Workshops will be identified by October 2018 and the topics will be included in every Parent Monthly Calendar, which will be sent out to parents via bookbag and displayed on the Parent Board on the 1st floor. 2018-19 CEP 28  Key personnel will include the Principal, Teachers, Ulit Coach and District 8 Parent Liaison. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The 2018-2019 Budget will include the following allocation of funds: Funding to provide outside consultants/vendors as needed   Materials for Printing Flyers. Monthly Parent Calendars and Advertising Events Class schedule will reflect common planning periods to planning of parent workshops and celebrations ClassDojo will be used to communicate with parents regarding upcoming events Resources include BFSC, ULit Coach, Selected District 8 Parent Workshops and Opportunities Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP X Title I TA C4E 21st Century Grant SIG Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. In February 2019, agendas, sign-in sheets, PBIS invitations and overall parent workshop attendance will be analyzed to monitor any increase or decrease in parent participation. Data will be used to determine if additional workshops are needed, which workshops are most or least attended and/or a new survey for our parents will be sent out to regain new ideas to meet the needs of the community. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Parent surveys, School surveys, parent-sign in sheets Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 29  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Small group   One-  to-one Ipads Small group  One-  to-one Ipads Small group  small group  Small group  One-to-one When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.)  During the school day  After School Program  During the school day  After School Program  During the school day  During the school day  During the school day English Language Arts (ELA)  Benchmark Assessments   Phonics Inventories F&P Running Records  TC Phonics  Guided Reading Groups Fundations Starfall    A-Z Reading  Mathematics Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.)  Envisions End of Unit Exams  BOY Math Benchmark   Assessment In class assessments Science Class Assessments  Teacher Observations  Class Assessments  Teacher Observations Student referrals to SIT   Parent referrals to Administration/Teachers Informal Observations   OORs incidents  Envisions ScaffoldedActivities  Guided Groups  Pull-out Groups  Teacher Scaffoldedactivities  Amplify ScaffoldedActivities  Hands-on Projects  Guided Practice  Use of Technology for scaffolds (eg: Videos)  At Risk Counseling  At Risk Speech Lunch Group(s)  2018-19 CEP 30  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) For 2018-2019, PS 583 has a total of 29 students who are identified as Students In Temporary Housing. A total of 28 students have a status of Doubled Up and One (1) student has a status of Shelter. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. 2018-19 CEP 31  Students in Temporary Housing will be provided with school supplies, book bags, and school uniforms in order for them to be able to participate in all instructional activities. The School Based Support Team (SBST) assigned Social Worker will work with families to provide additional support in the areas of social and emotional needs and/or academics. PS 583 works with Agencies that will offer free vision screening and eye glass if the students qualify, as well as, dental cleanings via in-school visits. Our district assigned Attendance Teacher will monitor attendance, specifically for our Students In Temporary Housing and make outreach via phone calls and/or home visits to support the families in improving attendance. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). n/a 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. n/a 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. n/a 2018-19 CEP 32  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. PS 583 Teacher Candidates are screened and selected from the NYCDOE Open market system and the New Teacher Finder in order to obtain teachers who have the required NYS Certification Credentials. An Interview and Hiring committee is formed with staff, and chaired by the Principal. This committee holds all interviews. After a demo-lesson viewed by the members, feedback is given and the committee discusses possible candidate qualifications by focusing on: Interpersonal Communications with peers  Knowledge of Reading and Writing/Balanced Literacy and Workshop Model/Common Core Standards   Outreach and Communication with parents  Willingness to work in Professional Learning Communities, share best practices and collaborate with school community After hiring new teachers, are provided with email and Google drive access in order to collaborate with other team members are invited to engage in inter-class visitations given a mentor (1st year teachers) or assigned to work with grade leader     meet with the principal every 2 months for check in to discuss progress, curriculum, student data, and any  concerns are assigned to in-house PD, outside PD, BFSC Professional Learning Opportunities and/or District 8 Professional Learning Offerings 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Activities and strategies for high quality professional development for staff will include the following:  Assign Instructional Support Mentors to 1st year Teachers  Assign Instructional Cabinet Members to support new teachers via inter-visitations and common planning periods 2018-19 CEP 33   Assign Peer Collaborative Teacher mentoring opportunities with new teachers  Assign TC Principal Days for Principal Learning  Principal will attend District 8 TC Offerings and TC Coach modeling sessions  Differentiated Professional Learning based on Advance and Danielson Observation Data,  Teacher Selected PDs through BFSC and outside consultants.  Professional Learning opportunities through Teachers College for all Prek, Kindergarten and 1st grade Teachers  Paraprofessionals will attend PD on Selected Prek non-attendance Days and Professional Development Mondays in the school In house Professional Development with TC Coach via grade meetings, lab site modeling and 1:1 coaching   Universal Literacy Coach will support the development of Guided Reading plans and AIS Action Plans Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. n/a 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). n/a Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). Preschool Students will be provided transitional plans through sharing of records on student needs. Curriculum will be aligned to meet the needs of students in Literacy and Math. Parents of Preschool children will be invited to attend workshops on Tuesdays, as well as specific workshops related to transition of students into elementary program. Intervention services will be coordinated through related service providers, teachers, Principal and parents. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Teachers will be part of a Professional Development Team, MOSL Committee and Assessment Team in order to support the decision making process regarding the use and selection of assessment measures and professional development opportunities to meet then needs of all Teachers and Paraprofessinals. 2018-19 CEP 34  4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) Section 5A, 5B, 5C, 5D, 5E Section 6 na na na Section 5A, 5B, 5C, 5D, 5E Section 6 Title I Part A (Basic) Federal Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Federal Federal Federal Tax Levy (FSF) Local 105,000 0 0 0 1,048,000 x na na na X 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used 2018-19 CEP 35  conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 36  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. P.S. 583, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students P.S. 583 will support parents and families of Title I students by:  providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology;  providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and  decision making in support of the education of their children; fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress;  providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments;  sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand;  providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; 2018-19 CEP 37  Parental Involvement and School Quality The Parent Involvement Policy at PS 583 was designed based upon an assessment of the needs of parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English as a New Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will:  actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact;  Title I Priority and Focus Schools and the parents of students served in the Title I program must jointly agree upon the use of these additional funds to support increased parent engagement/education to enable parents to effectively support their child’s learning.  engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills;  ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and  strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills;  maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home;   provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report;  host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help;    Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement 2018-19 CEP 38  The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by:  holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference;  hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year;  encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; supporting or hosting Family Day events;   establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents;  encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers;  providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress;  developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress;  providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) P.S. 583, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards;  using academic learning time efficiently;    offering high quality instruction in all content areas;  providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships     conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education;  providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; 2018-19 CEP 39   involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact;  providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information;  ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff  ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents;  notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff  member; arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities;  planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents    creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents;   ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as  described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Elementary and Secondary Education Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities  monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent;  ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games;     promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits;  encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child;   participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education;  communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested;  2018-19 CEP 40   become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact;  participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to         learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; III. Student Responsibilities attend school regularly and arrive on time; complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; show respect for myself, other people and property; try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 41  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District School Name Borough select one School Number B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Coach Assistant Principal Coach ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher School Counselor Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Related-Service Provider Superintendent Parent Parent Coordinator Field Support Center Staff Member Other (Name and Title) C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Total number of ELLs Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions ELLs as share of total student population (%) % 2018-19 CEP 42  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 3 K 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 4 0 2 0 5 0 6 0 7 0 8 0 9 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? 2018-19 CEP 43  5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. b. TBE program. If applicable. c. DL program. If applicable. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status 2018-19 CEP 44  6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? 2018-19 CEP 45 d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. 2018-19 CEP 46 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, [PRINCIPAL's NAME], testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 47  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: School DBN: Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Title Principal Assistant Principal Parent Coordinator ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 2018-19 CEP 48  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 08x583 School Name: PS 583 Superintendent: Dr. Karen Ames The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Fiorella Glorimer Mejia Lopez Secretary Principal Yes Yes Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral 2018-19 CEP 49  3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Month/Frequency Distributed How do you plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely Name to Families provision of translated documents to parents. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) 2018-19 CEP 50  Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? 2018-19 CEP 51 
