2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP-CS) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 09X593 School Name: M.S. 593 Principal: ALISON ANGRISANI 2018-19 CEP-CS 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: South Bronx International Middle School 6 1000 Teller Avenue, Bronx NY 10456 718-588-0341 School Number (DBN): 09x593 Phone Number: Fax: Alison Angrisani aangrisani2@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Email Address: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Alison Angrisani TamekaJarrett FrancheskaLopez TBD NeichmaOrtiz TBD Catherine Eugenio District Information Geographical District: 09 Superintendent’s Office Address: Leticia Rodriguez Rosario Superintendent: 1245 Washington Avenue Bronx NY lrosario2@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: Phone Number: Zerega Ave FSC: Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) Nancy Saffer Executive Director: 2018-19 CEP 3  Executive Director’s Office Address: Executive Director’s Email Address: Phone Number: Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Alison Angrisani Tameka Jarrett FrancheskaLopez NeichmaOrtiz Catherine Eugenio, Center for Supportive Schools Patricia Stellato ArgenyUrena LoidaVargas *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable/ Member/UFT Member/Parent Member/Parent 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Evelyn Copeland Yolanda Reyes Member/UFT Member/Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? South Bronx International Middle School (MS 593 until our name is officially approved) affords newly arrived English Language Learners with a rigorous, college and career preparatory education anchored in a robust literacy curriculum that provides equity and access in our democratic society resulting in a community of learners who have the habits of scholarship to engage with confidence in complex thinking and problem solving across disciplines. 2018-19 CEP 9  2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. South Bronx International Middle School is a small middle school located on the Teller Avenue Campus in the Bronx. As part of the Internationals Network for Public Schools, we serve newcomer English Language Learners, here in the United States for four years or less. We pride ourselves on knowing our students and families well, and providing our students with a warm, nurturing community that will support them in developing their literacy skills to enable equity and access. Our students leave us after three critical years as literate, creative, caring, compassionate and confident participants in their community. We do this by providing students with a robust interdisciplinary approach to skills, and a comprehensive literacy program including: close reading, independent reading, guided reading, and reading remediation. We see each student as an individual with unique strengths and needs in all areas. We build off of students’ assets, and we support their gaps by using data strategically to design instruction. Our foundation is our Advisory program which provides students with a community within our community. We partner with the Internationals Network of Public Schools and our approach is guided by the following 5 Core Principles:  Heterogeneity and collaboration : schools and classrooms are heterogeneous and collaborative structures that build on the strengths of each member of the school community to optimize learning  Experiential learning : expansion of the 21st century schools beyond the four walls of the building   motivates adolescents and enhances their capacity to successfully participate in modern society Language and content integration : strong language skills develop most effectively in context and emerge most naturally in a purposeful, language-rich, interdisciplinary, and experiential program Localized autonomy and responsibility : linking autonomy and responsibility at every level within a learning community allows all members to contribute to their fullest potential  One learning model for all : every member of our school community experiences the same learning model, maximizing an environment of mutual academic support. Thus all members of our school community work in diverse, collaborative groups on hands-on projects; put another way, the model for adult learning and student learning mirror each other. MS 593 is a Community School partnered with the Center for Supportive Schools. CSS supports our extracurricular programming as well as our Advisory program and other wraparound services including adult ESL, parent/family workshops and other after school programming through the LEAP program. On-Site Wellness Center: MS 593 is partnered with Montefiore Hospital who plays an important role in promoting the healthy habits of students. Services available on the Teller Campus include medical, mental health, and community health. Medical services are provided by nurse practitioners and/or physicians, with the support of licensed practical nurses. At our health centers, enrolled students can expect to receive: preventive care, including well-child visits and physical exams, immunizations, urgent care for sore throats, cold and allergy symptoms. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Our student population is entirely English Language Learners in the country for four years or less. Our school is open to students borough-wide with a priority to students in district 9. Many of our students have experienced trauma related to their immigration situations including unaccompanied minors and family reunification. A large portion of our students are SIFE and have interrupted or limited formal education, and are not fully literate in their home language. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. 2018-19 CEP 10  Key areas of focus for next year: Rigorous Instruction Supportive Environment Collaborative Teachers Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. We have spent the summer finding the best teachers to meet our students' needs. Our program has been designed to provide students with longer 50 minute periods so that teachers and students can engage deeply with content and skills. We have allocated time each day for our 'clinic' which is a small group instruction block to provide students with extra support in the areas where they are struggling. Literacy is at the forefront of all of the work that we do at 09X593. Literacy is embedded in all aspects of the work that our students engage in as we believe that literacy lifts all boats for our children. Literacy is intentional and our practices are anchored in data. We provide our students with a daily diet of literacy including close reading, guided reading, independent reading, and literacy intervention, that is anchored in research based practices. This goal aligns to the Internationals Network for Public Schools' Core Principle of Language and Content Integration. Our School's Instructional Focus Is: If teachers use data to plan for cognitively challenging tasks that include reading, writing, speaking and listening with appropriate scaffolds, then students will engage in rich literacy experiences that foster equity, access, growth, and achievement. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 2018-19 CEP 11  By June 2019, all students will strengthen their academic literacy skills as demonstrated by a minimum of one year’s reading level growth as measured by the Independent Reading Level Assessment (IRLA). 2018-19 CEP 12  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers administer the IRLA and use reading level data to design and implement effective lesson plans in the context of their classes that include content rich text, reading strategies such as annotation and appropriate scaffolds for all learners. All students September-Grade level team June Teachers use reading level data to make strategic decisions about grouping, differentiation of task, and adult deployment when relevant. Teachers use templates to incorporate language/content/skill learning targets into lessons/units. Lessons continue to incorporate school wide common reading and writing instructional strategies including: close reading/ text annotation, Socratic seminar and Hochman writing strategies. Teachers build repertoire of scaffolds and deploy scaffolds appropriately to provide students with access to the reading and task. Through the data wise inquiry process, teachers analyze students’ reading in professional learning teams in order to improve instruction. Leadership and teachers effectively facilitate teams’ work toward this goal by modeling professional norms and facilitating the group’s work. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement All students September- Grade level team June Teachers Sept-June Principal and Grade Team How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. 2018-19 CEP 13  The school will engage families/parents in understanding rigorous instruction and being able to support children at home through: -Our Advisory Program- Advisers regularly communicate student progress and liaise with families on an ongoing basis. Advisers make initial contact with families in the summer to establish the point of contact and to begin the intake process so that we can use our qualitative data to plan and group students according to academic, social and emotional readiness and challenges. -Parent facing JumpRope portal- Grades and student progress toward meeting standards are updated regularly via the portal and accessible to families and students. First workshop to acquaint families to JumpRope takes place in October; at that time logins are made available. Admin will provide guidance to teachers as to how many grades should be entered thus far to ensure that families have adequate knowledge of their child's progress. -Student-led conferences take place 2x per year (December and March); students present their work and learning to a panel including parents and families. Teachers and advisers work with students and their families to engage all stakeholders in this process. -Family workshops run by teachers and CBO staff from the Center for Supportive Schools are designed to provide families with the skills to be able to discuss student progress, grades and an to model the work that is occurring in the classroom so that families are equipped with the skills and knowledge necessary to be of support to their children. Staff run workshops on standards based grading so that families understand our policy. Our grading platform translates to Spanish; we will work with speakers of other languages to ensure language access to our platform through translation and interpretation. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 1) Hiring highly qualified teachers is our priority and we will be using the majority of our budget on human resources. 2) We have identified two online programs that will be implemented during our 'clinic' block, Imagine Learning/Math and Reading Plus. These programs are adaptive and use student baseline assessment data to tailor instruction to students' needs and levels. 3) Teachers are programmed for weekly instructional coaching with the principal and/or with a coach from Internationals Network for Public Schools partnership. 4) Our schedule provides teachers with time to co-plan in their team. 5) The schedule has 50 minute blocks for content classes (ELA, Math, Social Studies and Science). Per week, students have 6 ELA blocks, 6 math blocks, 5 science blocks, 4 social studies blocks, in addition to 3 advisory periods, 5 intervention blocks (small group instruction math and ELA) and PE/art. 6) Teachers meet individually with a coach, in teams, and as a full staff. These interactions are programmed into their schedule and the PD time is designed so that teachers can go deep into their inquiry work with a longer allocation of time. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other 2018-19 CEP 14  Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. We will use Reading Plus and IRLA reading assessment data to identify interim gains as well as skills that need to be prioritized during 'clinic' time (small group instruction) and classroom instruction. Our standards based grading system will also provide our teams with data as to skill gaps and student growth. This will be examined in teams during our weekly common planning time. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Independent Reading Level Assessment tool (IRLA), Reading Plus online assessment tool Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 15  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? As a new school, creating a culture of learning that shares a growth mindset is of the utmost importance. Our students come to us with a variety of levels of proficiency in English and in their home language, and with a variety of educational experiences from their home country. Standards based grading (SBG) is the cornerstone of our work at 09X593. The use of SBG provides our students, families and staff with clear outcomes and progress on student growth and achievement. SBG is the key structure that connects all of the aspects of our practice: student led conferences, assessment, inquiry, and the design of lessons, tasks and units. Our grading platform (Jumprope) and standards based grading which has academic and work habits learning targets, advisory and student led conferences are in place to ensure that we are supporting the whole child. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all staff will consistently implement standards-based grading in all of their classes resulting in student growth on school-wide learning targets. 2018-19 CEP 16  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers will work in teams to unpack grade 6 standards and create a set of grade-wide interdisciplinary learning targets to be taught and assessed throughout the year. Teaches will create 'standard, target, assessment' planners and get feedback on their assessment plans in their coaching meetings and in their team meetings. Students will engage in student led conferences twice yearly. Students will prepare for their conferences in advisory. RTI and the use of standards-based grading data will identify students who are at risk, and provide a plan for remediation. Teachers Sept-June Teachers Sept-June Principal and teacher team Principal and teacher team Students, advisers, families November and March All Stakeholders Students Ongoing All stakeholders 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. We will hold an early October family workshop to support parent/family understanding of our grading system and student led conferences. Progress reports will be shared six times per year, and families have access to students' grades on the JumpRope portal. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Tuesday PD is dedicated to parent engagement. We have prioritized hiring a community school director as well as a social worker to outreach to families. Advisers will serve as the primary liaison between students, teachers and families. As part of the advisory structure, students will prepare for their student led conferences and also deliver their conference to that group. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other 2018-19 CEP 17  Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 1) Progress reports will be used to demonstrate student progress. 2) We will monitor student/family usage of the JumpRope platform and use this data to inform our Tuesday family engagement PD. 3) November and March student-led family conference family attendance data. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. JumpRope platform; Student-led family conference data Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 18  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Literacy is at the forefront of all of the work that we do at 09X593. Literacy is embedded in all aspects of the work that our students engage in as we believe that literacy lifts all boats for our children. Literacy is intentional and our practices are anchored in data and cultural relevance. Consistency in our approach to literacy instruction and teacher collaboration is essential. We provide our students with a daily diet of literacy that is anchored in research based practices. This goal aligns to the Internationals Network for Public Schools (INPS) Core Principle of Language and Content Integration. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all students will engage in high quality, daily writing as evidenced by maintaining a portfolio of work, in which students will demonstrate growth on the writing modality in the New York State English as Second Language Achievement Test (NYSESLAT) and/or State English Language Arts (ELA). 2018-19 CEP 19  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers use data in teacher teams to design and implement lesson plans and rigorous tasks that incorporate writing. teachers Teacher teams the inquiry cycle in interdisciplinary teams to examine student writing products using looking at student work (LASW) protocol (to modify and inform instruction). teachers Teachers support students in creating a complete working folder, including drafts and final written work with rubrics and reflections on who they are as readers and writers. students beginning in August; ongoing beginning in August' and ongoing September-June teachers; principal teachers; principal teachers; Community School Director; principal Teachers meet weekly with a coach to develop tiered lesson plans that incorporate writing strategies and scaffolds for three layers of support. teachers weekly; Sept-June Coach, teachers, principal 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Advisers, who serve as the primary liaison between student, families other teachers, are able to discuss students' work, learning and progress in other classes, and readily will engage in such conversations with families on an ongoing basis. All staff will be present to support families during student orientation in August, curriculum night, student-led family conferences and other family engagement events. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Common planning time is embedded within the school day and will also take place on Mondays after school. We have designed our schedule to allow for co-teaching and co-planning in ELA and Social Studies. Our INPS coach will meet with teachers on a weekly basis. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other 2018-19 CEP 20  Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. The inquiry process provides ongoing monitoring of student work for all students as well as target groups. In November and March, we have built in interim checkpoints to look at student work and learning during student led conferences, and our assessment calendars have interim assessments occurring at strategic times during the year and leading up to State exams. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 1) Interim assessment 2) Student led conferences and work portfolios 3) JumpRope grading platform Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 21  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. As a new school capacity building is critical to our success and sustainability as we grow. The school's 18D committee prioritized hiring teachers who are willing and able to take on multiple roles, including leadership roles, during the start up phase. As the school grows to build towards three grades, the founding staff will play a vital role in building and refining the structures for which we have organized, acculturating teachers new to the school to the INPS model, and providing feedback in the spirit of continuous improvement. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all students will receive targeted social-emotional and academic support through multi-tiered Response To Intervention (RTI) approach, resulting in positive results in the school’s Learning Environment Survey data in Year 1 and average daily attendance of 90% or better. 2018-19 CEP 22  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Teachers will meet in their inquiry teams to discuss student work and students level data and develop intervention strategies. students August-June Teachers; RTI lead Staff will meet in student support team to discuss needs of at risk students and to remediate with a plan. At risk students Weekly; Sept-June Student Support Team; ISS Coordinator and Social Worker Teacher leaders Principal to collaborate with key staff members to ensure that capacity is built to gradually release leadership for Student Support Team and Inquiry to be eventually 100% teacher/staff led. Staff Ongoing Teacher teams will meet to develop common grade level learning targets. Teacher team August/September Grade Team 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We will maintain open lines of communication with families and mainly through the advisory structure. Teachers and staff will lead workshops for families and will address topics such as: standards based grading, student led conferences, and small group instruction/RTI. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Programs: Imagine Math, Reading Plus, IRLA, JumpRope Scheduling teachers for inquiry and common planning time Coach is deployed accordingly based on the data. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 2018-19 CEP 23  X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP X Title I TA 21st Century Grant SIG Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Imagine Math, Reading Plus and IRLA data JumpRope Reports Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. JumpRope grades; progress reports; New Visions Data Portal Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 24  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. We have worked with families of enrolled students throughout the summer. As families join us we reach out first with a phone call, then with an in person meeting. We invite families to our Summer Fun events, and our orientation in August helps families to be aware of the expectations for students, meet our staff, and learn about opportunities for students and families. We have prioritized hiring a staff member who will outreach with the community and we have hired a social worker who will also build strong family and community ties. Both of these staff members are bilingual. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we will strengthen our shared understanding of the school’s vision for high-quality rigorous standards-based instruct by having 100% parent participation in Student Led Conferences in SY 18-19 as evidenced by attendance and feedback from the parents. 2018-19 CEP 25  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Train teachers and families on Kinvolved attendance tool for two way text messaging in home language. Teachers and Families October and ongoing Staff and families September-November Community School Director and Social Worker Community School Director and Principal Student Support Team Weekly beginning November Social Worker and Community School Director Ongoing Advisory Lead 6th grade advisory team We will have at least two family events during the fall where families will have the chance to get to know the school staff and the community. This will help us to establish a relationship and trust with our community. One of these programs will take place in partnership with our partner arts organization, the DreamYard Project and the other workshop will be designed to support families in their understanding of and use of the JumpRope grading platform. Student support team to meet weekly and to use New Visions Heat Map/Data Portal to review attendance data for students who are trending towards an attendance percentage below 90%. This will enable the team to brainstorm and deploy strategies to support at risk students and families. Advisers to liaise with families and share observations, data and elicit input from families 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Center for Supportive Schools LEAP Montefiore Wellness Center DreamYard Project Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2018-19 CEP 26  We have and will continue to leverage resources to meet this goal as this is a priority for us: -Kinvolved attendance app -JumpRope -Hiring a dedicated Community School Director and Social Worker -Hiring a bilingual secretary -Use of the New Visions Data Portal and Attendance Heat Map -Strategic programming to allow for advisory to meet three times per week Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP X Title I TA 21st Century Grant SIG Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Student led family conference data in November will allow us to monitor our progress and make necessary changes based on what the data reveals. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Parent/family attendance in student-led family conferences Attendance Heat Map Data Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 27  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Reading Plus; guided reading; strategies depend on student needs. Small group instruction; one on one During the Small Group Instruction block and after school. Imagine math, math conferencing Small group instruction; one on one conferencing During the Small Group Instruction block and after school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) All students are engaging in AISfor ELA; JumpRopegrading platform and IRLA (Independent Reading Level Assessment) provides us with data to determine which students are not meeting standards and need more intense remediation during AIS. These criteria are used in conjunction with NYSEDexam data, when possible. All students are engaging in AISfor Math; JumpRopegrading platform provides us with data to determine which students are not meeting standards and need more intense remediation during AIS.These criteria are used in conjunction with NYSEDexam data, when possible. 2018-19 CEP 28  Science Social Studies State Exam Performance Levels; JumpRopegrades State Exam Performance Levels; JumpRopegrades At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Teacher anecdotal data; student support team meeting notes; Multiple opportunities to meet standards as determined by teacher Multiple opportunities to meet standards as determined by teacher Advisory is our first tier of RTIto support social/emotional development of students; tier 2 is the groups that our Social Worker runs; and tier 3 is one on one meetings with the SW. Small group instruction; after school Small group instruction; after school Small group instruction; after school Small group instruction; after school Pull out time during the school day. Advisory is our first tier of RTIto support social/emotional development of students; tier 2 is the groups that our Social Worker runs; and tier 3 is one on one meetings with the SW. 2018-19 CEP 29  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) TBD 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Our STH poplulation will be provided with the resources that they need in order to be successful at school. We will have items such as backpacks, school supplies, snacks, uniforms, coats, personal hygiene items, etc. available for our students and families in temporary housing. Our social worker and Community School Director will outreach to families to ensure that they have open dialogue and trust with our staff so that we can support meaningfully. We offer all students free access to the Montefiore wellness center including (medical, dental and mental health services), Astor Mental Health Clinic, Extended Day through the LEAP program including a hot meal for all students at 3:30 pm. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). n/a, We are title 1. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 30 n/a, We are title 1. 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. n/a 2018-19 CEP 31  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. Schoolwide Program (SWP) X Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. The 18D committee convened during the Spring and Summer to develop selection criteria, screen resumes, interview and select candidates that best fit the school design and student population. Our partnership with Internationals Network for Public School provides us with high quality coaching and PD. We have organized our day and week so that teachers have ample planning time and collaboration time, and so that students are receiving high quality instruction as well as social emotional support. Our Small Group Instruction block customizes instruction for students based on their strengths and needs. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Professional development is tiered. 1) One on one- All staff has a weekly one on one coaching time programmed into their schedule. 2) Staff meet in small groups for inquiry and common planning time. 3) Whole staff PD focuses on strategy building to meet the needs of all learners and to align with our school goals. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. Small group instruction provides an extra period for students daily to meet their math and literacy needs. We use the standards and student data to drive the design of the interventions provided for students. Reading Plus and Imagine Math adapt to students' strengths and needs and customize their instruction based on their individual data. 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program 2018-19 CEP 32  Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). Team collaboration and inquiry provide teachers with time to review data and adjust instruction for regular classroom lessons as well as small group instruction. This allows us to remediate and to provide grade level instruction at the same time. Our after school program provides power hour homework help to support with their work after school. Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). n/a 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. We believe that a robust assessment system includes multiple assessment measures and that it is incumbent upon us as a staff to make these decisions collaboratively. MOSL committee to meet to provide input on selection of MOSLs and periodic assessment. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Federal Federal 2018-19 CEP 33  Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Local 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs. 2018-19 CEP 34   Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 35  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. <School Name>, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. <School Name> will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; 2018-19 CEP 36  ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; 2018-19 CEP 37  ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help. Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) <School Name> , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Meet State Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) 2018-19 CEP 38  Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year. Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences. Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; 2018-19 CEP 39  ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs. ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; 2018-19 CEP 40  ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child. ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; III. Student Responsibilities ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 41  Addendum: Community School Partnerships Directions: The Community School (CS) strategy is directly aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. Community Schools bring schools and community partners together and integrate academics, health, youth development, and family engagement to provide students with the tools and opportunities they need to succeed. The Core Services in Community Schools are Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness. Part 1 – Community School Partnerships Goal(s) How is the CS strategy integrated into academic instruction at your school, and what impact has it had on student academic outcomes? Our CBO team is an integral part of our school community. Our Community School Director sits on our Grade Level Team and leads the Advisory program including all aspects of student-led conference planning. Our CSD ensures coherence and communication among the stakeholder groups (student-parents-teachers). Our CBO leads our attendance efforts and primarily with the use of Kinvolved, the attendance and two way text messaging app. We take a holistic approach to student growth and development and our CBO presence provides a complement to our team of teachers. Indicate the summative goal(s) of the Community School for the 2018-19 school year. Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. 1) To maintain Average Daily Attendance of 90% or better on a monthly basis. 2) To have enrolled by 85% of our projection for the 2019-20 school year by April of 2019. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Community School Annual Goal(s): How will achieving your Community School Goal(s)--in Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness--support your academic goals for students? The CBO/CSD will work on intense outreach to families by meeting with them individually and creating small group parent/family meetings and events to build trust with our community. This is critical for for us to maintain a high rate of attendance as it provides us with the opportunity to troubleshoot issues that arise with families such as physical health, mental health, transportation issues, and other family issues. We can support families by leveraging the resources that we have available through Montefiore, Astor and Center for Supportive Schools. As attendance is a leading indicator of student success, we can only meet our academic goals if our attendance and school culture are strong. Part 2 – Community School Partnerships Core Services Action Plan Part 2a. Identify the Community-based Organization (CBO) partnerships that you will develop in ELT, Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness, their target student population(s), and scope of the services provided. As well as supporting schools’ supportive environment and attendance work, CBOs should be helping to support your school’s instructional focus. CBO Partnership Center for Supportive Schools Target Population All students Scope of Service SY18-19 SMART Goal Social-emotional support, academic, coordinate medical and 1) To maintain Average Daily Attendance of 90% or better on a monthly basis. 2018-19 CEP 42  Montefiore Medical Center All students mental health services. 2) To have enrolled by 85% of our projection for the 2019-20 school year by April of 2019. Physical, mental health and dental services By November 1, enroll 90% of students enrolled at MS 593. Astor Mental Health Services All students in need of services Mental Health Provider LEAP All students After School Partner Program Meet with students as needed and on a regular basis resulting in a reduction in chronic absenteeism for participating students from month to month. By November 1, to enroll 100% of MS 593. Maintain 90%+ attendance in the after school program on a monthly basis. Part 3 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 3a. Indicate resources your Community Partnership will leverage to achieve your summative SMART goal(s) and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. We have prioritized allocating funds to support our smart goals including the purchase of: Kinvolved, JumpRope PD for grading and reporting; branding materials, text sets and advisory subcontractors. Part 3b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 3c. Describe how the school will partner with the Lead CBO to do the following: 1. Community Schools are expected to partner with a community-based partner organization (CBO) and together with members of the School Leadership Team, hire a Community School Director. The Director will lead implementation of the asset and needs assessment process, and other critically important coordinating activities. Indicate how you will leverage this aspect of the work. Community Schools are expected to personalize the needs of all students, through strategic programming and services, as determined by the asset and needs assessment, and must also offer Expanded Learning Time (ELT) and mental health programming. In completing this section, ensure that you think about how: (1) the right services are provided to the right students and families at the right time; and (2) how you will seamlessly coordinate services with instructional programming happening throughout and outside of the school day. 2. 2018-19 CEP 43  3. 4. Indicate how you will implement this work, and describe other programming you anticipate to be in place to strengthen this initiative. Community Schools are expected to emerge as Partnership Schools, which are places where parents and families feel welcome, actively participate in the conversation and decision-making around the renewal of their schools, and have many opportunities to advocate for their children. Monthly meetings and Community School Forums engaging families and community stakeholders will be a critical part of this family engagement strategy. Describe how you will implement this aspect of the work. Community School Principals are expected to meet on a weekly basis with their Community School Director, select Assistant Principals, key staff, and other CBOs, to analyze trends in data and case manage individual students. Data tools – including the New Visions Data Sorter - and training will be available for schools to use. Indicate how you will implement this aspect of the work. We will meet regularly as a CSD/principal pair, and our CSD will sit on our grade level meetings. The CSD will attend building council meetings and morning muster as well. Part 4 – Community School Partnerships Oversight Part 4a. Key Staff and Partners 1. Name and describe the scope of involvement of all community partners working in the school (include partners supporting ELT, counseling, enrichment, etc.) 2. Name the members of your Community School Team and how meetings will be organized and structured to engage all stakeholders and be focused on results. 3. Explain data strategies including the use of the data sorter, and steps that the school will take to ensure that the appropriate interventions are provided to the right students 1) Community partners are critical players in our students' success. CSS is involved in all aspects of our programming while our partners such as Montefiore, Astor and LEAP have specific roles in our daily operations and the overall student experience at MS 593. 2) CST Members: TBD 3) The use of the data portal is integral in determining which students are in need of intervention. We use the data portal during our inquiry team meetings and this data plays a key role in determining the level of intervention assigned to students during 'clinic'/small group instruction time. Part 4b. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the Community School program. Community School Director, shared space for our social-emotional team on our floor, Kinvolved, time for team to meet. Part 4c. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. The summer is an important time for us to create our strategic plan and begin implementation. We meet frequently in July and August and then meet twice per week and as needed throughout the year. Part 4d. Mental Health Work Plan Separate from this S/CEP, schools will complete a Mental Health Work Plan that will become an addendum to this document. 2018-19 CEP 44  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 9 School Name MS 593 Borough Bronx School Number 593 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Alison Angrisani Coach n/a ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Patricia Stellato Teacher/Subject Area Evelyn Copeland Teacher/Subject Area Karina Hichez Related-Service Provider n/a Superintendent Leticia Rodriguez Rosario Assistant Principal n/a Coach n/a School Counselor Adeleida Rojas Parent TBD Parent Coordinator n/a Field Support Center Staff Member Caterina DiTillio Other (Name and Title) n/a C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 2 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 1 1 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) TBD 2018-19 CEP 45 Total number of ELLs TBD ELLs as share of total student population (%) %  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 4 K 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 3 0 2 0 5 0 6 0 7 0 8 0 9 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? IRLA, Imagine Math baseline assessment 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? We have a dedicated RTI block called 'clinic' that meets daily. Students meet in small groups to work on skill-building as determined by our standards-based grading system and the inquiry team's work. Students work on reading and math in small groups and through the use of Reading Plus and Imagine Math during our 'clinic' block. Additionally, teachers modify lessons for thirds using the school-wide lesson plan template. The groups that teachers determine based on their data have three different levels of scaffolding. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? 2018-19 CEP 46  NYC Performance Tasks, ELL Periodic Assessments, IRLA and the online programs' baseline and benchmark assessments are being used. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Please reference question 2. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] n/a 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. NYSESLAT, NYS ELA/Math exams, NYC Performance Tasks and ELL periodic assessments. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Our Data Wise inquiry process provides a space for teachers to analyze assessment data and make adjustments based on data. Our standards based grading platform, JumpRope, shows student progression towards meeting standards, and we regularly review and reflect on this data during the inquiry process, during student support team meetings, and during our student led/family conferences. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Our model is an ENL model. All of our courses integrate language and content. Teachers design lesson plans using a school-wide template that asks them to identify standards-aligned learning targets that identify skill, language, and knowledge. The template promotes planning for language functions and scaffolding for thirds. Students travel together and are heterogeneously grouped to include a variety of proficiency levels and languages. Students are grouped for portions of the lesson to provide access to rigorous tasks. Social studies provides students with their standalone ENL minutes and is taught by a TESOL certified teacher; the integrated ENL time takes place during the ELA class which is taught by a dual-certified teacher (common branch/TESOL). b. TBE program. If applicable. n/a c. DL program. If applicable. n/a 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? See above. 2018-19 CEP 47  3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. We follow the core principles of the Internationals Network which blends elements QTEL and SIOP. Teachers write language, skill and knowledge learning targets; teachers identify tier 1, 2, and 3 vocabulary and the language functions that they are working with. Teachers scaffold their lessons for three groups to determine the level of scaffolding that is necessary for students to access the task. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? MLS, LAB-R, independent reading and conferencing. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status We use our tiered lesson plan template to support proficiency levels and time in the country of students. Teachers support students in small groups and using Reading Plus. We provide phonics based instruction as needed to increase and build phonemic awareness as appropriate and as indicated by the data. Our RTI/SGI model supports students in remediation and enrichment. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Our strategy of daily SGI provides remediation while our literacy blocks (ELA and SS) ensure grade level alignment to standards. During independent reading students are working at their independent reading level, whereas when they are pulled for guided reading they work at their frustration level. This allows us to have students build their fluency as well as increase text complexity over time. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Our RTI model supports flexible grouping. Our tier one intervention is our lesson modification for thirds, and we utilize our inquiry process to make instructional modifications for the whole class, small groups, and individual students. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Imagine Math and Reading Plus are the adaptive programs that we use during RTI/small group instruction. We provide small group instruction at this time and pull individual students as needed. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? TBD as this is our first year. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? n/a 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All of our students are ELLs and we design instruction to best meet the unique needs of our population. In addition to our academic blocks, students engage in advisory three times per week. During this time students engage in activities to build community and to reflect on their academic progress. We partner with the DreamYard Project to ensure that students have 2018-19 CEP 48  the opportunity to decompress and work with their hands during the art making block. All students have access to after school programming run through our partner program LEAP. Students have free after school daily from 2:50-5:30. On Mondays, Wednesdays and Fridays students work with Youth Comm a teen arts program in the first after school block (2:50-3:45); on Tuesdays and Thursdays students have Power Hour tutoring from 2:50-3:30. After Power Hour and Youth Comm students go to the cafeteria for a hot meal, then they transition to the elective block of after school which includes opportunities for a range of sports and arts activities. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. IRLA, leveled text sets, Reading Plus and Imagine Math; our templates make modifications for thirds. Classrooms have smart/Promethean boards, document cameras and leveled text sets to support entry and access to content. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Home language support is delivered during our independent reading time in SGI. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Ensuring that all ELLs get their required services is our top programming priority. Our curriculum is standards aligned and we make modifications based on data. All of our curricula prioritizes alignment to grade level standards, and our planning templates provide teachers with a framework to ensure academic rigor and standards alignment while also supporting students with scaffolds to ensure access and equity. Furthermore, our teachers receive weekly coaching with an INPS coach. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? The school collaborates with two other schools in the building (328 and 594) on after school programming through LEAP. Students work with the other students for the second portion of the after school program. Our team meets daily and as issues arise the building council addresses them. We share a CBO (Center for Supportive Schools), a wellness center (Montefiore), and a mental health partner organization (Astor) which has a bilingual counselor. Representatives from LEAP, CSS, Montefiore, and Astor meet regularly with school leaders. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). This year, we ran a series of 'Summer Family Fun' events to build community and establish trust with our new families. Families came to our school on afternoons in July and August to engage in a low-stakes, fun activity (tie dye shirt making and other crafts). The principal and CBO staff led the activities and provided some information for families about the school. We provided food and created a space for families to ask questions and get information about the school. We are running an orientation for students and families on 8/28/18. At that time, students and families will be formally welcomed to our community; they will meet their teachers/staff members and learn more about our community. Additionally, in order to support families with the enrollment procedures, members of the CBO team were available to families at the Family Welcome Center over the summer to provide information and connect with school staff from their initial contact with us. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? There are no language electives offered to 6th graders; next year we will build our program to include language electives. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? 2018-19 CEP 49 n/a Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Through our partnership with Internationals Network for Public Schools(INPS), our team (pedagogues and support staff) receive robust professional learning embedded into the school day with the support of a coach and guided by the INPS Core Principles. Our staff engages in the DataWise inquiry process on Mondays as well as individual and whole staff PD on language functions, language and content integration. Staff work weekly with their coach on strategies to make standards aligned curricula accessible to students. Furthermore, staff engage in PD with Imagine Learning and Reading Plus as well as the JumpRope online grading and reporting platform. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. All of our PD is ELL specific. We maintain rolling agendas for inquiry. All of our PD materials are maintained on the google drive. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? During Curriculum Night we share our program goals and curriculum. Student-led family conferences take place twice yearly. At that time teachers, community members, families and students come together to discuss individual student goals and progress toward meeting grade level skill, content and language standards. Every family meets with school staff individually during our intake process for an initial meeting to discuss their child's history and school experience. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. When we convene our SLT we will discuss and decide on specific events and activities that foster parent involvement. We have plans for family art-making evenings as well as Families as Reading Partners. Additionally, we will be running workshops to address the following topics: Know your rights, citizenship classes, Adult ESL, and career development/resume building. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Information supplied above. 2018-19 CEP 50  2018-19 CEP 51 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Alison Angrisani, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 52  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: MS 593 School DBN: 09X593 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Alison Angrisani Title Principal n/a n/a Assistant Principal Parent Coordinator Patricia Stellato ENL/Bilingual Teacher TBD Parent Evelyn Copeland Teacher/Subject Area Karina Hichez Teacher/Subject Area n/a n/a Coach Coach Adeleida Rojas School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 8/5/18 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 2018-19 CEP 53  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 09X593 School Name: MS 593 Superintendent: Leticia Rodrigu The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-2019 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Patricia Stellato Teacher No YES * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. All materials are translated into the languages spoken in our community. When we meet with families during our initial intake process, we ensure that we have staff available to translate for our parent community. Our intake process is thorough and we have a multilingual staff that can accommodate many of the linguistic needs of the community. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 2018-19 CEP 54 Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Spanish French 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to Families How do you plan to translate? Include procedures and translation resources to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. We work closely with the translation and interpretation unit to get our documents translated. We work closely with the translation and interpretation unit to get our One page brochure about the school once Events Calendar once 2018-19 CEP 55  documents translated. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings Curriculum night September Student led/family conferences November/March How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? We will utilize our staff as well as interpreters from T&I. We will utilize our staff as well as interpreters from T&I. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Our school has a variety of languages represented on staff and we can accommodate the linguistic needs of families. We also have built a relationship with the translation and interpretation unit and they can support us for phone calls where we do not have a staff member who can speak the language. Additionally, we utilize the Kinvolved program for two way text messaging to families. Messages are translated into 20+ languages and families can respond in their home language. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. As an school that is part of the Internationals Network for Public Schools, our school is founded on the linguistic diversity of our community and we are able to support the linguistic needs of all families. -We maintain a google drive with translated signs/sign in sheets that we regularly use. 2018-19 CEP 56  -We utilize Kinvolved for two way text messaging with families in 20+ languages. -We have a 6 bilingual staff members representing the dominant language group for our parents. -We have a relationship with the T&I unit, and submit documents for translation regularly. -Our grading platform translates progress reports, anecdotal reports, and report cards for families. -We have procured interpretation materials for our staff to use during events. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) This is a strength of our school. We work with every parent/family to provide access to information through translated content, and from our first meeting with families we let them know of their right to receive information in their language of choice. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? We will work with our PA and SLT to design a process whereby we gather input as to how we can better communicate with and meet families' diverse linguistic needs. 2018-19 CEP 57 
