2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 75X596 School Name: P.S. X596 Principal: JOHN SIRACUSE 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Number (DBN): 75x596 PS596x 307500012176 Pre-k-11 850 BaychesterAve, Bronx, Ny 10475 718.904.5752 Phone Number: 718.904.5753 Fax: John Siracuse jsiracuse@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: John Siracuse Email Address: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: 75 Superintendent’s Office Address: Adreianne Barksdale Beatrice Ayertey Regina Laurato N/A N/A District Information Mr. KetlerLouissaint Superintendent: 400 First Avenue, New York, NY Klouiss@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 212-802-1500 Phone Number: District 75 FSC: 212-802-1678 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) Kathleen Lefevre Executive Director: 2018-19 CEP 3  Executive Director’s Office Address: 400 1st Ave, NY, NY 10010 klefevr@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 212-802-1534 Phone Number: 212.802.1554 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) John Siracuse AdreianneBarksdale Beatrice Ayertey Carolyn Scolaro LashwanaAdewale Grace Francis Corey Easley *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable/ Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent 2018-19 CEP 5  Name StefannieBonilla LizmaryGarcia Rory Slattery-Conway Heather Martinez Rose Marinaccio Sara Leblanc Regina Laurato CarlyTeich Dixon Caro Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Teacher Member/Teacher Member/Teacher Member/Teacher Member/Paraprofessional 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Section 4: CEP Overview P.S. 596X is a highly collaborative and positive school community, where all stakeholders come together to celebrate students for their many strengths. We are committed to providing an interactive, hands on curriculum, that uses state of the art instructional programs and methodologies that meet the individual needs of our diverse learners. Our fundamental belief is that children are children first and that they are children with special needs second; therefore deserving the same rigor and quality of instruction, professionalism and creativity in their 2018-19 CEP 9  programming, as any other student in NYC does. Through our partnership with families, community agencies and an appreciation for the arts, our students flourish in a safe, nurturing and fun environment. We believe:     Students and staff should love coming to a school that is a safe space, where all stakeholders feel comfortable to express themselves and celebrate our differences. Student should have access to age appropriate, interactive and challenging curricula that is state of the art. Students should be able to express their wants and needs, through a preferred mode of communication. Students should have every opportunity to participate in fine arts, including music, theater, dance, visual arts, and stem.  Each student has the right to be a productive, proud, participating member of a family, community and society.  All students deserve a just quality of life.  School is a place where all students are safe, nurtured, valued and are involved in opportunities and experiences that maximize their social potential. School is a place where all constituents work in harmony receiving all necessary supports. In the importance of partnering and empowering families to best support their children and equip them with the skills and methodologies needed to give their children skills that lead to maximum levels of independence.   2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. P.S. 596X, a District 75 school, serves over 500 students, in 58 classes projected for the 2018-2019 school year. As written in our Mission Statement, we are committed to “Partnership with Parents/Guardians” so that we assist each student in achieving maximum skill development intellectually, socially and physically to ensure maximum independence. 176x received a “Well Developed” rating on the most recent Quality Review (2015-2016) and all QR indicators were rated highly effective or effective during the two PPO's done in 2017-2018. We are committed to "alternative pathways for education," due to the challenging learning styles of our students, so the arts play an integral part in our curricula. Partnerships with outside organizations include the Disney Organization, the North Shore Animal League, Daniel's Music, and Cookshop with the NYC Foodbank, Project BOOST/CEI, Senator Jamaal Bailey's Office, Shubert Organization, Marquis Studios, as well as numerous businesses where students frequently visit. Special initiatives include various instructional programs where our school piloted a program and then was recognized for our efforts. This includes recognition by First Authors writing program (Don Johnson), Project R.E.A.D. (students read to a therapy dog), a school therapy dog through the Mutt-i-grees Program, recognition by the Anti-Defamation League as a "No Place For Hate" school and recognition by the DOE for our anti-bullying program, "Respect for All" school. 176x was recognized as a Showcase School for the 2017-2018 school year. All classes are on goggle docs, where data is entered and analyzed daily. Effective September 2018, P 176x is divided into two separate organizations, P 596X is comprised of the elementary sites; 178, 153 and 498. As elementary school our focus is to support students in being prepared to transition to middle school effectively, developing their social and emotional skills, as well as academic skills. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. The students are classified with Autism Spectrum Disorder and other special needs, ages 2.9 – 10. We are located in three Community Schools in the Bronx (PS 176, PS 153, PS 498). Students are grouped in classes according to IEP (Individualized Education Plan) mandates in ratios of 6:1:1 (28 classes), 8:1:1 (15 classes), 8:1:2 (3 classes) 12:1:1 (6 classes) and Inclusion (6 classes). Each of the class ratios is indicative of distinctly different learning styles and needs. The great majority of our students present with challenges in cognitive, language, and social/emotional development. This presents an instructional challenge as we search for and implement a variety of “state of the art” programs to both address the students’ individualized education and provide professional development for staff so that they are well versed in the various programs and can appropriately match programs to students for instruction. 2018-19 CEP 10  4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. The Framework for Great Schools forms the basis of our program for our special needs students: 1. Rigorous Instruction: ● Academic Programs Aligned to Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) are matched to students’ strengths, weaknesses, academic levels and learning styles: Unique Curriculum, Go Math, Equals Curriculum, Fountas and Pinnell/Running Records, Bridges Science, Lego Robotics, ST Math, Passport SS, Access World History, etc.  Students are grouped according to assessment, and curricula is selected and implemented based on the assessment results.  At P596X there are a wide variety of programs implemented by design. As much as we would like to simplify and unify the programs throughout the school, we find that different programs are needed to support the wide age span of the students and their varying learning styles. We find that different programs are valuable to different cohorts of students and help meet their individualized needs. While it may seem like we implement an abundance of programs, we are watching the progress and monitoring the data to see if the programs are effective. A wide variety of programs enables us to match each learner to the most appropriate programs. ● IEP Goals and Objectives Aligned to CCLS. ● Systematic data collection and analysis of student performance to identify trends and make data based decisions about instruction. ● Professional development is frequent and on-going and informed by the Danielson domains. ● Literacy consultant – 8th year, professional development on the running record and developing rubrics for writing. * Math consultant – 3nd year, professional development on the unpacking Go Math and delivering high quality math instruction, as it related to the CCLS. ● Teacher feedback through observations and peer intervisitation cycles and observations. ● Teacher collaboration and review of student work to identify next steps. ● Collaboration between teachers and related service providers to create lessons. ● Students given opportunities to work in small groups, whole group instruction and individual sessions with teachers.  Curricula that provides multiple entry points.  Instruction aligned with the Danielson Frameworks ● Infusion of the ARTS throughout all curricula areas ● High interest, multi-sensory lessons. 2. Collaborative Teachers: 2018-19 CEP 11  ● Teachers in Leadership Roles: o Teachers Leading Professional Development o Model Teachers - Three teachers are in their 5th year of the DOE Model Teacher Program and work with other teachers. * Model Para - Three paras are in their second year of DOE Model Para Program and work with other para's. o Buddy Teachers o Mentor Teachers - In-house teacher coaches in each unit. o Teachers Teams o Teacher Inter-visitation o New Teacher Meetings o Teachers trained as Get Ready to Learn Trainers  Teachers leading professional development workshops o ● Teacher surveys and other opportunities to provide feedback to each other and administrators. 3. Strong Family-Community Ties: ● Inviting parents to attend classroom special projects and activities during a monthly parent academy. ● Behavior support for families/literacy activities to build comprehension strategies. ● Monthly student performances and assemblies ● Parent Resource Club to address IEP, parent counselling/training ● Family Fun Day at Camp Ramapo. Overnight Camp Ramapo summer trip. ● Saturday Academy activities for families: Sib Shop for Siblings, Bowling, School Dances, Tickets to Broadway shows ( partnership with TDF - Autism friendly performances). ● Monthly fathers’ Club ● Monthly Parent Support Group ● Monthly PTA Meetings and Workshops ● School Leadership Team 2018-19 CEP 12  ● Parent Coordinator – active role at meetings, coordinating events, follow up with parents ● Family Worker support to families * School App and a school website that is updated daily. ● Parent linkages to agencies ● Home to School communication books ● School web-site listing events and classroom updates ● Common sense Parenting sponsored by Councilman King’s Office – a training program for parents of PS 596X and general education school PS153. This event was hosted by the Parent Coordinators of both schools. 4. Supportive Environment:  A variety of special programs engage learners who are particularly difficult to engage by virtue of their disabilities, to include: ● This year we continued and will continue in 2018-2019 our collaboration with the Disney Organization to provide theatre education to our students. Students participated in 2014-2015 in Aladdin, in 2015-2016 in The Lion King, and the Jungle Book in 2016-2017 and Mulan in 2017-2018. For each performance, an 1100 seat auditorium was filled by students in general education and from our school along with parents. Student also worked on sets and costumes for the show. ● Collaborations with a variety of social service and community agencies to support parents/guardians and families, facilitated by Parent Coordinator, Family Worker. ● Teachers collaborated with the Literacy Consultant in further development of teacher skills in improving student writing and reading.  The P596X Rubric for Writing was implemented this past school year. A schedule to collect student work was instituted throughout the school where teachers evaluated student writing according to the Rubric developed by the school. ● Cookshop & Cookshop With Families - programs sponsored by the NY Food Bank which teaches students and families about healthy eating. ● Physical Education Initiatives: o Special Olympics/Mighty Roadrunners Running Club o USTA – tennis instruction o Super Soccer Stars Program o Collaboration with Camp Ramapo 2018-19 CEP 13  ● Inclusive opportunities for students: o Best Buddies/Fletcher's Place – students from General and Special Education paired for activities o 10.4% of students participate in Inclusion Classes ● Grants and Special Activities o EASE – Everyday Arts for Special Education o Get Ready to Learn Yoga PBIS Program o Students participated in district activities including STEM Fair, Festival of the Arts, Student Council, Spelling Bee o It’s A Wrap – Student based vocational business o Girls’ Club o Plant, Learn, Grow o Daniel's Music o Recognized by the Anti-Defamation League as a No Place for Hate School, Gold Star Status in recognition of our Positive Behavior Support Program and by the DOE for our Respect For All, anti-bullying program. o Staff participated with general education counterparts in an Inclusion Summit, 3rd year in a row. o District 75 Events - STEM Fair, Lego League, Social Studies Fair, Spelling Bee, Arts Fair 5. Effective School Leadership:  Principal and 4 assistant principals meet weekly at minimum. Principal coordinates activities, professional development topics with assistant principals. Assistant principals work with teacher instructional coaches in each unit to schedule in-classroom support for staff and to hold professional development workshops.  Assistant principals hold professional development workshops for staff, and meet with teachers, individually, to review student data in various programs, throughout the year.  Assistant principals meet with principal to discuss each student's progress based on data/assessments from teachers.  Teachers and administrators identify students in four categories: students who have made progress, students who have maintained skills at a certain level, students who have regressed in their skills and students who have made an extraordinary amount of progress in a given area. Students individual progress is analyzed to determine whether instructional programs are appropriate, are too difficult, need to be more challenging for students. Results of analysis inform: student grouping, purchasing of materials, professional development needed and any supports for families that the school can recommend.  Observations are conducted according to schedule, and administrators share their observations and experiences with each other to learn from one another.  Planning calendars are created for teachers and for the administrators so that the entire teaching community is aware of when formative, as well as summative assessment is due.  Administrators are highly receptive in addressing parents' concerns and schedule a series of meetings with parents to monitor the situation after a complaint has been made. The school resources including the family 2018-19 CEP 14  worker and the parent coordinator are utilized to make parent contact following meetings to resolve issues that parents might have and to schedule outside and in-school resources that might be available to families. We plan to continue these initiatives and established practices during the coming year. Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. P 596x uses an array of data to inform the annual goal for rigorous instruction. 2017-2018 PPO feedback from District 75 Superintendent and a second PPO visit from the Deputy Superintendent was extremely positive regarding the work of the school. During the first PPO, an area of focus centered around 2.2 - feedback to students. The school developed an action plan to address this indicator and during the second PPO, this indicator was well developed. The school was encouraged to continue best practices that are in place.  P596X Parent surveys - Distributed/Collected twice yearly  Parent feedback from School Leadership Team and PTA meetings  P596X Staff surveys - Distributed/Collected twice yearly Student Summative assessment - Brigance, SANDI  Student Formative assessment - Program Data  Data trends based upon student progress   Move to Less Restrictive Environment data   Curriculum Based Assessment School Snapshot STUDENT SUMMATIVE ASSESSMENT: SANDI and Brigance data was collected in the fall 2017 (Sept/Oct) for students in 6:1:1 ratio classes. Students were post tested in the spring (May/June). Based upon results of summative assessments, student scores were analyzed and students were placed in cohorts based upon performance. Instructional literacy programs are individualized to address strengths and weaknesses of each student. 2018-19 CEP 15  Student Formative Assessment - Program Data indicates:  Edmark: 58% of students made greater than 5% gains and 42% made less than 5% gains.  Fountas & Pinnell reading levels: 37% of students made greater than 5% gains, and 63% made less than 5% gains. Fountas & Pinnell comprehension: 30% made greater than 5% gains, and 59% made less than 5% gains. First Author: 33% of students made greater than 5% gains, and 67% of students made less than 5% gains.    Total average of all ELA programs: 40% of students made greater than 5% gains, and 56% of students made less than 5% gains. Based upon our data analysis, the following provisions have been implemented:  6:1:1, 8:1:1, and 12:1:1 students were placed in cohorts based on their individual needs (skill streaming).  Edmark tracking system was modified by further breaking down the pre-reading lessons 1 - 9.  Fountas & Pinnell method of data tracking was also modified by adding a new formula to the school wide Google Docs data tracking system by combining level and comprehension growth.  MeVille to WeVille curriculum and Eden will be utilized for students who require more intensive pre-reading skill instruction. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, students in P596X will show an overall 5% increase in reading comprehension through the use of programs and curricula designed and adapted for each student’s individualized needs as measured by formative and summative assessments. Assessments may include but are not limited to: SANDI First Author   Brigance  Running Records/Fountas & Pinnell  Edmark   MeVille to WeVille  IEP data based on the Eden curriculum 2018-19 CEP 16  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Administration will plan, schedule and provide professional learning for staff on the the various curriculum and programs used at P596X. Areas of improvement will be identified through classroom observations. Teachers will assess students in P596X classes. Assessment data will be used to make informed decisions such as instructional groups, to determine multiple entry points, and instructional programs. Students will participate in daily, individualized reading and writing instruction targeting skill development needs identified through formative data. Administration and teachers will participate in ongoing data analysis and review of school/class and individual student data and progress towards meeting goals and identifying school trends. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Administration Monthly Principal, Assistant Principals, Coaches All Teachers and Students Quarterly Principal, Assistant Principals, Coaches All Students Daily Teachers Students Classes Twice a year Principal, Assistant Principals, Coaches Administrators and teachers How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Monthly Parent Support meetings, Father's Club, Communication between teachers and families based on family preference of mode (email, communication book, DOJO, etc.). Families will be invited into their child's classroom, monthly to engage in an interactive activity that supports literacy. Families will be given parent counseling and training, per IEP mandates. Families will be shown student assessment/progress data during open school, IEP meetings, other meetings during the school year to discuss progress made in literacy. One literacy based Saturday Academy event will be created to empower families to support literacy skills. Shared special education workshops/general education parent workshops will be held jointly ( Showcase work) to increase literacy skills ( adapting books, breaking down vocabulary words, creation of visual schedules) from home to school. This work will be supported by speech teachers and other related service providers. Communication with the parent coordinator, family worker, school psychologist, administration, PPT meetings. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 2018-19 CEP 17  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 1. Teachers will attend various professional development both in and out of school targeting different instructional resources and strategies to address comprehension. They will turn key the information learned to their teacher teams during collaborative administrative periods. Teachers will conduct peer inter-visitations within their cohorts, across cohorts, as well as across sites in order to promote collaboration and ensure consistency in regards to the implementation of these strategies and resources. In addition, mentor teachers will be linked to new teachers as a buddy model to support various aspects of instruction. School based curriculum coaches will also model strategies and assist within the classroom. 2. Administrators will evaluate teacher practice through frequent cycles of observations and make informed decisions based off student assessment data. Administrators and coaches will monitor/track student progress using an online data tracking system, which will identify trends, make informed decisions and be able to identify students that are making below/above progress. 2. Principal will align the school budget to provide programs and resources to support this goal. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019 students will show a 2% increase. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Brigance, SANDI, Edmark, Running Records, First Author, IEP data based on the Eden Curriculum Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 18  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? The school provides teacher and paraprofessionals with extensive training and support on an on going basis with the creation and implementation of student FBAs and BIPs. Prior to initiating an FBA for a student, the following supports are in place for students: School wide PBIS system (B.A.R.K.)   Each classroom includes a behavior management system which incorporates visuals such as communication  boards, stop lights, first/then boards, token economy systems, and individualized schedules of reinforcement. School behavior support teams which includes Psychologists, teachers, coaches, administrators and parents will meet when interfering behaviors are impeding on a student's educational progress. A behavior support plan is created based upon the individual student's needs. As per the 2017 - 2018 Online Occurrence Reporting System (OORS), P596x infraction data indicates:  27 level 4 occurrences  18 level 3 occurrences  15 level 2 occurrences  8 level 1 occurrences Due to these infractions, it has been determined that the school will target the improvement of identifying and tracking student replacement behaviors as described in the student's Behavior Intervention Plan. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, students who have a behavior intervention plan will demonstrate an increase in positive replacement behaviors as evidenced by a 5% increase in positive replacement behavior and a decrease in the frequency, duration or intensity of the target behavior. 2018-19 CEP 19  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Initial review of all behavior plans by teacher teams. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Students with FBA's and BIP's September 2018 – June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, Transition Coordinator, School Psychologist, CIT, Coaches, Teachers and Paraprofessionals Principal, Assistant Principals, Transition Coordinator, School Psychologist, CIT, Coaches, Teachers and Paraprofessionals Principal, Assistant Principals, Transition Coordinator, School Psychologist, CIT, Coaches, Teachers, Paraprofessionals and Families Administration & Job Coaches Professional Development on implementation of behavior plans and progress monitoring. Student with FBA's and BIP's September 2018 – June 2019  Identify target/ replacement behaviors as documented on FBA/BIP  Review individualized strategies/ modifications needed to increase replacement behaviors Progress monitoring cycles are held every 8-10 weeks to ensure that the target behavior is decreasing in either frequency, duration or intensity while also ensuring that the replacement behavior is increasing in frequency. Students with FBA'S and BIP's Monthly Administrators will monitor and review school wide trends. Monthly Students with FBA'S and BIP's 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Teachers will ensure that parents are informed via face-to-face meeting or telephone conference to discuss the plan and progress at the end of each 8-10 week baseline cycle. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 2018-19 CEP 20  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Administrators, district and school coaches, lead teachers and teacher teams 2. Program materials 3. Schedules to enable teachers to collaborate 4. Sub-teachers to enable teachers to attend professional development Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Students will show a 2.5% decrease in targeted behaviors in either intensity, frequency or duration, and an increase in replacement behaviors as evidenced through the data collected during each baseline cycle. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 1. Functional Behavior Assessment 2. Behavior Intervention Plan 3. Frequency charts including intensity, duration and latency form 4. Baseline Data Summary form 5. Progress Monitoring Review Meeting forms 6. Consideration Forms 7. FBA/BIP Progress Monitoring Schedule Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 21  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. P596X promotes teacher development through a system of collaborative learning and distributive leadership. Every teacher receives professional development from their colleagues, both by way of collaborative inquiry teams or with the assistance of one or more unit-based mentor teachers (“curriculum coaches”) providing hands-on support to each classroom teacher. Coaches model lessons in the classrooms with the teachers both individually and in small groups throughout the year. Coaches are either directed by administrators to address specific topics with specific teachers as a result of observations, are sought out by teachers, or work with all teachers on a rotating basis. Distributed leadership is evident and fostered through the many leadership roles that teachers in addition to the coaches embrace by leading projects throughout the school. All staff members, regardless of experience, are encouraged to attend District 75 workshops, as well as those offered from other district within the DOE and beyond. Upon their return, staff members complete a form detailing what they learned and how they will use the information gained from the workshop in their teaching practice. This information is then vetted by administrators, who utilize the information to further build staff capacity through turn keying and teacher pairing. Special support is given by coaches to new teachers, who are also partnered with a more experienced teacher at the beginning of the year. Together, they address questions relating to classroom environment, classroom management, instruction and professional responsibilities. New teachers also meet with the principal to collaborate and reflect on a monthly basis. Inter-visitation is done throughout the school year, where new teachers watch more experienced teachers. These topics are identified through the observation cycle, etc. A culture of collaboration is perhaps best evidenced by the school-wide professional learning communities that are prevalent at 596X. Teacher teams evaluate programs through myriad of practices and protocols utilizing student work and programmatic data to inform their teaching. Every teacher has the opportunity to have a common planning administrative period, where teachers look at lesson planning and implementation. Teacher teams have the opportunity for intervisitations, in which they observe each other and debrief to discuss classroom discourse. This peer intervisitation protocol was one used during our 2017-2018 Showcase work at the 498 campus. Intervisition is especially utilized by our 3 members serving as DOE mentor teachers, whose schedules are embedded with time for both intervisitations, but to share best practices with teachers as well. The mentor teachers meet regularly with one another, and periodically with the administration, to discuss ways enhance teacher practice and increase rigor. During the 2018-201 school year, teacher teams will discuss how to look at the Danielson elements through the lens of what constitutes Effective vs. Highly Effective practice. Following that feedback, the 176x team came together during the winter and spring of 2018 to create a think tank on breaking down those characteristics. Two documents were created ( one for the 6:1:1 cohort and one for the 8:1:1 and 12:1:1 cohort) with "look fors" under Effective and Highly Effective for each of the Danielson Domains. 2018-19 CEP 22  Tool's utilized include but are not limited to; - P. 596x Ratings Document - P. 596x Peer Inter-visitation Note Catcher - Danielson Framework - P.596x Best Practices Document - P.596x Instructional Focus - P. 596x Suggested Lesson Plan Formats Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, utilizing promising practice protocol from the 2017-2018 Showcase work, all teachers will engage in a peer inter-visitation cycle within their team cohorts, specifically focusing on Danielson components 3B, 3C and 3D ( These domains have been chosen as areas of focus based upon the results of the 2017-2018 teacher Advance data) and there will be an increase in teacher rating by 5% in those components. 2018-19 CEP 23  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Administration will schedule and provide professional learning opportunities for staff utilizing the P596x Peer Inter-visitation supporting documents. Administration September 2018–June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, Lead Teachers and Teachers will participate in ongoing collaborative learning communities during their administrative common planning periods. Coaches Teachers of students in 6:1:1, 8:1:1 & 12:1:1 classes October 2018–May 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, Lead Teachers and Coaches Teachers will have the opportunity to participate in District 75 Professional Development as well as school based professional learning. Teacher's will have the opportunity to build capacity as they assume a leadership role. Teachers of students in 6:1:1, 8:1:1 & 12:1:1 classes October 2018–May 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals and Coaches Administrators will evaluate 2018-2019 Advance Data, specifically focusing on components 3B, 3C and 3D. Data will be compared to the 2017-2018 Advance Data to determine the impact of the Peer Inter-visitation Model. Students in 6:1:1, 8:1:1 and 12:1:1 classes February 2019 & June 2019 Administrators 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. During School Leadership Team meetings, PTA meetings, Parent Resource Club, teachers will present the Peer Inter-visitation model and its impact on student achievement and teacher practice. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● Scheduled time for administration and coaches ● Programmatic scheduling of professional learning by utilizing the schools budget for substitute teachers ● Programmatic time for team meetings, such as scheduling daily administrative periods 2018-19 CEP 24  ● School staff share resources with the families that are aligned to the Peer Inter-visitation Model Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019 there will be an increase of 2% in Danielson components 3b, 3c and 3d as a result of peer intervisitations. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Administrators will evaluate 2018-2019 Advance Data, specifically focusing on components 3B, 3C and 3D. Data will be compared to the 2017-2018 Advance Data to determine the impact of the Peer Inter-visitation Model. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 25  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The results of the 2017-2018 School Survey Report are that parents indicate an overall satisfaction of 93-96%. P596X has made parent involvement and support a foundation of its program, with an extensive calendar of parent workshops and activities. Currently, we offer on-going and pertinent workshops through our Parent Resource Club, in which topics (identified based on a survey related to topics of interest) such as IEPs, assessment, occupational and physical therapy, and augmentative/alternative communication devices (AACs) are presented in a workshop format. The program is offered during both daytime and evening hours, as are PTA meetings, the Father’s Club and the parent support group. On-going activities for families, such as trips to Broadway shows, the Camp Ramapo family fun day and the Sibshop siblings' group meetings, are also offered. The total participants for these events and others during the 2017-18 school year were approximately 480 parents. During the 2016-2017 school year, P596x (formerly known as P176x) started a Parent Academy once per month, where a variety of topics will be discussed, both on academic programs, arts and social skills/behavior. This learning league increased parent involvement by 15 percent. Based upon the 2017 - 2018 School Quality Snapshot, parent responses indicate that:  96% of families say that their school works to achieve the goals on their child's IEP.  93% of families say that their school offers a wide variety of activities and services to help improve life outcomes for their child.  96% of families feel that the principal works to create a sense of community in the school  93% of families say that school staff regularly communicate with them about how families can help their child learn  95% of families say that school staff work hard to build trusting relationships with families like them Although family responses were very positive toward the work of the school, only 31% of families completed the school survey. In lieu of the low response rates, the school team determined that an increase in school wide events may lead to a higher rate of participation in the school surveys by families. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, parent and alumni participation will increase with school community events on a monthly basis by a 5% gain as compared to the 2017-2018 school year. 2018-19 CEP 26  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? 1. A committee will be formed to develop a school wide plan for providing parents with more meaningful parent engagement opportunities. P596X parents will complete survey to determine needs and areas of growth for meaningful parent engagement opportunities. Committee will analyze survey results and develop opportunities to address areas of need identified by parents. Families Administration, Teachers, Consultant September 2018 - November 2019 2. Members of the School Leadership Team, during monthly PTA/SLT meetings, will address areas of ensuring parent attendance at school events and increasing parent involvement in school wide events. 3. A plan will be created to ensure parent attendance and involvement at school wide events. Parent attendance will be taken at all school wide events and attendance data will be analyzed throughout the year to monitor progress. Data will be analyzed by school wide parent engagement committee and adjustments to the P596X parent engagement program will be made accordingly. Families Students December 2018– January 2019 February 2018-June 2019 Administration, Teachers, Consultant Administration, Teachers, Consultant 4. Implement new systems that have been created and distribute a survey, created by the SLT, teacher committees, with PTA and P176X family input, and to analyze the results to determine the efficacy of parent engagement opportunities and next steps. Teachers May 2018– June 2019 Administration, Teachers, Consultant 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Senator Bailey's Office, NYPD, Daniel's Music, Theater Development Fund, Saturday Academy, the monthly school wide parent engagement events, parent training and counseling, PTA, and SLT. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2018-19 CEP 27  1. Administrators, Teachers, Parent Coordinator, SLT, PTA, P596X Families 2. Materials/Supplies 3. Outside Organizations: Project Boost, Senator Bailey's Office, NYPD Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019 parent participation will increase by 2%. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Sign in sheets/attendance taken at parent events. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 28  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. During 2016-2017 school year, our school was one of seven instructional programs to participate in the Mutt-i-Grees Comfort Dog city-wide initiative in conjunction with the North Shore Animal League. During our first year participating in the program, only one of our classes were involved in the pilot. During the 2017-2018 school year, we expanded the Comfort Dog Program to include more classes, including 8:1:1 and 12:1:1 classes. While Izzy was primarily assigned to one class, Izzy would frequently visit other classrooms and interacted with students on a case by case basis depending on their social emotional needs. We also implemented a data tracking system that aligned the components of the Muti-i-Grees curriculum to the Social Express assessment tool (Student Assessment Survey). In June 2018, the school team analyzed the data and found the following: 1. End of the year gains show an average of 11% increase in social skills across all classes participating. 2. The class that Izzy was primarily assigned to, showed an 18% gain in social skills. 3. The class who spent the least amount of time with Izzy made a 5% gain in social skills. Based upon the 2017-2018 school data, it was determined that the Mutt-i-Grees program had a greater impact on the students who spent the most time interacting with Izzy. Given this finding, it was determined that this program has the ability to teach our students appropriate social and emotional skills, therefore we feel there is a need to increase the amount of time that Izzy spends with all students participating in this program by having Izzy visit other classrooms more frequently. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, students participating in the NorthShore Animal League’s “Mutt-i-grees” Curriculum in conjunction with our school comfort dog, Izzy will show a 10% increase from September 2018 to June 2019 in social and emotional skills as measured by performance indicators using the Social Express. 2018-19 CEP 29  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Administration will plan, schedule and provide professional learning for staff on the the Mutt-i-grees curriculum. Areas of improvement will be identified through classroom observations. Teachers will assess students in P596X classes using the Mutt-i-grees Curriculum pre/post tests. Assessment data will be used to make informed decisions such as instructional groups, to determine multiple entry points, and next steps. Administrators Principal, Parent Coordinator, Related Service Providers, Teachers, Parents & or Guardians October 2018-November 2019 Principal, SLT, administrators, parent coordinator September 2018–June 2019 Principal Students will participate in daily, individualized reading and writing instruction targeting skill development needs identified through formative data. Teachers, SLT, administration, parent coordinator Administration and teachers will participate in ongoing data analysis and review of school/class and individual student data and progress towards meeting goals as measured by the SANDI. Teachers, SLT, administration, parent coordinator, Parents/Guardians, PTA Administrators September 2018– February 2019 February 2018– June 2019 Administrators, teachers, SLT, parents 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. North Shore Animal League. Project R.E.A.D Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 1. Administrators, Teachers, Parent Coordinator, SLT, PTA, PS 596X Families 2018-19 CEP 30  2. Materials/Supplies 3. North Shore Animal League, Mutt-i-Grees, and the student Ambassador program Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, students participating in the NorthShore Animal League’s “Mutt-i-grees” Curriculum in conjunction with our school comfort dog, Izzy will show a 5% increase. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Social Express Student Assessment Survey will be used as a measure to assess student progress with social skills. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 31  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Reviewing formative/summativedata and standarized performance tasks/running records/chapter tests. Reviewing formative/summativedata and standarized performance taks/running records/chapter tests. Reviewing formative/summativedata and standarized performance tasks/running records/chapter tests. Reviewing formative/summativedata and standarized performance taks/running records/chapter tests. Reviewing formative/summativedata and standarized performance tasks/running records/chapter tests. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Small reading groups, fountas& pinnellintervention program is used and various literacy strategies. Small groups. Cubed strategy to assist in word problems. Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Small group and 1:1 When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) During the day Small group and 1:1 During the day Small groups, direct instruction using Small group and 1:1 During the day Small groups, direct instruction using Small group and 1:1 During the day Respect for All, PBIS. Small group and 1:1 During the day 2018-19 CEP 32  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) n/a 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. n/a Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). 13 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 33 A needs survey was created for this population and each case is being handled differently. The school is providing metro cards, daily check ins with the school family worker. These students attendance is reviewed daily with a extra support given to ensuring these students are in school. Finally, clothing, personal care products, jackets and general school supplies have been order to support these students. 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. n/a 2018-19 CEP 34  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools X Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. n/a 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). N/A Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. n/a 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). n/a 2018-19 CEP 35  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). n/a 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. n/a 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. 2018-19 CEP 36  Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 37  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students Parental Involvement and School Quality Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement School-Parent Compact (SPC) I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents 2018-19 CEP 38 N/A N/A N/A II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities III. Student Responsibilities 2018-19 CEP 39  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District School Name Borough select one School Number B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Coach Assistant Principal Coach ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher School Counselor Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Related-Service Provider Superintendent Parent Parent Coordinator Field Support Center Staff Member Other (Name and Title) C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Total number of ELLs Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions ELLs as share of total student population (%) % 2018-19 CEP 40  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 3 K 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 4 0 2 0 5 0 6 0 7 0 8 0 9 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? 2018-19 CEP 41  5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. b. TBE program. If applicable. c. DL program. If applicable. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status 2018-19 CEP 42  6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? 2018-19 CEP 43 d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. 2018-19 CEP 44 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, [PRINCIPAL's NAME], testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 45  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: School DBN: Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Title Principal Assistant Principal Parent Coordinator ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 2018-19 CEP 46  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: School Name: Superintendent: The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-2019 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral 2018-19 CEP 47  3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures and translation resources to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents 2018-19 CEP 48  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? 2018-19 CEP 49 
