2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 75X721 School Name: P.S. X721 - STEPHEN MCSWEENEY SCHOOL Principal: FRANK DEGENNARO 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Stephen D. McSweeney School 75X721 307500012721 9-12 School Number (DBN): 2697 Westchester Avenue, Bronx, NY 10461 718-597-6404 Phone Number: 718-829-5752 Fax: Frank J. DeGennaro fdegena@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Email Address: Frank J. DeGennaro Edna Cotto Anthony Spellman Edna Cotto N/A N/A District Information Geographical District: 75 KetlerLouissaint Superintendent: 400 First Avenue, New York, NY 10010 Superintendent’s Office Address: klouiss@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 212-802-1501 Phone Number: FSC: Bronx 212-802-1678 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) Jose Ruiz Executive Director: 2018-19 CEP 3  Executive Director’s Office Address: 1230 Zerega Avenue, Bronx, NY 10462 Jruiz2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-828-7776 Phone Number: 718-828-3113 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Frank J. DeGennaro Edna Cotto Anthony Spellman Rebecca Miles Christopher Vano Russ Hess *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/Teacher Member/Teacher Member/Teacher 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Guillermo Gutierrez DritaLumaj Maggie Ortiz KeishaRobinson Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Our school’s mission is: At the Stephen D. McSweeney School, we believe in educating and preparing our students to meet the challenges of living independently in contemporary society. Our school is a student-centered learning community that believes in educating the “whole student” with a focus on integrating academic, social-emotional, and vocational development with self-advocacy and college and career readiness. We believe a student’s success is found in a sound partnership between the school, the family and the community. 2018-19 CEP 9  2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. The Stephen D. McSweeney School serves the special needs of students from the ages of 13-21. Our program features rigorous academic, social and vocational components with a special emphasis on the arts. The vast majority of students have intellectual disabilities and several are students with autism. Since these students will not be receiving a high school diploma they need work experiences that will lead to either competitive or supportive employment upon graduation. Our teachers use thematic based curriculum Unique but they adapt, modify, extend and differentiate the curriculum to satisfy the special needs of our students and to ensure that instruction is rigorous. This year we are introducing pre and post-tests to our Unique units to better assess what is being taught in each unit. Students receive reading instruction and remediation through programs like SMiLE, Fundations and Running Records. Many of our teachers also use Thinking Maps to assist with reading and writing instruction. Students are evaluated in September using SANDI, which is administered initially in October to obtain a baseline and then again in May and June to track academic growth. This year we will be using FAST as a benchmark to complement the SANDI testing. In addition to Unique, we use Attainment for mathematics and Attainment for ELA s. ELA Attainment was presented through the introduction of several high school-level books that will be read and discussed by the students. We decided to add ELA Attainment to include a more formalized way of presenting language arts, feeling that Unique presented topics through the lens of Social Studies and Science more than Language Arts. We also felt that we would be adding rigor to our program by presenting books that were read by high school students in general education. Our school community places special emphasis on the arts. Our main site features: Fine Arts, Theater Arts, Industrial Arts, Media Arts and Music. Our Monroe site features Theater Arts while 368X has a Fine Arts department. All of our sites collaborate on schoolwide plays. This past year we featured Grease after performing Romeo & Juliet and West Side Story in 2016-17, with students doing the sets and scenery and performing. Another very important feature of our school is our vocational program, featuring 10 full time worksites, 17 part time sites, Culinary Arts, Production, Publications and Retail Services at our main site while our Monroe site features an ADL Program that includes a student-run café. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. The majority of our 12:1:1 students receive vocational training from the moment they enter the school. The majority of our cluster teachers create a work environment in their classroom. For example, there are two cafe programs; one at the main site and one at our Monroe offsite. The Monroe Cafe teacher sees all eight classes at Monroe so every student gets to experience work through the cafe. At the main site there are two food oriented classes, one called retail that serves as a food store while another, Culinary Arts, serves as a cooking class where the students sell what is made in class. Production Class at the main site features a cardboard construction program that serves the other District 75 schools by making adaptive equipment for their students. 2018-19 CEP 10  The students graduate to part-time, community-based work at one of 17 different worksites. The supervisors for these sites are the student's classroom teacher and paraprofessionals and the students work for a few hours per week. At approximately age 17 the students are considered for placement at one of our 10 full-time, community-based worksites. These worksites are tiered (1-4 with Montefiore Hospital if a student masters the others) starting at sites where the teacher is the supervisor to sites where the students report to supervisors at each site. The students are able to move to more independent sites and could conceivably be placed at Montefiore where they will be getting superior job training in association with AHRC and Project Search. Our school is committed to moving students to less restrictive placement whenever it is appropriate. This means more than just moving a 6:1:1 student to an 8:1:1 placement and an 8:1:1 student to a 12:1:1 placement. We also place a huge emphasis on moving students to full time work sites at the age of 17.5 if possible. We also have a tiered work site system with three levels of work sites for our students. Our school also features a Travel Training Program that is housed in our main site to train students as quickly as possible. The school also features a paraprofessional who is trained in rerouting students to different worksites when their placement changes. While the vast majority of these students will exit the school and enter an agency, some of them will received quality part and full time employment in the community. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Math Attainment was once again successful after the units were mapped out by the Curriculum Development Team. Students were taught high school level math topics like algebra and geometry at their academic levels, allowing them to receive more rigorous instruction in mathematics. Attainment for ELA was also extremely successful because students were reading high school-level books and discussing characters, settings and other important elements of books, something they had never done before. Teachers met in collaborative groups to create maps for ELA, Math and Unique. For Unique, teachers created pre and post tests to gauge student attainment of the curriculum materials. In addition, teachers met in collaborative groups to discuss instruction and to plan units. The teacher teams and the curriculum committees made for a more collaborative, supportive environment. We believe in strong family-community ties, which are represented by ten full time, community based worksites and 14 part time sites where 16 classes participate. In the 2017-18 school year, we had great success at our Montefiore Hospital worksite, where 11 out of 12 students received paid employment before they graduated. This year five out of twelve have received employment and one student from our Jacobi Hospital worksite was also hired to work full-time. Our Lehman High School inclusion group graduated 12 students this year with 11 receiving either Regents or local diplomas. All 11 of these students applied to and were accepted into college. It is expected that at least 10 of these students will be going to college in the fall, with one whose parents feel he may not be ready for college. This year 7 out of 8 Lehman graduates received diplomas and all 7 were accepted into college. 2018-19 CEP 11  We host a transition fair two times a year to help link families to OPWDD (Office of People with Developmental Disabilities) agencies as early as possible to ensure a smooth transition from school to post-secondary placement. Our school is participating in the Promise Grant which will help track our students and the services that they receive. Our community ties are strong because of our community-based worksites but we still lack sufficient parental involvement in our school. Parents come to our Open School Nights and to our Family Day and Thanksgiving Family Events but the Parent Association and the School’s Leadership Teams are not consistently attended by parents, even though we have made gains in both areas. While we have a sufficient number of parents on our School Leadership Team, attendance at all meetings is sparse with the exception of four parents. Our parent workshops have met with varying degrees of success, even if the topics presented are essential to the well-being of their young adults. Our transition services focus on the vocational aspects of education, providing our students with meaningful work experiences in our school and in the community. While our inclusion students may graduate with a high school diploma and/or CDOS Certificate (Career Development and Occupational Studies), the majority will graduate with competitive and supported employment or an association with one of the many agencies that serve our students. In order to foster independence, our school features 10 full time, community-based work experiences and fourteen part time worksites that serve sixteen classes. Our students in the full time work-study program use our home grown work-study pacing calendar which utilizes many different vocational curricula such as WAVE, Skills for Independent Living and Unique Transition Band. Students begin to gain work experience in our school-based cafes and shops. Students are also introduced to work through our Vocational Arts classes where they have created businesses that make greeting cards, smoothies, healthy snacks, newsletters, jewelry and wallets. More than 60% of our students participate in a part or full time, community-based work experience with partners like Montefiore Hospital, Hebrew Home, The Plaza: Rehab and Nursing Center, Jacobi Hospital, a local restaurant named Jimmy Ryan’s and the Pelham Bay Little League. We have gained a stellar reputation for gardening and horticulture and we work on three gardens in the community including our own. Students in all of our work sites (full time as well as part time) are assessed using Level Three Vocational Assessments. Our school also features strong, rigorous inclusion programs with Lehman High School and Renaissance High School. The students in that program are included in classrooms with their general education peers. These students take and pass Regents exams and gain admission into college at rates that rival or exceed their general education peers. Our areas of focus for 2017-18 will be:  To increase the rigor in our instruction by focusing on reading through better training of staff members and instituting a system of reading pull-outs during the admin periods of our teachers.  To increase parental involvement through a series of workshops and meetings held by the Parent Coordinator, culminating in an event that will be held during the school day where parents and students can interact at our main site. 2018-19 CEP 12  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 75X721 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 07,08,09,10,11,12,SE Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 528 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual YES Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient N/A N/A % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance N/A N/A # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 92.0% % Attendance Rate 90.9% % Reduced Lunch 35.8% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.8% 57.0% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 4.9% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 3% 12% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A N/A N/A 0.0% 0.4% 100.0% 34.8% 2.3% 0.9% 8 17% 7 N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 13  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. P721X had demonstrated much strength in the area of rigorous instruction as evidenced by multiple sources of positive data trends. During the most recent Quality Review (February 2015), an experienced educator, evaluated the school and determined that the school was “Well Developed” in the area of teacher pedagogy. Across all classrooms, P721X curricula extensions and high quality supports provide multiple entry points for all students and there are multiple opportunities for all learners to participate and take ownership of their learning. This was observed through examining planning documents as well as teaching practices that embed the belief that every student has a voice and that they are capable of learning and should be exposed to the curriculum at any access level. Teachers incorporated a variety of teaching strategies and high quality supports to enhance the students’ cognitive skills, creating a consistent, school-wide focus. In our most recent Principal Performance Observation, the Stephen D. McSweeney School was rated Highly Effective or Effective in everything. On the School Quality Guide the school received a score of 4.01 for Rigorous Instruction The District 75 Enduring Understanding states: Rigorous learning (consistent, persistent and generalized), leads to optimal independence in work, living and mobility for all students as future citizens. This is one of the credos as P721X as we strive to make our students as independent as possible. Part of the vocational training our students will receive includes reading instruction because the students need to learn how to read on a functional level in order to make better progress at their worksites. Our SANDI data from the past shows that we are deficient in ELA and reading. We previously used SMiLE as an excellent intervention to help increase our SANDI scores and we want to go back to that with a strong reading pull-out program that will help to increase student scores. Although we still have some trained personnel in SMiLE many of our trained teachers have moved on to other positions within the organization or to other employment opportunities. Data from 2015-16 shows 26 SMiLE trained teachers and 49 SMiLE trained paraprofessionals. Eight of those teachers are either no longer with the organization or are no longer in classroom teaching positions. Seven of the paraprofessionals are no longer with the organization. We clearly need more personnel trained in SMiLE and we have the means to do so as we have a teacher and a paraprofessional who can do the trainings. Part 2 – Annual Goal 2018-19 CEP 14  Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, students will show a 5% increase in their SANDI Reading scores, by instituting a series of reading interventions such as a concentrated reading pullout program along with an increase in the use of the Structured Methods in Language Education (SMiLE) reading program. 2018-19 CEP 15  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Administration will meet with a UFT committee to discuss a reading pullout option for the teacher's administrative assignment. Teachers will choose Administrative assignments and administrators will choose those teachers for the reading pullout program based on their reading training and their desire to do more trainings. Training sessions on SMiLE will begin for teachers who will be involved in the pull-out program Teachers will be trained in the use of Achieve 3000 A system will be created to track reading progress online. Teachers will choose small groups of students to work with on their Admin Assignments Parents will be invited to a meeting to detail the reading program. Teachers will track student progress through an online data tracking system Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Classroom teachers. May 2018 Reading Pullout Teachers, Classroom teachers June 2018 Administration, Teachers Teachers with Reading Pull-out Admin Assignments Teachers with Reading Pull-out Admin Assignments Teachers with Reading Pull-Out Admin Assignments Teachers with Reading Pull-Out Admin Assignments Teachers with Reading Pull-Out Admin Assignments Teachers with Reading Pull-Out Admin Assignments Sept 2018- Feb 2019 Administration, SMiLE trainers, D75 Reading Coaches Sept to Oct 2018 Administration, Teachers Sept 2018 Administrators, School-based Instructional Coach, Data Personnel Sept to Oct 2018 Administration, School-based Coach Sept to Oct 2018, Feb 2019 Teachers with Reading Pull-Out Admin Assignments Sept 2018 - June 2019 Administrators, School-based Instructional Coach, Data Personnel 2018-19 CEP 16 Final report will be prepared showing the reading progress of students involved in the Reading Pull-Out program June 2019 Teachers, Administrators, School-based Coach Teachers with Reading Pull-Out Admin Assignments 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will be notified in the beginning of the year if their young adult will be part of this Reading Pull-Out Program. They will be given an opportunity to understand the reading programs through a series of meetings with teachers who run the programs; one of which will be held at the beginning of the year. This will happen minimally in Sept or Oct of 2018 and February of 2019. Teachers who run the pull-out programs will run the meetings with an administrator and the School-based Coach. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. There may be some per session pay for teachers if the meetings with parents will be held after school. School-based Instructional Coach, District 75 Coaches Some cohort meetings will be designed around reading instruction. Some teachers will be scheduled for reading pull-out as their administrative assignments. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. The reading pull-out program will be discussed at the majority of our Cabinet Meetings throughout the year. We will look at data pertaining to the students who are enrolled in the program. By February 2019, the Instructional Cabinet will meet to discuss the FAST and SMiLE data of the students in our pullout program to determine if there has been sufficient growth in their reading skills. If it is determined that progress is not being made or if it is less than expected we will determine new interventions to assist the students receiving the intervention. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) 2018-19 CEP 17  Data from the online program will be analyzed, data from Fast and SANDI will also be instrumental in determining the success of this program. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 18  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Based on the most recent Quality Review (February 2015), P721X is Well Developed in establishing a culture for learning that communicates high expectations to staff, students, and families, and provide supports to achieve those expectations. We would like to leverage this culture of high expectation in academic areas to improve a culture of high expectation in student behavior utilizing the supports we have put into place. In the 2016-17 school year we were designated as a Potentially Persistently Dangerous school. We spent a great deal of our time in meetings discussing how to stay off of the list and our counselors spent many hours collecting data and information on how to keep us off of the list. When we analyzed the data we saw many of those incidents were with students with autism biting or flailing and hitting others. According to the School Quality Guide, 91% of teachers and students feel the school is safe, which is better than the NYC average. OORS Data was pulled comparing the 2016-17 and 2017-18 school year. A close look at Level 4 data shows there was a huge jump in Level 4 incidents. In 2016-17 there were 15 Level 4 incidents, which rose to 28 in 2017-18. This disparity was particularly sharp in two areas. In 2016-17, we had two incidents of "engaging in an act of coercion or threatening or instigating violence, injury or harm to another or others". This year we had 6 such incidents. More alarming, there were 17 incidents of "Engaging in Physically aggressive behavior other than minor altercations as described under B36, which creates a substantial risk or results in minor injury". This generally means fighting. Last year we only had five such incidents. The rise in B36 incidents is definitely concerning to the school because that number signifies more fighting and unwanted physical interactions between students. A breakdown of students shows one student named "Q" had 4 incidents, 5 had 2 and the rest were dispersed throughout the other students. There is a strong need to analyze where these incidents are occurring, who is involved and why they are occurring at an increasing rate. There is also a need to find ways to decrease these incidents. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 2018-19 CEP 19  By June 2019, P721X will decrease the number of OORS reports offenses of physically aggressive behavior (B36) offenses by 5% by implementing a school-wide behavior management plan, which identifies communication deficits, establishes a more appropriate means of communication, and promotes a structured learning environment, as well as behavioral expectations. 2018-19 CEP 20  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Data from OORS reports will be discussed during Cabinet Meetings to determine areas of specific need. Students with multiple incident reports September 2018- June 2019 Administration, Teachers, Dean A behavior rubric will be created and disseminated to the staff. Teachers, paraprofessionals September 2018 Administration, Dean Data collection sheets will be created and distributed to the classes. Teachers, paraprofessionals September 2018 Administration, Dean The Pupil Personnel Team will meet once a month to discuss students with the greatest needs based on OORS and SWIS reporting. Students with multiple incident reports September 2018 Administration, Dean A program will be established where students with the greatest number of incidents will be paired with students from other classes as a "buddy". Students with multiple incident reports September to October 2018 Administration, Dean, Pupil Personnel Team School-based PBIS committee will be established, meeting bi-weekly or monthly to establish a point system for the entire school Student body, Teachers, Paraprofessionals September to June 2018 Dean, PBIS Committee Cohort meetings held to address the newly established PBIS Committee, the point system and restorative practices Teachers A school store will be established to contain items that students will want to purchase with points earned for good behavior Students, teachers September 2018 to June 2019 October - November 2018 Dean, School-Based Instructional Coach Dean, Administration, School's Programmer (who is the person in charge of school finances) 2018-19 CEP 21 PBIS Team will collect data from PBIS Team classroom personnel (teachers and paraprofessionals) to track progress using a point system. October 2018 to June 2019 Dean /PBIS Team Data will be analyzed showing progress toward decreasing the amount of targeted Level 3 incidents will be discussed at Cabinet Meetings and Cohort Meetings Teaching personnel November 2018 to June 2019 Dean, , Administration Data analysis for the 2017-18 school year will be compared with the data from 2018-19 to determine next steps for 2018-19 Classroom personnel, Dean, Administrators June 2019 Administrators, Dean Pupil Personnel Team will meet monthly to discuss SWIS reporting and data to help determine target areas and where to be more proactive in managing behavior issues. Students and Teachers June 2019 Dean/PPT/Assistant Principal 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will be apprised of the new system for behavior management by letters home, robo calls and parent workshops whenever necessary. The Dean will be responsible for parent workshops on behavior management. Parents will have access to our website. Parents will receive a monthly calendar by the beginning of each month. The calendar will include information on events at the school including workshops and will also contain information on workshops at other Department of Education schools. Parents will be given a newsletter twice a year that will detail information on instruction, curriculum, the arts, behavior intiatives and transition. Parents will be informed on family events through our School Messenger Service. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 2018-19 CEP 22  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. School-Based Instructional Coach Dean Money set aside to fund a school store Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Cabinet Meeting data debriefing in October of 2018 In February of 2019 the Cabinet will meet to analyze data from Online Occurrence Reports (OORS) and School-Wide Information System (SWIS), both of which track information on behavior and will determine whether we are on track to achieve our goal of 5% reduction in incidents involving aggressive behavior, specifically fighting. Final cabinet Meeting where data is discussed in June of 2019 Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. School Wide Information System (SWIS) to monitor incidents. Online Occurrence Reporting System to monitor OORS Reports. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 23  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 721X is an extremely collegial school where the teachers often work closely on projects and easily offer their advice and assistance to their colleagues. Many teachers participate in teacher teams as their administrative assignment, working through their own student's issues in a group. These teams will meet a minimum of 2 times per week and often up to 4 times. This year a minimum of one of those groups will operate as an inquiry group for the entire year. Teachers are permitted to take courses through the D75 Course Catalog, which are then approved by the school's coach who keeps track of these courses. If a teacher registers for a course that does not pertain to his or her practice, the coach, in conference with an administrator, will meet to determine if that course is necessary to further that teacher's practice in the classroom. According to data from ADVANCE for the 2017-18 school year, our teachers averaged a 3.17 score on Questioning and Discussion (3B), slightly less than their score on Assessment (3D), which was 3.18. According to the School Quality Guide, teachers claimed the following:  53% of teachers say that students build on each other's ideas during class discussion  46% of teachers say students use data or text reference to support their ideas  67% of teachers say that students show they respect each other's ideas  52% of teachers say students provide constructive feedback to their peers and teachers  70% of teachers say that students participate in class discussions at some point The teachers are clearly saying there are problems in the classroom with ELA. There seem to be problems with writing and discussion. These are areas teachers feel should be worked on in order to improve academic performance and it does match the data found in ADVANCE showing teachers struggle with Questioning and Discussion. The most recent NYC School Survey (2016 –2017) also provides insight into teacher perceptions of teacher collaboration. Ninety-two percent of teachers reported they work together to design instruction and 97% of teachers reported that they have opportunities to talk with one another about instruction. Eighty-three percent of P721X teachers reported feeling responsible that all students learn. This is up from 76% the year before. This was slightly lower (3 percentage points) than the city average. Overall, teachers feel they have opportunities to work collaboratively and this can been seen across most classrooms. Studies have shown that teachers learn and grow best from each other. P721X would like to continue this trend by creating supports and opportunities for embedded professional learning experiences. This will be accomplished through common planning teams, cohort meetings, intervisitation, and peer-led professional development workshops. 2018-19 CEP 24  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 80% of classroom teachers will participate in 10 hours of targeted, instruction related professional learning experiences, through district related professional development, common planning teams, cohort meetings, intervisitation, and peer-led professional development workshops, that will improve overall instruction in the classroom and at off site vocational experiences. 2018-19 CEP 25  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Administrators will schedule teaching staff in common planning periods to work collaboratively. All teachers August to September 2018 School Administrators The topic of Questioning and Discussion will be on the agenda for the Opening Day PD All teachers September 2018 School Adminstrators, School-Based Instructional Coach At least one specific common planning team will serve as an inquiry group to study questioning and discussion. September 2018 School Administrators Common Planning Inquiry Group The topic of Questioning and Discussion will be on the agenda for the Election Day PD All teachers November 2018 School Adminstrators, School-Based Instructional Coach Common planning periods will be monitored by school administrators and Instructional Coach through a data base that is created for that purpose. Common Planning Groups Oct 2018- June 2019 School Administrators Teachers will be surveyed to determine who could run cohorts and workshops to teach and learn from their peers. Teachers who go to outside professional development will be asked to complete Bridge to Practice Forms after they attend PD to determine if the information they received should be turn-keyed to their colleagues Teachers will discuss student academic, social and vocational achievement with the student's parents. Classroom Teachers Classroom Teachers Sept 2018- June 2019 Instructional Coach Sept 2018- June 2019 School Administrators Classroom Teachers, Parents Sept 2017- June 2018 Instructional Coach Classroom Teachers 2018-19 CEP 26 A mid term check of ADVANCE Data will focus on 3B to see if there has been growth Classroom Teachers January- February 2019 School Administrators The topic of Questioning and Discussion will be on the agenda for the Chancellor's Conference Day PD All teachers June 2019 Analysis of data from ADVANCE should show growth from last year's Questioning and Discussing (3B) scores. All teachers June 2019 School Administrators, School-Based Instructional Coach School Administrators, School-Based Instructional Coach 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Strategic meetings will be held throughout the year with parents to inform them on the progress of this goal. Parents will be given a Handbook in October with important information regarding the curriculum, homework policy and our school's website. Parents will have access to our website where they will see information on our curriculum and assessments. Parents will receive a monthly calendar by the beginning of each month. The calendar will include information on events at the school including workshops and will also contain information on workshops at other Department of Education schools. Parents will be given a newsletter twice a year that will detail information on instruction, curriculum, the arts, behavior initiatives and transition. Parents will be informed on family events through our School Messenger Service. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Administrative periods used for Common Planning with one designated as an Inquiry Group School-based Coach to oversee many of the Professional Development activities Coverage money to pay teachers to go to PD outside of the building Coverage money for intervisitations Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 2018-19 CEP 27  X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February of 2019 the Instructional Cabinet will analyze data that is collected from Common Planning Teams, Bridge to Practice Forms that monitor outside professional development experiences and in-house Cohort Meetings to determine if we need to include additional opportunities for professional development related to instructional practices and will revise accordingly. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Analysis of school-made professional development lists involving outside workshops & in-house common planning and cohort meetings. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 28  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. ADVANCE scores were scrutinized to reveal areas of great success and areas where improvement was needed. It was no surprise that 2a (Creating an Environment of Respect and Rapport) and 2d (Managing Student Behavior) were areas of strength in a school where 47% of the students are intellectually disabled, 34% are students with autism and 12% are students with multiple disabilities. Teachers achieved an average score of 3.66 in 2a and 3.67 in 2d. It was no mystery that 3b (Questioning and Discussion) and 3d (Assessment) were areas of deficiency due to the nature of the students. Teachers achieved average scores of 3.17 in Questioning and Discussion and 3.18 in Assessment. Comprehensive Education Plan goals in the past focused on improving both areas with minimal progress so it was decided to concentrate on the planning process, specifically component 1e- Designing Coherent Instruction. 1e is an important area as it directly affects the other areas, especially because it focuses on lesson planning, which drives instruction. While our average score in ADVANCE on Ie was 3.33, it is obvious that instruction will be improved in every area if we concentrate on improving 1e. In order to improve instruction it is felt that teachers should go to professional development on instructional methodology. We want to focus on the lesson plan, the structure of the lesson, unit planning and sufficiently and effectively wrapping up a lesson every period. Our cohort meetings will focus on instructional methodology in all academic subjects and teachers who are expert in these subject areas will be the ones delivering the cohort meeting. Teachers will submit Bridge to Practice forms to our School-Based Instructional Coach when they go to Professional Development workshops and the Instructional Cabinet will review these forms to determine which workshops should be turn-keyed at our school. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. There will a 5% increase in teacher rating scores of Danielson Component 1E (Designing Coherent Instruction) as measured by low-inference data and ADVANCE observation ratings, comparing scores obtained from October -January 2018 to February-May 2019, as achieved through professional development that will be offered to the teachers and paraprofessionals. 2018-19 CEP 29  2018-19 CEP 30  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Administrators will meet with School-based Instructional Coach to and Cabinet members to discuss potential professional development topics for 2018-19 that will ensure improvement in Danielson Component 1E (Designing Coherent Instruction). These topics will be included in Cohort Meetings as well as for our Professional Development experiences from September- December, 2018. Teachers Oct- Dec 2018 Administrators, School-Based Instructional Coach The school will avail itself of District Coaches to assist with several instructional topics and subjects. All teachers Sept- Nov 2018 Administrators, Instructional Coach The Bridge to Practice Form will be introduced on Opening Day and teachers will hear that they will have to complete the form each time they attend an instructional professional development experience or they will not be able to attend other workshops. Bridge to Practice Forms will be discussed at Cabinet Meetings where it will be determined whether that teacher should lead a cohort meeting Administrators will use ADVANCE observations to see how the information gained during these professional development experiences is being utilized during units and lessons. Teachers & Paraprofessionals September 2018 Administrators & School-Based Instructional Coach Teachers Teachers Oct 2018-May 2019 Administrators & Cabinet Members Oct 2018- June 2019 Administrators 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will be given a Handbook in October with important information regarding the curriculum, homework policy and our school's website. 2018-19 CEP 31  There will be two opportunities for parents to hear about the school's curriculum and assessments in school-based workshops in December of 2017 and January of 2018. Parents will have access to our website where they will see information on our curriculum and assessments. Parents will receive a monthly calendar by the beginning of each month. The calendar will include information on events at the school including workshops and will also contain information on workshops at other Department of Education schools. Parents will be given a newsletter twice a year that will detail information on instruction, curriculum, the arts, behavior initiatives and transition. Parents will be informed on family events through our School Messenger Service. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. School-based Instructional Coach Coverage Money when teachers leave the building for professional development workshops and for participation in the D75 UDL Team Meetings Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. From October to December 2018, administrators will discuss data pertaining to the Designing Coherent Instruction in Learning Components of Danielson to determine trends and next steps. Administrators will also discuss participation in D75's UDL Team. Data from that time shows teachers have an average rating in Component 1E In January of 2019, with half of the observations completed, school administrators will chart progress in ADVANCE website for Danielson's Component 1E, Designing Coherent Instruction, comparing ratings from first to second observations and will evaluate progress to determine what professional development opportunities should be offered to improve the ratings in this component. 2018-19 CEP 32  While data is trending well, it was determined that there should be more cohorts on how to engage every student in every class during every lesson. In May of 2019, based on Observation Data, administrators will determine whether this initiative should continue into 2018-19 school year. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Low inference notes from observations ADVANCE data Data from UDL Team Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 33  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. According to the 2017-18 School Quality Guide, parents are extremely satisfied with the Stephen D. McSweeney School. An outstanding 49% of the parents took the survey. The following statistics come directly from that report:  98% of the families say their young adult is safe at our school  95% are satisfied with the education their child has received this year  95% are satisfied with the course offering, extracurricular activities and services provided  95% are satisfied with the quality of their teachers  96% are satisfied with the principal All of these are extremely high scores, far outweighing other like schools across the Department of Education. Unfortunately, there is one area where our parents feel we are falling short. When asked if they have the opportunity to volunteer time to support our school, only 73% say this is the case. This is one area where the school has clearly fallen short. Perhaps by offering opportunities to volunteer we will get more parents involved in fun events as well as serious events such a Parent Association Elections and sales. 721X has held two large family events every year for the past five years that have been well attended. Every Thanksgiving there is a Family Thanksgiving event on the Saturday before Thanksgiving. Working in conjunction with a local community-based organization called Afterdark Ryders, we feed dozens of meals to our families. In May or June we host a Family Day which is also attended by dozens of our families as well as by our more independent students who may attend without their families. Family Day allows students to have an outdoor event at the school featuring music, games, dancing, sports activities and a barbecue led by Afterdark Ryders. Both of these events include students and families that are currently enrolled along with students who have graduated. Despite engaging families in large scale events, we have seen little progress in getting them in to the school for other events, including the transitioning of their young adults to agencies upon graduation, which is essential to the success of the students after high school. While we are unsure at this time whether we will continue the tradition of Family Day we will keep our options open by gauging parental involvement throughout the year. Parent engagement involves parents at a deeper level in the education of the students at the school. 721X is a school that educates the "whole child", ensuring he/she gets educated academically, socially and vocationally. All three components This year the school will make a more diverse, concentrated effort at bringing families into the building in the hopes that the Transition Fair could be a greater success. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the 2018-19 CEP 34  identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By May of 2019 there will be a 10% increase in parental engagement as measured as measured by attendance at several parent meetings, including Open School Night, Transition Fairs and Parent Workshops and a grand Parent Event to be held in May of 2019. 2018-19 CEP 35  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Parents will be invited into the school to participate in the Promise Grant activities Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Parents, Promise Grant Students Sept 2018 to June 2019 Promise Grant personnel, Assistant Principal September 2018 Sept 2018- June 2019 Parent Coordinator, Principal, Cabinet Members Parent Coordinator September 2018 to May 2019 Parent Coordinator, Transition Linkage Coordinator Parent Coordinator Tech Liaison October 2018- June 2019 October 2018-Nov 2018 Parent Support Committee will meet to discuss the various events that will take place throughout the year. Parents Parent Coordinator produces a Parent Calendar detailing important dates, workshops and parent events in our school and throughout District 75 Parents Workshops organized on Legal Guardianship, twice per year Parents A monthly Parent Volunteer Day will be instituted by our Parent Coordinator. Parents Meetings held with school personnel on how to create a way for parents to access school information via social media. Parents, students Parents will be informed of all ways to connect with the school via the internet, including social meeting and a new website that is designed by the Tech Coordinator. Parents October 2018- March 2018 Tech Liaison, School Administrators, Teachers Parents will be invited to at least one arts event and one awards ceremony that honors their young adults. Parents, students Nov 2018- June 2019 Job Developer, Transition Linkage Coordinator, Special Events Committee Workshops on the importance of transition and our worksite program Parents, transitioning students December 2018 to May 2019 Job Developer, Transition Linkage Coordinator 2018-19 CEP 36 Job Developer will invite parents to visit our worksites to get a better idea of what programs exist for our older students. Parents, Worksite Personnel October 2018 to May 2019 Job Developer, Parent Coordinator Promise Grant parents will be offered workshops including vocational training and interviewing skills. Produce a video highlighting our transition program to enable our parents to see the outcomes that are expected at our school Parents and students involved in the Promise Grant Parents December 2018 to June 2019 Promise Grant Personnel, Assistant Principal January 2019 Job Developer, Media Arts Department Job Fair will be held for our parents to view the possible worksites for their young adults Culminating event at our main site with all sites and parents represented. Parents, students Parents, Students April 2019 May 2019 Job Developer, Parent Coordinator Parent Coordinator, Events Committee 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. There are ten full time worksites associated with the school: Schervier, AmVets, Castle Hill YMCA, Jacobi Hospital, Glebe YMCA, Providence Rest, Hebrew Home, Plaza Health, Montefiore Hospital and Brightside Academy. In addition, there are 17 part time worksites that serve the school. Afterdark Ryders is an altruistic non-profit organization that supports the school for Thanksgiving and May family events as well as by doing a "Back to School Drive" in September. The school supports their toy and diaper drives by collecting goods for them. The Pelham Bay Little League Field allows the school to use its facilities and the school provides gardening and maintenance service to the field. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Funding from the school's budget to provide food and raffle objects for parent meetings, workshops and events. The same funding will provide food for the participants of the Transition and Job Fair. Funding from the Promise budget to provide food for parents at those events. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other 2018-19 CEP 37  Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February, 2019 there should have been at least 4 each of the following events: Parent Volunteer Days and monthly meetings to dispense information on relevant topics such as transition, instruction and social development, along with at least one Transition Fair and information dispersal on how to connect to our school via social media. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Parent Coordinator will collect parent and family attendance data collected from the following events: Transition Fairs, Open School events, monthly workshops, student arts events, student award ceremonies, Parent Volunteer Days. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 38  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) SANDI scores to determine levels, scores on specific reading program tests to determine their levels within the program. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) SMiLE Reading Program Full class, small group or tutoring During the day Wilson Reading Program Full class, small group or tutoring During the day Thinking Maps Full class During the day Achieve 3000 Full class During the day First Author UCP: computer program Lehman Inclusion Program Scantron Full class, small group During the day During the day Small group and tutoring Small group and tutoring Small group instruction After School Duringthe day RCT and Regents Prep Small group and tutoring During the day Reading A-Z Attainment ELA Mathematics SANDI scores to determine levels Lehman Inclusion Program Small group and tutoring District-based Math Coach Small group and tutoring During the day, after school, some weekends During the day During the day 2018-19 CEP 39  Science SANDI scores to determine levels Discovery Science Full class Lehman Inclusion Program Small group and tutoring Small group instruction During the day Small group and tutoring During the day, after school, some weekends During the day During the day During the day During the day Scantron RCT and Regents Prep Attainment Mathematics Scantron RCT and Regents Prep Unique Discovery Social Studies Lehman Inclusion Program UCP : computer program Scantron Social Studies SANDI scores to determine levels At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) SANDI scores to determine levels Small group instruction Small group and tutoring Full class During the day Small group and tutoring Small group and tutoring Small group instruction During the day After school During the day During the day RCT and Regents Prep Small group and tutoring Unique Lehman Inclusion Program Small group and tutoring Behavior Intervention Plans and Functional Behavior Assessments Counselors write these to describe a way to intervene with a student’s behavior Counseling services 1:1 and group counseling During the day During the day During the day 2018-19 CEP 40  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. N/A Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). 3 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 41  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. 0 2018-19 CEP 42  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools X Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. N/A 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). N/A Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A 2018-19 CEP 43  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. N/A 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 0 0 0 0 0 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. 2018-19 CEP 44  Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 45  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Stephen McSweeney School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students Stephen McSweeney School will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 2018-19 CEP 46  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; 2018-19 CEP 47  ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) The Stephen D. McSweeney School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student 2018-19 CEP 48  achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; 2018-19 CEP 49  ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; 2018-19 CEP 50  II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; 2018-19 CEP 51  ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 52 Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components: 1. 2. 3. The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers. Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. 1. 2. 3. 4. High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” 1. Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences. Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. 1. These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): K 6 1 7 2 8 3 9 4 10 5 11 12 24 2018-19 CEP 53  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the · · · · · · rationale subgroups and grade levels of students to be served schedule and duration language of instruction # and types of certified teachers types of materials Begin description here: P721X is a special education school in District 75. Our current enrollment is 518 and 180 (35%) of those students are English Language Learners. During the 2018-19 school year P721X will have both Transitional Bilingual Education (TBE) and Freestanding English as a New Language (ENL) programs. ENL instruction is provided by two NYS certified ENL teachers through both integrated and stand-alone models at the main site, PS368, the Monroe Annex and some worksites. The goal of our TBE and ENL programs is to ensure that all our students can communicate effectively in English in academic and social settings, and our work study sites. To this end, students are immersed in an instructional program that is rich in both academic and functional content. 721X’s Title III program, entitled "Interactive Literacy and Mathematics through Coding" will be conducted in English and service a total of 24 ELLs in grades 9 to 12 with a 12:1:1 ratio, ranging in age from 14 to 21. The students will be divided into two groups of 12 each. This population was selected because these are the students who primarily transition to our full time worksites and gain competitive employment. The program will take place after school, on Tuesdays and Thursdays, for two hours (from 2:55pm to 4:55pm), for a total of thirty sessions. Ten sessions will take place in November and December 2018 and the remaining 20 sessions from March through May 2019. The program will be facilitated by two New York State certified teachers: one bilingual and one ENL. There will be three paraprofessionals: two classroom and a 1:1 as mandated by the IEP of one of the participating students. They are fluent in Spanish, the home language of most of the students participating in the program. Supervision will be provided by an Assistant Principal who will receive compensation from 3:35pm to 4:55pm after her regular work hours end. The Title III program will prepare students for young adulthood by aligning instruction with the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS), New Language Arts Progressions (NLAP) and the New York State Career Development and Occupational Studies (CDOS) curriculum. Instruction will incorporate ENL strategies and methodologies such as Total Physical Response (TPR), the Language Experience Approach (LEA), Whole Language, graphic organizers and cooperative learning. Technology, appropriate conversations, time management and computer and workplace etiquette will be incorporated into all aspects of the program. Our school’s vision for the Title III Supplemental Instructional Program is to prepare our young adults to become productive, functioning members of their communities. To this end, we have designed a program that will allow our ELLs to perform at their best in the required state and local assessment, and provide opportunities for the following: · · · · · engage in functional cooperative learning activities in English interact and communicate in small cooperative groups to accomplish a given task actively engage in appropriate conversational skills follow given verbal and written directions explore the creation and management of personal budgets 2018-19 CEP 54  explore work/computer etiquette, consumer education use speaking and writing to communicate what they have learned, thereby strengthening Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information · · those two deficient modalities as identified in the scores for NYSESLAT 2017 · use smartboards, computers, Chromebooks, iPads, calculators and Scratch/Scratch Jr. to support the acquisition of new functional and academic skills needed for employment and future independent living. We are purchasing six iPad minis to support both the literacy and technological aspects of the program. All materials purchased will support instruction of the ELLs in the program. Culminating activities for the program will include the following: Scratch is an introductory programming language that enables students to create their own interactive stories and games. Students snap together graphical programming blocks to make characters move, jump, dance, and sing. They can modify characters in the paint editor, add their own voices and sounds, even insert photos of themselves, and then use the programming blocks to make their characters come to life. ScratchJr is a redesigned interface and programming language that does not rely on the use of reading skills to program. ScratchJr uses an interface that resembles the symbol based interface of our students AAC devices and was designed to be developmentally appropriate for preliterate learners with carefully designed features to match these learner's cognitive, personal, social, and emotional development. Scratch is a free downloadable software that can be used online and offline and compatible with our school’s previously purchased technology, Chromebooks and iPads. ScratchJr is available as a free app for both iPad and Android tablets. Morrison, Ross & Kemp (2007) state that "A language learning experience is not a linear process, but a developmental learning sequence from the lowest level of functioning to a level of expertise and success. Therefore, success and achievement for individuals in the process of learning a second language is directly based on the school’s ability and availability to provide quality and equitable support that engages the school, home, and community". According to Mowschenson and Weintraub (2009), "Teaching Consumer Education through a multi-disciplinary model, including the use of technology, provides students with the opportunity to experience hands-on work practices". P721X provides students with transitional planning beginning at the age of 13. Supporting instructional efforts can lead to pursuing a career and ultimately job placement. Teachers will implement best practices that provide students with the opportunity to do authentic work connected to real life situations. The assessment methods used to determine student progress and the success of the Title III program will be teacher observations, pre and post assessments, evaluation of learning portfolios, and student self-assessments, checklists and rubrics. A secretary will provide clerical support with payroll and the purchasing of materials. A secretary will provide clerical support with payroll and the purchasing of materials. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. · · · · · Begin description here: According to Learning Forward, an international association of learning educators, “Teachers and administrators who routinely develop their own knowledge and skills model for students that rationale teachers to receive training schedule and duration topics to be covered name of provider 2018-19 CEP 55  Part C: Professional Development learning is important and useful. Their ongoing development creates a culture of learning throughout the school that supports educators' efforts to engage student in learning. When school leaders know how to engage teachers, paraprofessionals and students in effective learning, the school becomes the center of learning for all adults and students". According to Edutopia, "The best professional development is ongoing, experiential, collaborative and connected to and derived from working with students and understanding their culture. Ongoing professional development keeps teachers up to date on new research, on how children learn, emerging technology tools for the classroom and new curriculum resources". The Professional Development component of our Title III program will consist of five sessions (1 and ½ hours each) to take place on Wednesdays, from 2:55pm to 4:35pm beginning in November 2018 and continuing through the duration of the program. All five sessions will be led by the bilingual and ENL teachers. During the sessions, the teachers will develop computer science concepts by modeling for the administrator and paraprofessionals how to access and create various literacy and math based projects in Scratch and Scratch Jr. The ability to code computer programs is an important part of literacy in today’s society. When students learn to code in Scratch and Scratch Jr., they learn important strategies for solving problems, designing projects, and communicating ideas. The PD sessions will provide the administrator and paraprofessionals with knowledge of the inner workings and logistics of the Scratch and Scratch Jr. programs. This in turn, will allow them to provide the required support for the students participating in the program. Our professional development will also include information for participants on the need for a more equitable approach to computer science education in our public schools. Up to the present, computer science education has left-out the specific high-need populations of ELLs and special education students. Our professional development will promote awareness of the need to bring high quality computer science education to urban students. rationale schedule and duration topics to be covered name of provider how parents will be notified of these activities Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. · · · · · Begin description here: Parents are invited to participate in all aspects of the program alongside their children. This will allow them to make strides towards the acquisition of English fluency and computer skills. Having access to the instructional program will allow parents to reinforce content from the program at home and in the community. Information about the Title III program will be sent home with students and via US Mail. All information will be in English and in the parents’ preferred home languages. 2018-19 CEP 56  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) 1. 2. Per session Per diem $18,386.08 (75.3%) Purchased services 1. High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. 0 Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Direct Instruction 1 supervisor - 30 sessions X 1.3 hrs. (63.45) = $2,474.55 2 teachers - 30 sessions x 2 hrs. ($60.65) = $7,278.00 3 paraprofessionals - 30 sessions x 2 hrs. = $6,251.40 1 secretary x 10 hrs. X $37.37 = $373.70 Total =$16,377.65 Professional Development 1 supervisor - 5 sessions x 1 hr. x $63.45 = $317.25 2 teachers x 5 sessions x 1.5 hrs. x $60.65 = $909.75 3 paraprofessionals x 5 sessions x 1.5 hrs. x $34.73 = = $781.43 Total = $2,008.43 None Supplies and materials 2. Must be supplemental. Additional curricula, instructional materials. Must be clearly listed. 3. 4. $4,826.92 (19.7%) 13" MacBook air 1.8 DC i5/8GB/128GB/mini display port to HDMI Tier 1 device = $976.00 Max MacBook 13" Extreme Shell gray (cover) = $20.97 (3) Seagate Backup Plus STDR2000100 Hard drive-2 TB-USB 3 @ $71.07 = $213.21 (6) iPads (6th gen/ Wi-Fi/32GB (space gray) - @ $290.00 each = $1,740.00 12.9 inch iPad Pro/Wifi/64GB = $774.00 (3)Laminating Machines @ $138.00 each = $414.00 2018-19 CEP 57 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. (3) Color ink cartridges @ $48.56 each = $145.68 (2) High yield black ink cartridges @ $144.72 each = $289.44 Miscellaneous classroom supplies (binders, construction paper, laminating pouches, markers, pens, glue, scissors, etc.) = $253.62 Total = $4,913.01 None 170 round trip metrocards There is no afterschool bus service. Also for Parent Involvement meetings Refreshments $24,398 Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel 0 $935.00 Other TOTAL $250.00 24,219.29 2018-19 CEP 58  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 75 School Name The Stephen D McSweeney School Borough Bronx School Number 721 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Frank DeGennaro Coach Francis Cruz ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Guadalupe Reyes-ENL Teacher/Subject Area Carmen Luciano-Bilingual Teacher/Subject Area Yvonne Encarnacion-Bilingual Related-Service Provider NA Superintendent NA Assistant Principal Cheryl Green-Foster Coach type here School Counselor Justine Lopez-Dejesus Parent Keisha Kirkland Parent Coordinator Marilyn Alfano Field Support Center Staff Member NA Other (Name and Title) NA C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 3 2 2 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 3 0 D. Student Demographics 2018-19 CEP 59  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 537 Total number of ELLs 182 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 33.89% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): Spanish If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 4 3 2 Lang. Spanish Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 4 10 11 7 2 12 13 0 0 0 0 4 7 2 13 Tot # 26 0 0 0 0 0 26 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Our school uses a variety of assessment tools to assess the early literacy skills of our students including the SANDI Student Assessment Needs Determination Inventory, Vocational 1Assessment, Student Learning Datafolios, Teacher created assessments, and Unique pre and post checkpoints. The assessments help to determine the placement of the students along the continuum towards least restrictive environments. Students within their various classifications are grouped according to their cognitive and social emotional abilities. Their abilities help determine their readiness to participate in full or part time work experience. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 2018-19 CEP 60  There is a specific testing window and calendar for SANDI and Vocational 1 Assessments. Student Learning datafolios are developed in created in each class. Student assessment and work are discussed during teacher team meetings and IEP meetings. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? We use various tools to evaluate the success of programs for ELLs. On-going assessments are an important component of our ELL program. All of our ELLs participate in assessments throughout the year so that we may gain the insight we normally would from the use of standardized curriculum and tests. This includes, but is not limited to: School-Created checklist assessment, which outlines indicators of proficiency across all four domains of language, Student Annual Needs Determination Inventories (SANDI), periodic assessments created on the school level using SANDI and CCLS tasks from NYSAA as a guideline, plus six reporting periods when teachers analyze data to make conclusions on progress and ascertain if current goals have been met or need modification. Portfolios and teacher created materials additionally are used to monitor student progression across the program. We administer pre- and post- assessment surveys as part of our Title III program. We also use teacher observations and functional based rubrics. The goal of our program is to give our students the skills necessary to function independently in the community and the ultimate success for many of our ELLs is the transition to worksites and the community at large. Success for ELLs is also the mastery of IEP goals. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? The summative data will be shared with teachers during cohort meeting and common planning meetings. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Currently, P721X has only high school ELL students. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. When looking at NYSESLAT data patterns, the first point we have to address is that the majority of our students who sat for this exam in 2016 were unable to receive a score because they could not complete all four domains. These students were counted as "entering" for overall proficiency and modality analysis. The bulk of our students are unable to complete the NYSESLAT as they are moderately to severely delayed. Many of these students are unable to read or write in conventional manners due to their cognitive and/or physical disabilities. Some of them are limited in areas of verbal and listening skills, as well. Therefore, we are unable to ascertain any information on gains towards proficiency for these students. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Most of our students are unable to complete the NYSESLAT. The ENL and Bilingual teachers look at IEPs and talk to other teachers to obtain additional information before creating their caseloads. Adjustment are made where necessary. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. 2018-19 CEP 61  Based on our school population, during the year 2015-16, P721X will have both Transitional Bilingual Education and Freestanding English As a New Language programs. Instructional models used for our ELLs in the EL instructional portion will be the integrated/stand alone model. The goal of our Transitional Bilingual Program (TBE) is to insure that all our students can communicate effectively in English in both the school setting and at our work study sites. We give these students a rich, functional academic program where we immerse them in the English language through a community based work experience. ENL Program: ENL is provided by two certified ENL teachers through a integrated/stand alone model of instruction at the main site, P721X @368, P721X @Monroe, Lehman, and some worksites. Our newcomers receive peer tutoring and a buddy system. Our plan for students receiving an extension of service and long term ELL students includes the following enrichment strategies: One-to-one tutoring, AIS, Instructional Technology, Augmentative Communication Devices, Picture Exchange Communication (PECS), and Arts Enrichment though various arts disciplines. Currently, our SIFEs are provided support though the following: one-to-one tutoring, AIS, Instructional Technology, and visual arts enrichment. ENL Instruction: In order for our ELLs to be successful in meeting standards and passing the required state and local assessments, ENL instruction follows the NYS and NYC ENL Standards and incorporates ENL strategies such as Whole Language, graphic organizers, and cooperative learning. As per CR Part 154, mandated students receive ESL instructional minutes as follows: In grades K to 8 Entering and Emerging receive 360 minutes per week and Transitioning and Expanding receive 180 minutes of ENL. In high school, Entering level students will receive 540 minutes of ENL instruction per week. Emerging students will receive 360 minutes of ENL instruction per week, and Transitional and Expanding level students will receive 180 minutes of ENL instruction per week . Students are grouped for instruction according to age and level of performance. The use of technology (including SmartBoards and iPads) is integrated into all aspects of instruction along with multisensory techniques. In addition to the school library as a literacy resource, each class has access to a level library that addresses the interests and needs of the students. Content Area Instruction: For all students at the main site, all content subject areas are taught through ENL Methodologies in English by Special Education/ENL Certified teachers. ENL Methodologies include Language Experience, Whole Language, the use of graphic organizers, multisensory approach, and the use of picture symbols. These methodologies are also used in the other content areas including mathematics, social studies, and science. The ELLs perform as well as others students in all content areas as indicated by NYSAA results and teacher observations. Students at work sites and in the main building who are in Alternate Placement receive additional support from paraprofessionals who speak their native language and English and receive mandated ENL instruction. English Language Arts: Literacy instruction for all students follows the NYC Balanced Literacy Program. The literacy program for ELLs makes use of a variety of teacher adapted materials for students with severe disabilities including technology, cultural trips and both classroom and school libraries. Commercial books used include: Real Life English and New Readers Press – The Working Experience –Level 1. b. TBE program. If applicable. Transitional Bilingual Education: The program is composed of 2 bilingual Spanish high school classes located at the main site(12:1:1) and one 6:1:1bilingual Spanish class for student on the autism spectrum. All three bilingual classes follow the CR Part 154 mandated requirements for units/minutes of ENL and HLA instruction: in high school entering level students will receive 540 minutes of ESL instruction per week. Emerging students will receive 360 minutes of ENL instruction per week, and Transitioning and Expanding level students will receive 180 minutes of ESL instruction per week. The twelve week, after school Supplementary Education Program (Title III program) emphasizes a Parent Engagement Initiative, to include parents in their child’s education to improve English language learning through developing transition and self advocacy skills. The Family Living and Consumer Science Curriculum is used to improve independence and daily living skills. The bilingual students who are ready for vocational training are able to visit our worksite with a bilingual teacher. All students are Alternate Assessment. The teachers assigned to these classes are NYS Certified/NYC licensed in Bilingual education and provide instruction in all subject areas. The components of the Transitional Bilingual Education are: English as a New Language: ENL instruction follows the NYS and NYC ENL Standards and incorporates ENL strategies such as Whole Language, graphic organizers, and cooperative learning. Students are grouped for instruction 2018-19 CEP 62  according to age and level of performance. The use of technology (including smartboards and iPads) is integrated into all aspects of instruction along with multisensory techniques. In addition to the school library as a literacy resource, each class has access to a level library that addresses the interests and needs of the students. Home Language Arts: 95% of ELLs in our bilingual program are at the beginning level of English Language proficiency. HLA is taught for a minimum 180 minutes per week as per CR Part 154 mandates. HLA follows the guidelines of the Balanced Literacy program. The HLA instruction is provided by a bilingual teacher who adapts materials to meet the needs of cognitively delayed students who are following the alternate curriculum. The students’ literacy skills in their Native Language vary based on abilities and cognitive delays, and the teachers use differentiated instruction to meet their students’ individual needs. Adapted materials include books, student created projects, picture symbols, workbooks, augmentative devices, and communication boards. In addition, the commercial materials include: Santilana – Lectura y Comuniciacion, Lenguaje y Comunciacion, Escritura y Comunciacion, Levels 1-3; Santilana – Ortografia Levels A-C; Real Life English; New Readers Press c. DL program. If applicable. Currently , P721X only features ENL and TBE programs 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? ENL Program: ENL is provided by two certified ENL teachers through a integrated/stand alone model of instruction at the main site, P721X @368, P721X @Monroe, Lehman, and some worksites. Our newcomers receive peer tutoring and a buddy system Our plan for students receiving an extension of service and long term ELL students includes the following enrichment strategies: One-to-one tutoring, AIS, Instructional Technology, Augmentative Communication Devices, Picture Exchange Communication (PECS), and Arts Enrichment though various arts disciplines. Currently, our SIFEs are provided support though the following: one-to-one tutoring, AIS, Instructional Technology, and visual arts enrichment. ENL Instruction: In order for our ELLs to be successful in meeting standards and passing the required state and local assessments, ENL instruction follows the NYS and NYC ENL Standards and incorporates ENL strategies such as Whole Language, graphic organizers and cooperative learning. As per CR Part 154, mandated students receive ESL instructional minutes as follows: In grades K to 8 Entering and Emerging receive 360 minutes per week and Transitioning and Expanding receive 180 minutes of ENL : In high school, Entering level students will receive 540 minutes of ENL instruction per week. Emerging students will receive 360 minutes of ENL instruction per week, and Transitional and Expanding level students will receive 180 minutes of ENL instruction per week . Students are grouped for instruction according to age and level of performance. The use of technology (including smartboards and iPads) is integrated into all aspects of instruction along with multisensory techniques. In addition to the school library as a literacy resource, each class has access to a level library that addresses the interests and needs of the students. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Content Area Instruction: For all students at the main site, all content subject areas are taught through ENL Methodologies in English by Special Education/ENL Certified teachers. ENL Methodologies include Language Experience, Whole Language, the use of graphic organizers, multisensory approach, and the use of picture symbols. These methodologies are also used in the other content areas including mathematics, social studies, and science. The ELLs perform as well as others students in all content areas as indicated by NYSAA results and teacher observations. Students at work sites and in the main building who are in Alternate Placement receive additional support from paraprofessionals who speak their native language and English and receive mandated ENL instruction. English Language Arts: Literacy instruction for all students follows the NYC Balanced Literacy Program. The literacy program for ELLs makes use of a variety of teacher adapted materials for students with severe disabilities including technology, cultural 2018-19 CEP 63  trips and both classroom and school libraries. Commercial books used include: Real Life English and New Readers Press – The Working Experience –Level 1 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Since our program includes a low staff to student ratio and ample opportunities for 1:1 instruction, SIFE students are provided with the extra support they need to get re-acclimated to the school environment. Our teachers have extensive knowledge in differentiating and scaffolding instruction, therefore providing SIFE students the support they need to access the school curriculum. Newcomers also benefit from the low staff to student ratio and 1:1 instruction. As our teachers are highly qualified special education teachers, they have the skills needed to differentiate instruction and materials in a way that makes the curriculum accessible to students who are new to the US. ENL and Special Education strategies are closely aligned, such as modeling, use of manipulatives and experiential learning. ENL staff also provides additional support to teachers of ELLs who are newcomers. As newcomers in our program follow an alternate curriculum, they do not have to take the standardized ELA tests outlined by NLCB. Some of our newcomers may fall in the age ranges for partaking in the New York State Alternate Assessment. If this is the case, classroom and ENL teachers provide the students with ample opportunities to master ELA Alternate Grade Level Indicators. The nature of the assessment also allows the use of pictures to help student who do not read English achieve proficient scores. ELLs receiving 4-6 years of service receive the same individualized and focused instruction as the rest of our students. Instruction is focused on development and support of access/foundation skills such as functional communication approaches for ELLs with severe communication disabilities, including Mayer Johnson and Carol Goosens symbols, and emergent literacy strategies such as The Workshop Model, centers, and word walls. Opportunities for skill acquisition include Balanced Literacy approaches, creation of bilingual communication boards and bilingual story boards, augmentative and alternative communication systems in the native language and in English, total communication approaches (transition boards, photographs, paraprofessional who speaks native language and English) and the use of the New York state Alternate Assessment standards which align to the New York State Standards. Our school provides services for long term ELLs for as long as they need it and according to their IEPs. The majority of our Long Term ELLs have made great gains in their English Language Proficiency but are unable to demonstrate this on NYSESLAT due to the nature of their disabilities. Our school also provides after school programs (Title III and Project Champs) to help foster gains in their English Language Proficiency. This year, select groups of our Long Term ELLs have also been enrolled in our AIS program and as the focus of a student based data inquiry team. As our school is entirely comprised of students with special education mandates, all ELL students naturally receive accommodations for program needs for their disability diagnosis, a mandated class size ratio, as well as related services such as speech, counseling, physical therapy, and occupational therapy. These ELLs students are placed with teachers who are highly qualified to meet their special needs. The formative assessments align with the ELA and Math curriculum of the school and informal assessments are the teachers checking for understanding. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Newcomers benefit from the low staff to student ratio and 1:1 instruction. As our teachers are highly qualified special education teachers they have the skills needed to differentiate instruction and materials in a way that makes the curriculum accessible to students who are new to the US. ENL and Special Education strategies are closely aligned, such as modeling, use of manipulaives and regalia. ENL staff also provides additional support to teachers of ELLs who are newcomers. As newcomers in our program follow an alternate curriculum, they do not have to take the standardized ELA tests outlined by NLCB. Some of our newcomers may fall in the age ranges for partaking in the New York State Alternate Assessment. If this is the case, classroom and ENL teachers provide the students with ample opportunities to master ELA Alternate Grade Level Indicators. The nature of the assessment also allows the use of pictures to help student who do not read English achieve 2018-19 CEP 64  proficient scores. ELLs receiving 4-6 years of service receive the same individualized and focused instruction as the rest of our students. Instruction is focused on development and support of access/foundation skills such as functional communication approaches for ELLs with severe communication disabilities, including Mayer Johnson and Carol Goosens symbols, and emergent literacy strategies such as The Workshop Model, centers, and word walls. Opportunities for skill acquisition include Balanced Literacy approaches, creation of bilingual communication boards and bilingual story boards, augmentative and alternative communication systems in the native language and in English, total communication approaches (transition boards, photographs, paraprofessional who speaks native language and English) and the use of the New York state Alternate Assessment standards which align to the New York State Standards. Our school provides services for long term ELLs for as long as they need it and according to their IEPs. The majority of our Long Term ELLs have made great gains in their English Language Proficiency but are unable to demonstrate this on NYSESLAT due to the nature of their disabilities. Our school also provides after school programs (Title III and Project Champs) to help foster gains in their English Language Proficiency. This year, select groups of our Long Term ELLs have also been enrolled in our AIS program and as the focus of a student based data inquiry team. As our school is entirely comprised of students with special education mandates, all ELL students naturally receive accommodations for program needs for their disability diagnosis, a mandated class size ratio, as well as related services such as speech, counseling, physical therapy, and occupational therapy. These ELLs students are placed with teachers who are highly qualified to meet their special needs. The formative assessments align with the ELA and Math curriculum of the school and informal assessments are the teachers checking for understanding. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Instructional strategies for ELL students includes the following enrichment strategies: One-to-one tutoring, AIS, Instructional Technology, Augmentative Communication Devices, Picture Exchange Communication (PECS), and Arts Enrichment though various arts disciplines. Currently, our SIFEs are provided support though the following: one-to-one tutoring, AIS, Instructional Technology, and visual arts enrichment. In order for our ELLs to be successful in meeting standards and passing the required state and local assessments, ENL instruction follows the NYS and NYC ENL Standards and incorporates ENL strategies such as Whole Language, graphic organizers, and cooperative learning. Students are grouped for instruction according to age and level of performance. The use of technology (including smartboards and iPads) is integrated into all aspects of instruction along with multisensory techniques. In addition to the school library as a literacy resource, each class has access to a level library that addresses the interests and needs of the students. All content subject areas are taught through ENL Methodologies in English by Special Education/ENL Certified teachers. ENL Methodologies include Language Experience, Whole Language, the use of graphic organizers, multisensory approach, and the use of picture symbols. These methodologies are also used in the other content areas including mathematics, social studies, and science. The ELLs perform as well as others students in all content areas as indicated by NYSAA results and teacher observations. Students at work sites and in the main building who are in Alternate Placement receive additional support from paraprofessionals who speak their native language and English and receive mandated ENL instruction. Literacy instruction for all students follows the NYC Balanced Literacy Program. The literacy program for ELLs makes use of a variety of teacher adapted materials for students with severe disabilities including technology, cultural trips and both classroom and school libraries. Commercial books used include: Real Life English and New Readers Press – The Working Experience. ENL instruction follows the NYS and NYC ENL Standards and incorporates ENL strategies such as Whole Language, graphic organizers, and cooperative learning. Students are grouped for instruction according to age and level of performance. The use of technology (including SmartBoards and iPads) is integrated into all aspects of instruction along with multisensory techniques. In addition to the school library as a literacy resource, each class has access to a level library that addresses the interests and needs of the students. HLA follows the guidelines of the Balanced Literacy program. The HLA instruction is provided by a bilingual teacher who adapts materials to meet the needs of cognitively delayed students who are following the alternate curriculum. The students’ literacy skills in their Native Language vary based on abilities and cognitive delays, and the teachers use differentiated instruction to meet their students’ individual needs. Adapted materials include books, student created projects, picture symbols, workbooks, augmentative devices, and communication boards. In addition, the commercial materials include: Santilana – Lectura y Comuniciacion, Lenguaje y Comunciacion, Escritura y Comunciacion, Levels 1-3; Santilana – Ortografia Levels A-C; Real Life English; New Readers Press – The Working Experience –Level 1. 2018-19 CEP 65  For 9-12 students at beginning levels, content area is taught with a minimum of one subject taught in English through ENL Methodologies incorporating ENL strategies such as Whole Language, graphic organizers, and cooperative learning. Students are grouped for instruction according to age and level of performance. All instruction in the content areas is conducted in both Spanish and English, using a ratio of 60/40. The use of technology and, where possible, actual experience driven lessons are used in all aspects of instruction along with multisensory techniques. One Subject area (content) is taught in NLA with a summary done in English. Title III is offered to all ELL students. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Curricular flexibility has been referenced above, including the numerous adapted and commercial materials and supports utilized by instructors across all areas of study and work experience. Instructionally, since our varied population includes students with differing degrees of cognitive disabilities as well as students with physical constraints, flexibility comes through the use of multiple entry points and adapted communicative devices. The ENL teacher who travels to offsites and worksites must flexibly schedule instruction around the students' work obligations, class time, and other related services. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. The 721X Stephen D. McSweeney School is an Occupational Training Center for high school age special education students. The OTC is comprised of grades 9 to 12 in the main site, 721X @ 368, and 721X@ the Monroe Annex. The student body is comprised of five hundred and fifty five (555) students with one hundred and seventy seven English Language Learners, which equals 33 % of the population. The one hundred and seventy seven English Language Learners students are NYSAA students and exempt from standardized testing except for a few ELL Inclusion students at 721X@Lehman H.S. The goal and instructional focus of the 721X Stephen D. McSweeney School is for students to become independent young adults, knowledgeable about the world of work, able to explore career opportunities, and possessing self-determination skills. All ELL students are fully immersed in every aspect of the 721X School Comprehensive Educational Plan. At the 721X main-site there are two bilingual classes, comprised of Spanish speaking students12:1:1 and several ENL push-in/pull- out groups. At 721X@368X and P721X@the Monroe Annex there are fourteen students receiving English As a Second Language in a pull-out/push-in program. There is also a 6:1:1 bilingual Spanish class at 368. In all classes, both Transitional Bilingual Education students and ENL students are taught by licensed certified teachers in the language of instruction. In all classes, 12:1:1, 8:1:1, 6:1:1, and 12:1:4 are the student to staff ratios. The students are involved in work-study and community based instructional planning. All classes use the Common Core, the Alternate Assessment Curriculum frameworks and Unique. Our measures of student learning (MOSL) is NYSAA. ELL teaching strategies encompass scaffolding and an English Language Learning Approach. The language of instruction is English. All ENL students, especially those with more than six years (long term ELLs) and those in Transitional Bilingual Education (TBE) may be placed in a Community Based Organization work-study program of their choice and ability. They will also receive support in the form of AIS and Title III. Students who receive extension of services are also provided with additional linguistic support, through AIS, Title III, and the Unique Transition Curriculum. The bilingual staff will provide work study training which will support their linguistic growth through intervention, counseling support services, and job coaching. The instructional focus will address self-advocacy and career development. Monthly scheduled parent meetings are held to inform and support transition linkage to adult services prior to graduation. The 721X work-study CBO classes have a diversity of work learning experiences in that each work-site has its own unique type of community service and training. The types of community services are located in senior citizen centers, hospital, nursing homes, nursery schools, and state parks. ELL students are fully immersed in the transitional process of work-study and vocational training. The school teaches “The WAVE” (Work, Achievement, Vocation and Employment”) curriculum and Unique Transition Band to prepare students for transitional services prior to moving to least restrictive environments and graduation. Content area instruction, ELA, math, science, and social studies are provided through a functional and vocational 2018-19 CEP 66  learning approach using the Content Area Pacing Calendars. The three bilingual classes follow the English Language mandated requirements as follows: in high school beginner level students will receive 540 minutes of ENL instruction per week. Intermediate students will receive 360 minutes of ENL instruction per week, and Advanced level students will receive 180 minutes of ENL instruction per week. The twelve week after school Supplementary Education Program (Title III program) emphasizes a Parent Engagement Initiative, to include parents in their child’s education to improve English language learning and using Computer technology as a learning tool. The Family Living and Consumer Science Curriculum is used to improve independence and daily living skills. All ELL students are included in every aspect of the school’s instructional program and extra-curricular activities. ELL students have classes in Theatre, Chorus, A-Team Industrial Arts, Fine Arts, Culinary, Retail, and Consumer Science. It is our belief that all students should acquire the skills of English Language Learning and develop the attitudes and knowledge to survive in a multicultural society. Due to the nature of our school, language electives are not offered. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? No new programs are being considered now. The focus of our current Title III program was rewritten to expand to additional Adult Living Skills including cooking. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? None 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. We have an exciting Title III enrichment program that is developed specifically to meet the needs of our ELLs and prepare them for transition,independent living, a least restrictive environment, and the world of work. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Home language support is naturally built into our Spanish TBE programs. HLA is taught in Spanish and is provided for a minimum of 180 minutes of instruction per week. HLA follows the guidelines of the Balanced Literacy program. The HLA instruction is provided by a bilingual teacher who adapts materials to meet the needs of cognitively delayed students who are following the alternate curriculum. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? The students literacy skills in their Home Language varies based on abilities and cognitive delays and the teachers uses differentiated instruction to met their individual needs. Adapted materials include books, student created projects, Mayer Johnson Symbols, workbooks, augmentative devices and communication boards. Similarly native language support is provided as needed during instruction of all content areas. In our ENL program the ENL providers, alternate placement paraprofessionals, and classroom teachers (if they speak Spanish) provide native language support. Teachers also have access to materials to help build native language libraries in the classrooms for student who are not in our TBE program. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. All instructional materials used to educate ELLs in our school are age appropriate as they are often modified by our teachers to meet the cognitive needs of our students. These materials included but are not limited to school-created curriculum, adapted books, picture books, communication boards, picture dictionaries, and audio and video programs for learning English and functional based curriculums which prepare our ELLs who will soon be transitioning out of school. Technology plays an important role in the instruction of ELLs. Every classrom has two computers plus two computer labs in our main building and several laptop carts which teachers can also use to conduct computer based lessons in their classroom. Two of our Spanish TBE classrooms have SmartBoards in them. This allows the teacher to incorporate hands-on, visual learning in to the students’ everyday experiences. Many students have access to augmentative communication devices if needed which can be programmed to speak in both English and the students’ home language. 2018-19 CEP 67  15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Home language support is naturally built into our Spanish TBE programs. HLA is taught in Spanish and is provided for a minimum of 180 minutes of instruction per week. HLA follows the guidelines of the Balanced Literacy program. The HLA instruction is provided by a bilingual teacher who adapts materials to meet the needs of cognitively delayed students who are following the alternate curriculum. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Our program's primary focus is on transitioning students into their adult life and giving them the resources and support services they need to do so. New ELLs have access to the Parent Coordinator and the Transition Linkage Coordinator, who plan a large resource fair twice annually for student and families. We have an excellent transition team that works with students and parents to help facilitate plans for the future. Our role included connecting them with community resources and agencies for adults with disabilities in addition to helping them find appropriate program and/or job placements. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Cuurently, there are no language electives for ELLs. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? All ELL staff including administrators, homeroom and cluster teachers, paraprofessionals, and related service providers participated in opening day workshops on September 8th. All ELL staff will participate in Chancellor’s Conference Day on Tuesday, November 3, 2015. They can also attend other professional development workshops given by District 75. Our new ENL teacher will attend the Professional Development series for new teachers being offered by the district. The ELL teachers all participate in weekly cohort meeting and do common planning with non ELL teachers. In the spring, the ELL staff will have the opportunity to participate in the Supplementary Instructional Program part of Title III. A component of this is the six hour professional development program that will address ELL Strategies, Data Collection, Using the Computer as an Instructional Tool for ELLs, and Differentiation of Instruction for ELLs. All teachers participate in weekly cohort meeting. Topics discussed included Math Attainment, SANDI, Achieve 3000 and Unique, all curriculums and resources are aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. 2018-19 CEP 68  All staff receive training and support from the transition team to help all ELLs as they transition from high school to adult services and independent living The transition coordinator, who is bilingual Spanish, conducts workshops for parents and staff to assist ELLs and their families in the transition from the DOE to adult services when they turn twenty-one. Each school must provide professional development to all teachers and administrators that specifically addresses the needs of English language learners. A minimum of fifteen percent (15%) of the required professional development hours for all teachers prescribed by CR Part 80 must be dedicated to language acquisition, including a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for English language learners. For all bilingual and English as a new language teachers, a minimum of fifty percent (50%) of the required professional development hours must be dedicated to language acquisition in alignment with core content area instruction, including a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for English language learners. All Teachers participating in Chancellor’s Conference Day on Tuesday, November 3, 2015 will attend a workshop on language acquistion and teaching strategies presented by the Assistant Principal. In addition the ELL teachers will attend other professional development workshops given by District 75. Our new ENL teacher will attend the Professional Development series for new teachers being offered by the district. The ELL teachers all participate in weekly cohort meeting and do common planning with non ELL teachers. In the spring, the ELL staff will have the opportunity to participate in the Supplementary Instructional Program part of Title III. A component of this is the six hour professional development program that will address ELL Strategies, Data Collection, Using the Computer as an Instructional Tool for ELLs and Differentiation of Instruction for ELLs. The transition coordinator, who is bilingual Spanish conducts workshops for parents and staff to assist ELLs and their families in the transition from the DOE to adult services when they turn twenty-one. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? In addition to the parent orientation and two parent teacher conference sessions annually, the school provides several opportunities for parents of ELLs to discuss goals and language development as it relates to their children Additionally, the parents of the students who attend the TITLE III after school program are invited to both orientation for the program as well as events to highlight student learning and progression. Records for these meetings and events are kept and reviewed by the team to measure parent involvement and student progression within the curriculum. Records are kept in various ways including the binder for Title III. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. 2. Our schools individually meets with the parents or guardians of English language learners at least once a year in addition to parent-teacher conferences, initial parent orientations, quarterly progress meetings or other scheduled meetings provided for parents or guardians to discuss the goals of the program, their child’s language development progress, their child’s English language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas. This additional meeting includes school staff necessary to sufficiently inform the parents or guardians about the child’s language development in all content areas in English and in the child’s home language in the case of students enrolled in a bilingual education program. Such a meeting is conducted with a qualified interpreter/translator in the language or mode of communication the parent or guardian best understands. Our school determines the manner and form of such individual parent meetings, in accordance with collective bargaining agreements, and records attendance using existing procedures. 3. Parent involvement is an extremely important part of our program. Parents are invited to attend PTA meetings and special workshops provided by the transition coordinator, job developer, and/or parent coordinator. Workshop topics that we have given or that are being scheduled based on the evaluation of our parents needs included social security, guardianship, Medicaid services, health benefits, employment opportunities, and programs for learning English. In addition, there are specific workshops for parents as part of our Title III program. 2018-19 CEP 69  Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 2018-19 CEP 70 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Frank DeGennaro, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 71  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Stephen D. McSweeney School School DBN: 75X721 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Frank DeGennaro Title Principal Cheryl Green-Foster Assistant Principal Marilyn Alfano Parent Coordinator Guadalupe Reyes ENL/Bilingual Teacher Keisha Kirkland Parent Carmen Luciano Teacher/Subject Area Yvonne Encarnacion Teacher/Subject Area Francis Cruz NA Coach Coach Justine Lopez-DeJesus School Counselor NA NA NA NA NA Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member NA Other NA Other NA Other NA Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 06/30/17 06/30/17 06/30/17 06/30/17 06/30/17 06/30/17 06/30/17 06/30/17 NA 06/30/17 06/30/17 NA NA NA NA 2018-19 CEP 72  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 75X721 School Name: The Stepehen D McSweeney School Superintendent: Kettler Louissa The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this Marilyn Alfano-Cruz conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. During the intake process, the parents are interviewed by a bilingual teacher or bilingual guidance counselor to determine the parents' home languages and translation/interpretation needs. In addition, we use ATS, CAP, the blue Student emergency Contact cards and the students' IEPs to determine the home language. Based on these findings, all communication sent home to parents is in both English and the parents' preferred home language. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 2018-19 CEP 73  Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral From our findings, the languages that primarily require written translation and interpretation are: Spanish, Albanian, Arabic, and Bengali. Other languages include Vietnamese, French, Haitian Creole, Tagalog, Urdu, and Ukrainan. We currently have but could use more translation and interpretation assistance for the 170 Spanish speaking ELL parents, 4 Arabic speaking parent(s), and 3 Bengali speaking parent(s). After the intake process and determining a parent’s translation and interpretation needs, the bilingual or teacher guidance counselors meet with other related services providers, teachers, and staff and notifies them of the translation and interpretation needs of each ELL parent. 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency How do you Distributed to plan to Families translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Parent Teacher Conference Announcements,Title III after school program information, NYSAA and NYSESLAT Testing dates, Notice of 2018-19 CEP 74  IEP Meetings, School calendars, Notices of half-days, school closings (holidays and vacations), School Leadership Team letters. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school Parent teacher conferences, IEP annual reviews, triennial meetings, PROMISE recruitment meetings and case management, Agency Fairs, Monthly parent workshops, Title III afterschool parent workshops' Annual progress meeting with parents of ELLs (mandated by CR-Part 154. plan to provide interpretation service(s)? 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) There is a parental bulletin board in the main hall of the school that provides bilingual notification of general school activities, events in the community, and neighborhood resources. Timely notifications, translation, and interpretation services are available in health, safety, legal or disciplinary matters, entitlements, permission slips and consent forms. Interpretation notice signs offering language interpretation and translation are posted at the main entrance across 2018-19 CEP 75  from the security desk. The Parents' Bill of Rights is made available to parents, as needed, in their language. If there is a parent who speaks a language that we are unable to accommodate, we contact the DOE’s Translation and Interpretation Unit. School activities and District initiatives are offered to all students and their families with translation and interpretation services. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? 2018-19 CEP 76 
