2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): School Name: 75X723 P.S. 723 Principal: SHANTE CHUNN 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Number (DBN): 75X723 P723X N/A K - 12 3540 Bivona Street, Bronx, NY 10475 718-320-1222 Phone Number: 718-320-2213 Fax: ShanteChunn SChunn@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: 75 Superintendent’s Office Address: Email Address: Shante Chunn Jonathan Blaufarb Linda Johnson ShanteChunn n/a n/a n/a District Information KetlerLouissaint Superintendent: 400 First Avenue, NY, NY 10010 klouiss@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 212-802-1503 Phone Number: FSC: Bronx 212-802-1678 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) Jose Ruiz Executive Director: 2018-19 CEP 3  Executive Director’s Office Address: 1230 Zerega Avenue, Bronx, NY 10462 jruiz2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: (718) 828-7776 Phone Number: (718) 828-6280 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) ShanteChunn Jonathan Blaufarb Linda Johnson Gertrudis Centeno N/A Dana Martinez AnnikaPanton *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable/ Member/UFT Member/Parent Member/ Parent 2018-19 CEP 5  Anna McGovern Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ CSA Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Our school’s mission is to prepare our students to attain higher learning standards and reach their potential in a supportive, safe learning environment. Our school’s vision is to provide the skills, opportunities and knowledge for all students so they may become lifelong learners and participate in the world of work after leaving school. It is through the collaboration of the school community that we can ensure that students expand their experiences, achieve their goals, and become lifelong learners. 2018-19 CEP 9  2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. P723X is a District 75 school providing educational services for 470 students in grades K – 12. The organization is located in eleven separate locations throughout the Bronx. Our program provides instruction for twenty one 12:1:1 classes, sixteen 8:1:1 classes, twenty two 6:1:1 classes and three 12:1:4 classes. We also provide Special Education Teacher Support Services for students in three inclusion programs. Some of our students attend day treatment programs associated with mental health organizations. Students enrolled in the day treatment programs are first admitted by the mental health organization following an intake and medical documentation, which supports the need for a therapeutic environment. Our school’s curriculum is based upon the Common Core Learning Standards, as well as meeting the needs of a diverse population. A standards-based curriculum provides standardized assessment students with relevant instruction in all content areas. Instructional methods are driven by formal and informal assessment results and data analysis. Differentiated instruction is used to address the individual needs of our students including different learning styles and behavioral characteristics that interfere with learning. Our alternate assessment program uses the evidenced based TEACCH (Treatment and Education of Autistic and Related Communication Handicapped Children) methodology to prepare our students for life after school and gain the skills necessary for independence. The Picture Exchange Communication System (PECS) is used to support the development of communication skills for our alternate assessment students. Verbal Behavior is used with students in need of this support. Video modeling is used to assist in the acquisition of social skills, play skills and vocational skills. Social stories are created to assist students in dealing with stressful situations. The Get Ready to Learn Program is a movement based program that provides additional support for student learning. Our school places a high priority on establishing clear rules of behavior to engage students academically. Current practices include the following research based programs: Positive Behavior Intervention and Support (PBIS), Cornell Therapeutic Crisis Intervention (TCI), Character Education and Social Skills training. Additional school interventions include a daily advisory period, leadership clubs and career clubs. Our focus on the social emotional needs supports our students’ movement to “Least Restrictive Environments." Students have been referred for general education programs with and without supports, inclusion programs, mainstreaming and special education programs in community schools. P723X focuses on creating highly effective partnerships with our community organizations. Our strong collaboration with our mental health organizations: Bronx Children’s Center, Astor Day Treatment and the Henry Ittleson Center for Childhood Research, enhance our instructional program and provide our students with critical mental health resources. Other resources include character education, advisory periods and social skills development which assist our students with developing appropriate social skills necessary for maintaining relationships with others and coping with difficult situations. Instructional area collaborations include Marquis Studio, MOMA Education Program and Urban Advantage that provide enrichment programs to assist with positive learning outcomes and address the different learning styles of our students. Community based collaborations include NYPD and the Food Bank of NYC, assisting in enhancing our learning environment. This school year the Food Bank of NYC is sponsoring the Cook Shop Program in four of our sites. The program encourages healthy habits, healthy choices and provides an exploration of foods through an instructional cooking program. Our successful collaboration with Bronx Lab High School, Metropolitan High School and PS 204 provides our inclusion students with greater access to the general education environment and opportunities for career and college choices after graduation. P723X was the recipient of RESO-A grant from the Bronx Borough President’s for technology upgrades. The main site site also has a partnership with Road Runners NYC, a community running organization that teaches getting healthy through running. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. 2018-19 CEP 10  The school services students in the following categories: emotional disturbance, speech and language delays, other health impairments, intellectual disabilities and Autism Spectrum Disorder. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Based on the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide Survey Element scores based on the Framework for Great Schools, P723X has shown growth from the 2016-2017 school year in the following areas: Rigorous Instruction, Collaborative Teachers, Effective School Leadership, and Strong Family-Community Ties. Our key areas of focus for the 2018-2019 school year are Supportive Environment and Trust because of the decrease in the Framework Element Scores, as well as Rigorous Instruction because that is the Framework Element in which our Instructional Focus lies. 2018-19 CEP 11  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 75X723 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 01,02,03,04,05,06,07,08,09,10,11,12,SE Total Enrollment (2017-18) 465 SIG Recipient (Y/N) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient N/A N/A 7 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Drama # Music # Dance # CTE N/A N/A # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 94.0% % Attendance Rate 93.1% % Reduced Lunch 9.2% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 2.6% 55.7% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 5.8% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 2% 10% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A N/A N/A 0.0% 1.3% 98.3% 34.4% 1.3% 2.8% 6 6% 8.2 N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 12  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. As an organization, P723X believes that students learn best when their learning has been assessed and based on those assessments, instructional modifications are made to either further their learning or intervene so that they are able to participate in the curriculum. Our school has developed a Curriculum Team who work to ensure that teachers are prepared to assess and teach reading to students on various levels. This team consists of a representative from each of our elementary and middle school sites. The team provides both guidance and professional development in regards to ELA. In addition to PD's, the Curriculum Team will be available to assist teachers develop instructional strategies, as well as implement and adapt chosen curricula based on individual student’s needs. Teachers will be working collaboratively in Professional Learning Communities to further their learning on the curriculum and programs being used, as well as the assessments and interventions in regards to ELA that we will be using school wide. At their monthly meetings, the Curriculum Team analyzes data collected from the various sites and plan for necessary inter-visitations, as well as Professional Developments that can be facilitated at other sites by the team members or other teacher leaders. For example, if a teacher at our 189 site is seeing significant growth in Language for Learning, while a class at 338 is remaining stagnant, the teacher from 338 will visit the teacher from 189 to observe her best practices in Language for Learning. These are documented with Inter-visitation Logs. This team is also responsible for making necessary adjustments to the current programs and curriculums being used. For example, these teachers facilitated the use of Reading A-Z texts to supplement the Expeditionary Learning curriculum to introduce readings at the students' level based on Running Records assessments. Our students participating in standardized assessment are assessed using the QRI, EdPerformance, and bi-monthly running records (K-5) that are recorded in a school-wide data collection system on GoogleDrive. They are also formatively assessed using the assessments and activities that are included in the curricula and programs being utilized in the classroom, including ReThink (K-2), Wilson Fundations (K-2), and Expeditionary Learning (3-8.) Our students participating in alternate assessment (6:1:1, 8:1:1, 12:1:4) as assessed using SANDI, WebABLLs, and running records where appropriate. These students are also assessed using the programs that are run throughout the day in the classroom such as ReThink (12:1:4), SMiLe: a multi-sensory program that teaches speech, reading, and writing in an integrated way to individuals with the most severe language-learning and literacy problems, and Language for Learning: a program in which children acquire the words, concepts, and statements important for oral instruction and written language. The programs we use are based on the Common Core Learning standards and CDOS, incorporate the Instructional Shifts, and provide our students access at their Individualized level. During the 2017-2018 school year, the Curriculum Team monitored the online school-wide data collection system that was created during the 2016-2017 school year. Teachers follow an assessment calendar and provide data to their 2018-19 CEP 13  Curriculum Team representative on a uniform Student Profile Sheet to be entered into the School GoogleDrive. The Curriculum Team representatives input data monthly and/or bi-yearly from the following programs and assessments: SMiLE, Language for Learning, Running Records, QRI, Expeditionary Learning and Fundations. After reviewing the data collected in this online system, out of 205 students tested using running records, 32% of those students were reading at least 4 levels above baseline. 70% of students at the Main Site increased their reading scores by one or more grade levels between baseline and end of year assessments using the QRI. The Curriculum Team will continue this work during the 2018-2019 school year in order to continue to improve student outcomes in ELA. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 723X will improve student outcomes in ELA, through the use of targeted instructional strategies to indicate an increase of 5% above baseline as measured by formative and summative assessments (SANDI, NYSAA, Scantron, QRI, Reading A-Z Running Records, Smile Data, NYS ELA test scores). 2018-19 CEP 14  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers will conduct baseline assessments such as SANDI, ABLLS, Running Records, Scantron, QRI and Fundations checklists. Teachers, Students P723X will ensure ALL students are participating in a targeted and individualized researched-based ELA program such as SMiLE, Language for Learning, Expeditionary Learning, and Wilson FUNdations based on their baseline assessments. Teachers, Students, Related Service Providers Teachers, Curriculum Team Members, Mentors Teachers, Curriculum Team Members The P723X Curriculum team will deliver PD's on the above ELA programs and work to adapt and modify programs to target individualized student learning needs and emphasize higher-order thinking skills for all learners. Teachers will input data monthly to the P723X Curriculum Team who will analyze data to determine where support is needed. The Curriculum Team will work to identify the most significant growth and share best practice and strategies used to achieve it. This includes teacher led PD, staff training and inter-visitations. Mentors will observe and collaborate with teachers during administrative periods, specifically working on ELA program implementation and modification for all students learning needs. September-October 2018 By November 2018 Teachers, Assistant Principals Teachers, Paraprofessionals, Related Service Providers, Assistant Principals Monthly November 2018 - June 2019 Assistant Principals, Principal, Curriculum Team, ELA Program PLCs Monthly November 2018 – June 2019 Assistant Principals, Principal, Curriculum Team, Inquiry Team Principal, Assistant Principals, Curriculum Team, Mentors September 2018 - August 2019 Administrative Team, Curriculum Team , Teachers, Mentors Administrators will provide oversight using observation cycles, teacher improvement plans, learning walks, and monthly check-ins. Administration, Teachers September 2018-August 2019 Administrative Team 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. 2018-19 CEP 15  Families will be engaged and educated about their child's participation in rigorous instruction through daily written communication, point sheets, progress reports, report cards, parent training and newsletters. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. P723X has built-in time and resources for mentoring, inter-visitations, professional development, teacher team meetings, SIT meetings and Curriculum Team meetings. In addition, the school held a School Based Option and voted in favor of re-purposing the school day, allowing for 80 minutes of Professional Development on Monday afternoons and a 75-minute block of time of Tuesday afternoons for parent activities and other professional work. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. September – October 2018: Professional Development in targeted and individualized ELA Programs and baseline assessments. November 2018 – June 2019: Monthly administrative check-ins with Curriculum Team to look at data of student outcomes in ELA Programs and advise next steps for support including inter visitations, mentoring and staff development. By February 2019 there will be an increase of 2% in formative assessment scores (Running Records, SMiLE, Language for Learning) in ELA as measured by Teacher data submitted to the Curriculum Team GoogleDrive. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) The instruments of measure that will be used to monitor progress are formative and summative assessments (SANDI, NYSAA, Scantron, QRI, Reading A-Z Running Records, Smile Data, NYS ELA test scores). Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 16  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Our school uses a Positive Behavior Intervention Support (PBIS) program to promote a safe environment in most of our sites where it is found to be beneficial. The program provides students with clear expectations for safe behavior. Students earn points throughout the day based on various categories that are accounted for on a points sheet which they take home. If a student has a difficult day, this will reflect on their points sheet and be followed up with a phone call home or through a ClassDojo message which is utilized in some classrooms. Based on their PBIS points, students make a "Level" which contributes to the activities that they will participate in on Friday afternoon. This motivates students and is referred to throughout the week. Staff members are provided with PBIS professional development so that strategies and language are consistent. Celebrations of student achievement are held on a monthly basis. In addition, we use components of Emotional Literacy in our classrooms. Guidance staff provide training in social skills and character education during group counseling sessions. We have staff attend on-going Therapeutic Crisis Intervention and Supports (TCIS) trainings. Each year we engage in a "Spirit Week" during Autism Awareness month in which we participate in special events to celebrate our school through student developed themes that enhance school spirit and build a culture of trust and collaboration. P723X creates communication opportunities for all students using Preferred Mode of Communication (PMC). The 2017-2018 School Quality Guide also showcases some of P723X's strengths in regards to Supportive Environment. If you are a teacher of grades pre-K-5, My students are safe.... Strongly Agree or Agree in the hallways, bathrooms, locker rooms, and cafeteria of this school. 100% in their class(es). 100% Students, How much do you agree with the following statements? that they feel safe in their classes at their school. that their teachers support them when they are upset. of high school students say that adults at their school encourage them to continue their education after high school. Strongly Agree or Agree 88% 84% 96% 2018-19 CEP 17  According to the Periodic Attendance Reports, P723X Student Attendance is as follows: September 2017 83.74% October 2017 87.16% November 2017 84.49% December 2017 84.96% January 2018 83.29% February 2018 83.44% March 2018 April 2018 May 2018 June 2018 81.12% 84.55% 85.30% 80.15% Our 10 month overall attendance rate is 83.82%. The 2017-2018 NYC School Survey states that: 74% of students responded that, in most or all of their classes at their school, most students feel it is important to come to school every day. After reviewing 2017-2018 attendance data and the Learning Environment Survey, we have found the need to improve our school wide attendance rates. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 723X will develop a series of activities and recognition events in alignment with PBIS in order to increase student engagement. This will result in school wide attendance of above 85% for at least 150 days as evidenced by Periodic Attendance Reports. 2018-19 CEP 18  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). In order to continue establishing a culture where students feel safe and supported, 723X will send staff to TCIS training in order to provide them with the tools to safely de-escalate situations. Teachers, Students Staff will communicate to families the importance of attendance in supporting and challenging students in school. Families September 2018 through June 2019 September 2018 through June 2019 P723X will develop and implement strategies to encourage attendance. Teachers will follow up with targeted interventions for students with low or inconsistent attendance. Administrators, Teachers, Unit Coordinators, and the Attendance Teacher will establish personal contact with families when an issue with attendance first arises. Teachers and PBIS Coordinators at each site will analyze attendance data in correlation with PBIS point sheets. According to the data, teachers and PBIS Coordinators will plan activities and recognition events to acknowledge student attendance. Administrators, Teachers and Unit Coordinators will emphasize the importance of attendance at all school gatherings and functions. Families, Students Sept. 2018 through June 2019 Families, Students Ongoing Sept 2018- June 2019 Teachers,Students Ongoing September 2018- June 2019 Families, Students Ongoing September 2018- June 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Administration, Unit Coordinators Administration, Teachers, Parent Coordinator Unit Coordinators, Assistant Principals, Teachers Unit Coordinators, Administrators, Teachers Administration, Teachers, Counselors Unit Coordinators, Administrators, Teachers How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Families will be engaged and supported in their understanding of a Supportive Environment by daily communication books, point sheets, progress reports, report cards and newsletters. Attendance data and the importance of attending school will be reviewed at IEP meetings. 2018-19 CEP 19  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. P723X has built-in time and resources for common planning, coaching, mentoring, inter-visitations, professional development, teacher team meetings, SIT meetings and Curriculum Team meetings. In addition, the school held a School Based Option and voted in favor of re-purposing the school day, allowing for 80 minutes of Professional Development on Monday afternoons and a 75-minute block of time of Tuesday afternoons for parent activities and other professional work. This time on Tuesday afternoons can be used to analyze attendance data, as well as reach out to parents to ensure attendance is a priority. Each site has a PBIS point person or team, that can use the extended time on Tuesday to plan for activities in alignment with the PBIS system. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. P723X will use weekly and monthly attendance data to monitor progress and develop interventions where needed. Staff will plan activities and recognition events to acknowledge student attendance, in alignment with PBIS. By February 2019, we hope to see school wide attendance of above 85% for at least 130 days as evidenced by Periodic Attendance Reports. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The instrument of measure that will be used to measure progress will be the Periodic Attendance Reports. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 20  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Curriculum Team: During the 2016-2017 school year, P723X began the implementation of a school-wide Curriculum Team. This team consists of a representative from each of our elementary and middle school sites. The members of this team collect data monthly from their sites and input the data into our school-wide GoogleDrive. At monthly meetings, the team analyzes data and plans for necessary inter-visitations, as well as professional developments that can be facilitated at other sites by the team members or other teacher leaders. Inter-visitations can be across sites and are based on assessments. For example, if a teacher at our 338 site is seeing significant growth in Language for Learning, while a class at our 189 site is remaining stagnant, the teacher from 189 will visit the teacher from 338 in order to observe her best practices in Language for Learning. These visits are documented with Inter-visitation Logs. This team is also responsible for making necessary adjustments to the current programs and curriculums being used. For example, these teachers facilitated the use of Reading A-Z texts to supplement the Expeditionary Learning curriculum to introduce readings at the students' level based on Running Records assessments. Professional Development: In September, teachers are encouraged to register for District 75 professional developments that are provided throughout the year. Administrators also instruct specific teachers to register for targeted professional developments in this catalog based on need or Advance data. In September, teachers are provided with a folder of resources including: Student Data Profile Sheet, Assessment Calendar, IEP Checklist, IEP Development document, Transition checklist, and a Professional Development calendar through October. These professional developments through October were informed from last years' assessment and Advance data, as well as our Instructional Focus. Moving forward, each site develops an individualized professional development calendar based on the Instructional Focus and the site's particular needs and interests. These calendars are submitted to their supervisor for review and approval. Teachers volunteer to lead these targeted Professional Development sessions based on an area of expertise or an area that they are interested in researching. Teachers also turn-key information they have learned from District 75 professional developments that they have attended. According to the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide, P723X received a score of 3.63 in the area of Collaborative Teachers. In the area of Cultural Awareness and Inclusive Classroom Instruction, we received a 92% Positive response. Some of the Positive Responses include: Teachers Respond: Agree or Strongly Agree: They are able to use their students' prior knowledge to make their lessons relevant to their everyday life. They are able to modify instructional activities and materials to meet the developmental needs and learning interests of all of their students. 100% 100% They are able to adapt instruction to ensure it represents all cultures/backgrounds positively. 100% 2018-19 CEP 21 They design appropriate instruction that is matched to students' need (for example, English language learners (ELLs) proficiency and students with disabilities). 100% After participating in walk-throughs, reviewing inter-visitation logs, and reviewing School Quality Guide survey data in the area of Peer Collaboration, our school has found a need to implement monthly Teacher Team meetings at each site to ensure that all areas of instruction are aligned throughout our organization in order to appropriately address all student needs. Data reviewed includes the following: Teachers Respond: They design instructional programs (for example, lessons and units) together. They talk with one another about instruction. At their school the principal, teachers and staff collaborate to make the school run effectively. Agree or Strongly Agree: 75% 89% 87% Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. During the 2018-2019 school year, P723X will improve the quality of instruction by incorporating monthly Teacher Team meetings at each site to encourage collaboration so that all areas of instruction are aligned throughout our organization in order to appropriately address all student needs. This will be measured by an increase in student achievement of 40% of students reading at least 4 reading levels above baseline in Running Records as indicated by data collected in the school-wide online system. 2018-19 CEP 22  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). In the Spring of 2018, P723X held a School Based Option and voted in favor of re-purposing the school day, allowing for 80 minutes of Professional Development on Monday afternoons and a 70-minute block of time of Tuesday afternoons for parent engagement activities and other professional work. 723X will designate specific Tuesdays each month that will be designated for Teacher Team meetings. Administration and lead teachers will provide resources and development to each site on what Teacher Team meetings should look like, including: scholarly articles, sample norms and roles, and constructive feedback templates. Teachers, Students Spring 2018 Administration Teachers, Related Service Providers, Paraprofessionals Teachers, Administrators September 2018 Administration, Curriculum Team September - October 2018 Administration, lead teachers, Unit Coordinators Teachers will select a problem of practice at their site based on student data provided to the Curriculum Team. Teachers, Students Administration, Teachers Ongoing September 2018 through June 2019 Staff will organize and participate in meetings designed around a problem of practice at their site. At this meeting, staff (teachers, paraprofessionals, related service providers) will bring supporting student work samples in order to have collaborative conversations around instructional programs to address the needs of all students and build capacity for teacher best practices. During these meetings, teachers will give collaborative feedback to each other resulting in improvement in student achievement and teacher practice. Administrators will participate in Teacher Team meetings in order to provide guidance and give feedback. Teachers, Paraprofessionals, Related Service Providers, Students Ongoing September 2018 through June 2019 Administration, Unit Coordinators, Lead teachers Administration Teachers, Paraprofessionals, Related Service Providers, Administration, Students Ongoing September 2018- June 2019 2018-19 CEP 23  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Teachers, Related Service Providers, and Administrators will ensure parents are involved in the educational process and made aware of best practices discussed at the teacher team meetings during Parent Association meetings, SLT meetings, and Parent Teacher conferences in order to facilitate these practices at home to increase student achievement. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. P723X has built-in time and resources for common planning, coaching, mentoring, inter-visitations, professional development, teacher team meetings, SIT meetings and Curriculum Team meetings. In addition, the school held a School Based Option and voted in favor of re-purposing the school day, allowing for 80 minutes of Professional Development on Monday afternoons and a 75-minute block of time of Tuesday afternoons for parent activities and other professional work, such as the planning and implementation of Teacher Team meetings. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, there will be an increase in student achievement of 40% of students reading at least 2 reading levels above baseline in Running Records as indicated by data collected in the school-wide online system. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The instrument of measure that will be used to measure progress will be Running Records data from the school-wide data collection system. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 24  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths of P723X in regards to Effective School Leadership include the following: Principal and Assistant Principals attend ongoing professional development sessions throughout the school year. Administrators hold weekly cabinet meetings to discuss new initiatives, share information from professional developments, analyze student data, and discuss any concerns. Administrators assist the school community by providing instructional support, building positive relationships with staff, and providing staff with the opportunity to grow and develop professionally. School leaders visit classrooms regularly to observe instruction, view student data and provide actionable feedback to teachers. Expectations are shared weekly with staff through a "Weekly" message distributed by the Principal in which she highlights: Great Things I Noticed, Nuts and Bolts Notes (Reminders) and Events this week. In regards to Effective School Leadership, the following results were found from stakeholders who completed the 2017-2018 NYC School Survey: Parents/Guardians at this school.... Agree or Strongly Agree The principal encourages feedback from the community and them through regular meetings. 89% The principal/school leader at their school is strongly committed to shared decision making. 91% The principal/school leader at their school works to create a sense of community in the school. The principal/school leader promotes family and community involvement in the school. 89% 89% Teachers at this school say that... Agree or Strongly Agree the principal makes clear to the staff his or her expectations for meeting instructional goals. 92% the principal sets high standards for student learning. The principal/school leader communicates a clear vision for their school. the principal encourages feedback through regular meetings with parent and teacher leaders. 96% 92% 89% 2018-19 CEP 25  Below is the teacher Advance data summary from 2017-2018: Domain 1: Planning and Preparation, 1e: Designing Coherent Instruction (observation): Ineffective 0% Developing 4.93% Effective 59.15% Highly Effective 35.92% Domain 3: Instruction, 3d: Using Assessment in Instruction: Ineffective 0% Developing 6.75% Effective 58.65% Highly Effective 34.60% After conducting walk-throughs, informal and formal observations, analyzing Advance data, and looking through the school-wide data collection system, we decided that our school wide Instructional Focus this year would be Using Assessment to Design Coherent Instruction. As effective school leaders, we want to increase our teacher's capacity to use assessment when designing coherent instruction. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. During the 2018-2019 school year, administrators at P723X will demonstrate effective school leadership by building teacher's capacity to use assessment when designing instruction. This will result in a 30% increase in teachers improving one performance level reflected in Advance components 1e: Designing Coherent Instruction and 3d: Using Assessment in Instruction. 2018-19 CEP 26  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Administration will communicate to staff of P723X our schools vision and how it aligns to our instructional focus for the 2018-2019 school year. Teachers, Paraprofessionals, Related Service Providers September 2018 Administration Administration will distribute an assessment calendar to all staff to ensure that learning materials and assessments are well coordinated across the school. The Curriculum team will work in grade banned and program based Professional Learning Communities in order to ensure consistency school wide. Teachers, Paraprofessionals, Related Service Providers Teachers, Paraprofessionals, Related Service Providers September- October 2018 September 2018 - June 2019 The Curriculum team will collect and analyze data in order to provide professional development and organize inter-visitations, targeting teachers who need assistance with designing instruction based on specific assessments. Teachers, Students Ongoing September 2017 through June 2018 Administration Administration, the Curriculum Team Administration, Curriculum Team Administration will support staff for inter-visitations and teacher led professional development to encourage the use of assessment in designing coherent instruction. Teachers, Paraprofessionals, Related Service Providers Ongoing September 2018- June 2019 Administration Administration will review lesson plans and assessment data during informal and formal observations to ensure teachers are using assessment when designing instruction. Teachers, Students Teachers will develop a goal for the 2018-2019 school year and enter the goal into TeachBoost. Administrators will review each teacher's goal with them during their Initial Planning Conference. Teachers, Students Ongoing September 2018 - June 2019 September - October 2018 Administration Administration 2018-19 CEP 27 Administration will reference, as well as give feedback related to, each teacher's personal goal during informal and formal observations. Teachers Administration will give targeted, actionable feedback on how to improve in the areas of 1e: Designing Coherent Instruction and 3d: Using Assessment in Instruction after formal and informal observations. Teachers Administration Administration Ongoing October 2018 - June 2019 Ongoing October 2018 - June 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Families will be engaged and educated about the use of assessment in instruction through daily written communication, point sheets, progress reports, report cards, parent training and newsletters. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. P723X has built-in time and resources for common planning, coaching, mentoring, inter-visitations, professional development, teacher team meetings, SIT meetings and Curriculum Team meetings. In addition, the school held a School Based Option and voted in favor of re-purposing the school day, allowing for 80 minutes of Professional Development on Monday afternoons and a 75-minute block of time of Tuesday afternoons for parent activities and other professional work. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, there will be a 15% increase in teachers improving one performance level reflected in Advance components 1e: Designing Coherent Instruction and 3d: Using Assessment in Instruction. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The progress will be monitored using Advance data to show an improvement in teacher's performance in components 1a: Designing Coherent Instruction and 3d: Using Assessment in Instruction. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 28  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. P723X staff members provide outreach to parents through phone calls, daily correspondence through point sheets and communication books and newsletters. We have a school wide Parent Outreach Log that is used across our sites. Staff members assist parents with their needs and provide resources outside of school. Although attendance is low, parents are invited for monthly celebrations, School Leadership Team (SLT) meetings, IEP (Individualized Educational Plans) meetings, Parent Trainings, Cookshop Trainings/Meetings and Parent/Teacher conferences. Parents are also engaged through the P723X website that offers information on our various sites and programs throughout the year. In the Spring of 2018, P723X held a School Based Option and voted in favor of re-purposing the school day, allowing for 80 minutes of Professional Development on Monday afternoons and a 75-minute block of time of Tuesday afternoons for parent engagement activities and other professional work. Some positive responses from the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide include: Families state that... school staff regularly communicate with them about how families can help their child learn. 94% they are greeted warmly when they call or visit their school. 94% their school communicates with them in a language and in a way that they can understand. 94% that they have communicated with their child's teacher about their child's performance. 97% Based on the review of attendance at Parent Workshops, participation on the School Leadership Team (SLT) and attendance at Parent/Teacher conferences we have found that there is a need for more parent participation and involvement. This is also evidenced by responses received to the 2017-2018 NYC School Quality Guide, in which only 17% of parents participated. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 2018-19 CEP 29  By June 2019, parent participation will improve by 5% as measured by an increase in attendance at parent meetings, SLT meetings, parent-teacher conferences, and parent activities in order to enrich the life of our school. This will be evidenced by sign in sheets from previously listed events, as well as an increase in NYC School Survey participation. 2018-19 CEP 30  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? The SLT, along with the Parent Coordinator, will increase parent participation in workshops, meetings and involvement in the school through a parent survey. Parents will be asked for topics of interest for workshops, as well as the best days and times for parents to attend events/meetings. Parents September – October 2018 Parent Coordinator, SLT Members The SLT, along with the Administrative Cabinet, will review the surveys. Parents School Leaders, the Parent Coordinator, and the SLT will collaboratively create a year-long, dynamic parent engagement calendar for the 2018-2019 school year that will be informed by surveys, as well as teacher feedback, and ensures that all stakeholders contribute. Parents The Parent Coordinator will explore ways to use text messages and email as an additional source of parent outreach. Parents Administration will review attendance sheets from parent events, IEP meetings, conferences, and SLT meetings in order to monitor progress of this goal. Parents, Administration Parent Coordinator will make adjustments to the calendar as needed to increase parent involvement in SLT meetings, IEP meetings, workshops and Parent/Teacher Conferences. Parents October - November 2018 Sept. 2018-June 2019 October - November 2018 October 2018 - June 2019 January 2019 - June 2019 Administration, SLT Administration, Parent Coordinator, SLT Administration, SLT Administration Administration, Parent Coordinator 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Astor Children and Family Services OMH Henry Ittleson Center Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 2018-19 CEP 31  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The school held a School Based Option and voted in favor of re-purposing the school day, allowing for 80 minutes of Professional Development on Monday afternoons and a 75-minute block of time of Tuesday afternoons for parent outreach and other professional activities. During this time, school staff can contact parents to update them on student progress by phone or in person. Related service providers plan targeted parent training based on parent needs at the various sites. The different sites plan for different shows and presentations to engage parents based on student interest and functional level. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Administration and the Parent Coordinator will review parent involvement on a monthly basis through January 2019 to check for increased participation at school events. Modifications will be made based on the monthly reviews, as well as survey feedback. By February 2019, there will be a 2% increase in rates of parent participation at school events, SLT meetings, evidenced by parent workshop, parent meeting, and parent-teacher conference attendance rates. If the data does not indicate the trend towards meeting the goal, the action plan will be revised. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The goal will be measured by parent sign in sheets for meetings and school activities. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 32  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Assessment results –summative and formative assessments, IEPs, portfolio review Assessment results – summative and formative assessments, IEPs, portfolio review Assessments – Summative and formative assessments Assessments – formative assessments Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Wilson, Fundations, Achieve 3000, Great Leaps, Smile, Language for Learning, Reading A-Z Go Math Small group, 1-1 instruction During the school day Small group, 1-1 instruction During the school day Brain Pop,FOSS kits Small group, 1-1 instruction During the school day Achieve 3000, Attainment resources Small group, 1-1 instruction During the school day At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) OORSreports, PBISData, Attendance Data, Low inference data Emotional Literacy, Social Skill Training, Verbal Therapy, Character Education Small group, 1-1 instruction During the school day 2018-19 CEP 33  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) n/a 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. n/a Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). 26 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 34  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 CEP 35  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools X Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). 2018-19 CEP 36  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 0 0 0 0 0 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. 2018-19 CEP 37  Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 38  2018-19 CEP 39  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. 75X723, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. 75X723 will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 2018-19 CEP 40  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 2018-19 CEP 41  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) 75X723, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for 2018-19 CEP 42  improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; 2018-19 CEP 43  ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities 2018-19 CEP 44  ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; 2018-19 CEP 45  ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 46  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP 47  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information 1 1 0 Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: P723X services 472 students, 46 of which are English Language Learners (ELLs) and represent 9.75% of our total population. 23 ELLs participate in standardized assessment and 23 in the New York State Alternate Assessment (NYSAA). The majority of our ELLs speak Spanish, and those that are bilingually mandated have alternate placement paraprofessionals who speak their home language. The following is an ELL population breakdown by grade: 1 in first grade, 4 in second grade, 3 in fourth grade, 6 in fifth grade, 7 in sixth grade, 9 in seventh grade, 6 in eighth grade, 2 in ninth grade, 2 in tenth grade, 2 in eleventh grade, and 4 in twelfth trade. Our NYS certified ENL teacher provides English as a New Language (ENL) using both the integrated and stand-alone models. Students at 723X have the following disability classifications: autism, intellectual disability, emotional disturbance, and multiple disabilities. ELL students receive ENL as mandated by the NYS CR Part 154. The following are infused into our instruction: Balanced Literacy, the Uniform Curriculum, development of phonemic awareness and comprehension skills, literature-based and standards-based materials and activities, scaffolding techniques. ENL instruction is also aligned with the New Language Arts progressions and NYS Common Core Learning Standards. 723X’s Title III After school program will serve 6 ELLs in grades 6, 7, and 8th, with 6:1:1 and 8:1:1 ratios. The program will run for 13 sessions on Wednesdays and Thursdays, 3 hours per session (2:25pm to 5:25pm), from January to March 2019. It will be conducted in English by a NYS certified ENL teacher, supported by three paraprofessionals (a Spanish bilingual and two 1:1). A health paraprofessional, and a crisis paraprofessionals are mandated by the IEPs of two participating students. An administrator will supervise the program and receive compensation for 1 hour and 50 minutes each session. His/her regular working hours end at 3:30pm. The students participating in the program scored at the Entering Level in the NYSESLAT administered in the spring 2018. The theme of the after school program will be "Exploring our cultures". Students will engage in activities that will foster development of communication skills and English language acquisition, such as: • Create a book called "All About Our Cultures" • Learn and perform songs and dances from a specific student cultures • Identify foods from different countries • Write family favorite recipes and organize them into a book • Explore a culture using books, music & Internet resources • Compare and contrast two different cultures Our after school program will employ ENL methodologies and scaffolding techniques, supported by research, such as the Natural Approach (Krashen, S., 1985), TPR (Asher, J., 2003), the Language Experience Approach (Wales, M.L., 1994), and scaffolds (Walqui, 2005). As supported by research (Diane Nelson Bryen, D.; Potts, B.D.; & Carey, A.C., 2007; Murphy, J., 1998; Cameron, L. & Murphy, J., 2002 ), IEP driven augmentative and alternative communication (AAC) systems (e.g., single-loop voice output devices, symbols, gestures, etc.) 2018-19 CEP 48  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information will be used to assist students who have severe communication disabilities. Technology and music will be infused into instruction to promote engagement, facilitate student learning, and ensure access to the content presented. The instructional goal of our Title III After School Program is to provide additional support and opportunities for ELL students to increase their listening, speaking, reading, and writing skills in English. The ENL teacher will deliver instruction that is differentiated and can provide our students with an opportunity to generalize skills taught and apply them across all content areas as well a variety of daily life situations. A smart board and computers will be used during the lessons to facilitate/support instruction by making lessons to more interesting for the students. According to research, technology integrated classrooms have a positive effect on the instructional process for ELLs with special needs (Bialo & SivinKachala 1996; Dwyer, 1994). As a result, students become independent learners and self-starters. They also gain the ability to share their new skills with others. Technology can also help them develop expressive and receptive language skills. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: The Professional Development component of our Title III program will take place on six Fridays, for one hour each (2:25pm to 3:25pm). All PD sessions will be conducted by the ENL teacher for the administrator and paraprofessionals. The administrator will not receive compensation for the PD sessions because his/her regular work hours end at 3:30pm. The sessions will consist of a study group, discussions and presentations focusing on analyzing student work and exploring different cultures. The following Topics will be covered: "Language & Cultural Acquisition of ELLs with disabilities.” "The Role of Cultural Background Knowledge and how it affects their learning" The study group format of our planned professional development is in alignment with research findings that equate successful professional development and application of what’s gained during PD to the classroom to teachers having a leadership role in their own training (Galbraith, P. & Anstrom, K., 1995). Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Parents will be invited to participate in all the instructional sessions of our Title III after school program with their children. Participation in the program will allow them to develop academic 2018-19 CEP 49  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities and computer skills that will in turn facilitate their support of school content provided to their children. Additionally, they will make strides towards English language acquisition. Parents will also have the opportunity to meet with the ENL teacher, three paraprofessionals and administrator to obtain answers to any instruction related questions. Parental involvement (Kalyanpur, M. & Harry, B., 1999; Dunst, C, 2007) and integration of technology (ISTE, 2000; (Fisher, Dwyer, and Yocam, 1996; Cummins and Sayers, 1997) and music into instruction are both supported by research and enhance both parent and student learning, and can be used to narrow the “digital divide” between people of low socio-economic status (SES) and the more affluent (International Reading Association, 1991). Informational letters about the Title III program will be sent home with students and also via US mail. All letters will be in the parents’ home/preferred language. Follow up calls will be made by the parent coordinator. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem $ 9,276.23 (75% of total budget) Purchased services  High quality staff 0 Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Direct Instruction (DI) 1 Administrator x 13 sessions x 1.80hrs. /session x $63.45/hr. = $1,484.73 1 teacher x 13 sessions x 3 hrs. /sessions x $60.65= $2,365.35 3 paraprofessionals x13 sessions x 3hrs./sessions day x $34.73 = $4,063.41 1 Secretary x 10hrs x $37.37 = $373.70 DI Subtotal: $8,287.19 Professional Development (PD) 1 teacher x 6 sessions x 1 hour/ session x $60.65 = $363.90 3 paraprofessionals x 6 sessions x 1hour/session x $34.73 = $625.14 PD Subtotal: $989.04 N/A and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental. $ 2,807.27 HAMILON PORTABLE CD PLAYER 2 @ $49.46= $98.92 2018-19 CEP 50   Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Califone headphones (set of 12) = $154.49 Staples 18" x 24" Flat Poly Bags = $19.23 Scotch Heavy Duty Shipping Packing Tape with Dispenser = $17.70 DYMO Label Manager Wireless Plug and Play Label Maker x 2 @ $88.53 = $177.06 Swingline High Capacity Electric Stapler = $183.04 Staples Poly Composition Notebook, Assorted Colors, Wide Ruled = $34.60 Scotch Easy-Grip Packaging Refillable Tape Dispenser and Tape = $10.25 Scotch Shipping Packaging Tape, Pack of 18 Rolls = $117.32 Swingline Ultimate Staple Remover with Built-In Magnet = $4.70 Iris Medium Supply Bin Clear = $16.75 ECR4KIDS Large Art Caddy, Assorted Colors, 3@$27.54 = $82.62 Flipside Privacy Shield, 18 x 48 in, Assorted Colors, $42.56 Post-it Self-Stick Lined Easel Pad ,4@$49.00= $98.00 Time Timer Audible Countdown Timer, AA Battery, 8 in, Black- 2 @ $31.60 = $63.20 iPad Wi-Fi 32GB 6th Gen - Space Gray - 5 @ $290.00 = $1,450.00 Griffin Survivor Rugged Case-protective cover for iPad - 5 @ $34.65EACH = $173.25 Miscellaneous classroom supplies (pencils, erasers, glues, staples and etc) = $63.58 Total: $2,807.27 2018-19 CEP 51 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. N/A 13 round trip Metrocards for parents = $32.50 Refreshments for Parents = $250.00 $12,366.00 Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL N/A $32.50 $250.00 $12,366.00 2018-19 CEP 52  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 75 School Name 723X Borough Bronx School Number 723 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Shante Chunn Coach N/A ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Natalie Lim Teacher/Subject Area Jenna Hansen Teacher/Subject Area N/A Related-Service Provider Carol Garcia Superintendent Ketler Louissaint Assistant Principal Anna McGovern Coach N/A School Counselor Anna Marantidis Parent TBD Parent Coordinator Yssalina Morillo Field Support Center Staff Member N/A Other (Name and Title) N/A C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 496 2018-19 CEP 53 Total number of ELLs 49 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 9.88%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 4 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 6 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? We use ECLAS, NYS ELA, and NYSSA results as our assessment tool to assess the early literacy skills of our ELLs. We also use their portfolios to assess them as well. Based on the result of these tests, all students will be serviced accordingly. We are using formative assessments as a guide to improve academic achievements and language learning of the ELLs. We are monitoring student's knowledge and understanding during instruction to enhance our students' learning experiences. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? The school will concentrate on these areas by providing additional help in the form of teacher collaboration, extended minutes of instruction, and additional help provided by coaches and mentors. 2018-19 CEP 54  3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? We also use portfolios to evaluate authentic student work and provide a multi-dimensional perspective of growth over time. We evaluate the success of ELL program by NYSESLAT, ELL Periodic Assessment, NYSAA, teacher made assessments, SANDI & NYS ELA Test . For alternate assessment students, we use portfolios, notebooks and teacher observations in addition to their NYSSA results. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Instruction for ELLs will be differentiated to meet students’ diverse needs. It is tailored to meet ELLs Language needs and incorporated into research based intervention strategies. 723X will focus on improving the quality of ELL instruction and make sure all the ELL students will have ongoing opportunities to succeed. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] 723X will follow 4 steps to meet Response to Intervention; universal screening, strong core instruction, intensive instruction, and progress monitoring. Universal screening is done to establish a baseline performance. For ELL students, universal screening is Home Language Survey. Strong core instruction will include but not limited to making lessons meaningful, teaching complex thinking, and developing language and literacy curriculum that is easier for ELL students to understand. For more intensive instruction, differentiated instruction is crucial. It is also important to identify that need further intervention to improve their academic skills. The progress monitoring will help teachers to make an informed academic decision about ELL students. ELL students’ progress will be monitored throughout the year. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The data patterns across proficiency levels on the NYSITELL, NYS ELA, and NYSESLAT revealed that the students need to work on their reading and writing skills. In content areas, all the students are performing comparably well to their non-ELL peers. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? The result of the NYSESLAT will guide me to focus more on the areas most of the ELL population need to work on. The alternate placement paraprofessionals will assist all teachers in incorporating reading and writing strategies. They will also incorporate study skills and organizational strategies in student’s daily lessons. We look at student portfolios and evaluate their work to assess progress. We will use the 2017 NYSESLAT scores by modalities to drive our ENL instruction. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. We have heterogeneous integrated and stand-alone ENL program in our school. ENL instructional minutes are delivered through providing consistent number of minutes everyday of the week. Stand-alone ENL instruction is used 2018-19 CEP 55  to develop English language skills which is delivered by a certified ENL teacher. Integrated ENL is used to build English language skills through content area instruction which is delivered by a certified ENL teacher and a certified content area teacher. Both certified teachers include content area subject matter and English language development instruction using ENL strategies. All ELLs and former ELLs up to 2 years after exiting ELL status is receiving a minimum number of units of integrated ENL. b. TBE program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: c. DL program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Students receive the maximum number of allowable ENL minutes given the staffing and geographical constraints of our organization. Freestanding English as a new language (ENL) programs provide instruction in English emphasizing English language acquisition. Stand-alone ENL instruction is used to develop English language skills so that students can succeed in core content courses. It is delivered by a certified ENL teacher. Integrated ENL is used to build English language skills through content area instruction which is delivered by a certified ENL teacher and a certified content area teacher. Methods of integrated ENL instruction include content area subject matter and English language development using ENL strategies. All ELLs and former ELLs up to 2 years after exiting ELL status is receiving a minimum number of units of integrated ENL. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. As an instructional approach, I use lots of visual cues along with the vocabularies for the content areas. A free-standing English as a New Language Program consists of a program of instruction composed of two components: a language arts and a content area component. The language arts component is delivered through instruction in English Language Arts and English as a New Language. The content area component is delivered through instruction in English and ENL methodologies. Entering and Emerging students receive 360 minutes of ENL services. Transitioning and Expanding students also receive 180 minutes of ENL. Currently we have no SIFE at such time but when we do they will receive tutoring from a peer tutor to help to develop their initial literacy in native language, and a nurturing environment to facilitate language production. P723X follows the Common Core Language Arts Standards(CCLS) as a guide to instructional planning and assessment. Our ENL teacher plans on referencing the NYS Resource Guide for the teaching of Language Arts to long term Limited Proficient/English Language Learners along with the NYS learning Standards for English. Our ENL program will focus on explicit reading instruction with consistent feedback, guided reading, teaching learning strategies, and lots of other reading activities. Audio versions of children’s books are particularly helpful for language learners because they can listen to the spoken English, follow the printed words, and use the pictures to facilitate meaning. Children’s storybooks are now available in audio versions that offer an audio component with a good visual support. Our ENL instructions will be in collaboration with content area teachers. This instructional program will be explicitly aligned with CCLS and New Language Arts Progressions. To ensure that students meet the New York City and New York State standards and pass required state and local assessments, ENL instruction will follow the NYS ENL standards and incorporate ENL strategies such as: Total Physical Response (TPR), graphic organizer, and Cooperative Learning. Students no longer requiring Bilingual or ENL services according to the NYSESLAT will receive half a unit(90 minutes) of ENL for a minimum of two years. These commanding ENL students are supported through: AIS, Instructional Technology, and visual arts enrichment. We strive to provide opportunities that are multi-sensory and kinesthetic in nature. The school will 2018-19 CEP 56  concentrate on reading and writing areas by providing additional help in the form of teacher collaboration. The ENL teacher will have common planning sessions with the collaborating teachers by using real objects, photographs, graphic organizer, software, ENL materials, classroom libraries, Fundations, Wilson reading program, Head sprout, Read 180, Achieve 3000, Ramp up, and incorporating technology to enhance students' outcomes. We have 24 Students at the Entering level in our school but there are none for the SIFE population. If we had a SIFE student, we would use lots of modeling, graphic organizers and visual aids. I also would engage entering level students in using basic social and school vocabularies, phrases and sentence structures along with pictures. I would also encourage peer to peer interactions to increase speaking, listening, reading comprehension and writing skills. As students progress, continue to contextualize instruction of more complex language forms and uses: subject specific academic vocabulary, grammatical forms, and sentence structures used in listening, speaking, reading and writing. I would also teach and model ways for students to describe their thinking processes verbally and in writing. Instruction is given exclusively in English using ENL methodology in order to foster proficiency and competency in the four modalities of listening, speaking, reading, and writing. Currently, there are 49 students being served in the ENL program. English Language Learners (ELLs) from kindergarten to grade twelve are grouped according to their level of English language proficiency and grade level. The school utilizes 45 minute blocks across eight teaching periods per day. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? 723X does not have a TBE Program. Students with a bilingual mandate are supported by Alternate Placement Paraprofessionals. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status The teacher will get to know the students as much as she can. ENL teacher will use research based instructional strategies to enhance their learning. The teacher will collaborate with classroom teacher to assist ELLs. ELL's receiving services between SIFE, Newcomer, and Developing ELLs will have more assistance from the teacher. The long term and former ELL students receive more complex curriculum followed by small group activities. The former ELL students will receive necessary support they need to be successful in school. The ENL teacher will make content even more comprehensible for all students by providing ELLs with alternative ways of accessing key content to help them to learn the same material as other students as they continue to develop their English language skills. We use strategies such as Cooperative Learning, which encourages interactive student participation and promotes social and academic language skills. At 723X we differentiate instruction for our ELL subgroups. One-on-one conferencing is a best practice used throughout the school to research each student and plan academically. Students are grouped by ability and each group is taught a different lesson daily, according to the needs of each group of students. Entering Level ENL students receive more support in the content areas since they tend to be behind academically in all subjects. Total Physical Response activities are used in order to accelerate language acquisition through the use of the kinesthetic sensory system. In addition, the Language Experience Approach is used allowing language to be acquired by relating it to the experiences and interests of students. The Cognitive Academic Language Learning Approach is used as a strategy to provide content-based ENL instruction for students at the entering, emerging, transitioning, expanding and commanding levels. Each of these strategies is used as a tool to promote linguistic and academic excellence leading to the increase of State assessment scores for English Language Learners. One of our goals for the invention programs for ELL population is to develop academic language skills. It is important to distinguish academic language skills from conversational language skills. Many ELLs who struggle academically have well-developed conversational English skills. To succeed academically, students need to develop the specialized academic language, which is distinct from conversational language. This is particularly true when we consider the large number of English learners who have good word reading skills but weak comprehension skills. Many of these learners especially in the upper elementary, middle, and high school years have 2018-19 CEP 57  insufficient English vocabulary levels. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? We use common core-aligned, content specific materials to support ELLs. We are planning to use lots of visual aids, sentence frames and pre-teach whenever possible. There are lots of graphic organizers to help them organize their ideas which will help ENL students to create visual guidelines. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? All the teachers work as a team, communicating as much as possible to meet the needs of our ENL students. We increased peer interaction as well as class participation. ELL students are exposed to lots of content area vocabulary words. We built on their background knowledge to increase comprehension. We will also increase more writing opportunities as well as parent involvement. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. All teachers are aware that they are teachers of ELLs by reviewing their students IEPs. Our ENL teacher will work together with content based teachers to accommodate ELL students. All the teachers will have a meeting to discuss the effectiveness of our ENL program. Identified ELL students are provided with support outside of the regular classroom setting after school. Intensive support for students performing significantly below grade level and needing appropriate differentiated instruction; additional targeted and specific interventions for the lowest achievers will be implemented. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? There are no plan for new programs or improvements considered for the upcoming school year yet. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? There are no plans to discontinue any programs at this time. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. We have Title III after school program that addresses the need of the ELL students. The Title III program will focus on ELL students after school with more extensive support throughout the year. The goal of instruction in the Title III After School Program at 723X is to provide additional support and opportunities for ELL students with moderate to severe cognitive and multiple disabilities to increase their listening, speaking, reading, and writing skills in English. The Title III after school program can better prepare ELL students by addressing their listening, speaking, reading, and writing skills in English. Student performance on the New York State English as a Second Language Achievement Test (NYSESLAT Spring 2017), the ELA New York State Alternate Assessment (NYSAA), and SANDI as well as teacher-made pre and post assessments will be used to determine the impact that the Title III Program. 2018-19 CEP 58  12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. We use lots of instructional materials from online. We particularly like to use the ELL Collection Program from Learning a-z.com. This program provides content based and thematic based program that is designed for ELL students. It correlates with Common Core Standards. It provides ELL assessments that evaluates a range of English language skills so we can track progress with grade appropriate learning materials. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? We only have ENL program currently. We have bilingual staff on site to assist ENL students in need. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. We can use various online resources to figure out which materials correspond to ELLs' ages and grade level. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? We share our resources by communicating with other staff. We maintain open communication system throughout the school year. We collaborate on best practices in teaching and learning for ELLs. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). 723X will post signs in multiple languages. The school will enlist a Spanish morning greeter to welcome all newly enrolled ELLs and their families. The classroom will have Spanish book to help them feel welcomed. 723x will schedule an enrollment night to give ELL students and their families to learn about the enrollment process and school policies with interpreters on hand. The school will also assign each family a school contact who speaks their language and guides them through the enrollment process. 723X holds Parent Orientations for incoming students. There is also a special Open House and School Tour prior to the first day of school to assist newly enrolled ELL’s. Parents and English language learners meet with the Parent Coordinator, teachers and staff. ELL’s learn about the layout of the building and how to find their classrooms, the cafeteria and rest rooms. Parents receive information about translation services to assist them during the school year. These activities help English Language Learners to adjust to their new school environment before the first day of school. For the newcomers, bilingual professional or bilingual parents will help them. There will be a buddy system within a classroom to help them understand their school work and also navigate in the school. The newcomer will have index cards with the most common words or phrases on them to help them and make them feel more comfortable. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Presently, 723X does not offer any language electives to English Language Learners. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Presently, 723X features ENL program only. 2018-19 CEP 59  Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? We only have 1 ENL Personnel at our school. She will attend Professional Development on ELL Compliance PD Series. During the school year on professional development days, the school will be incorporating workshops that will teach ENL strategies for ELL students. Teachers will also be sent to workshops that are offered through the Department of Education and through the District Office. We will also take advantage of the offerings from Learning Times that pertain to ENL issues. Teachers will work collaboratively with the ENL teacher. ENL strategies, Identification of ELLs, NYSESLAT, Title III program and ENL in Content area will be presented to P723X staff members during professional development during 2017– 2018 school year. All of our staff including but not limited to assistant principals, common branch teachers, subject area teachers, paraprofessionals, guidance counselors, special education teachers, psychologists, occupational therapists, physical therapist, speech therapists, secretaries and a parent coordinator will participate in professional developments throughout the year. Training will be on going during the school year during integrated and stand alone ENL instructional periods with the ENL teacher and classroom teachers. Our ENL teacher will attend all professional developments offered by the Department of Education during the school year. It is important that all staff members receive training in language acquisition, cultural awareness, and instructional strategies for ELL students. Professional development is offered to ENL teacher to support English Language Learners to engage in the common core learning standards. ENL teacher will sign up for Professional Development online. 723X will consider structuring professional development around strengthening educational staff in the following areas: student-centered instruction, content-based sheltered English instruction, balanced literacy instruction, and alternate assessments. Intervisitations will be arranged in order to enhance new teacher’s skills. It is important to develop academic English and build knowledge of content subjects. It is also important for other staff to know an effective instruction with attention to subject specific language use. Teachers should be trained to teach academic literacy and incorporate ENL methodologies. The ELLs need to understand the ways to assess their knowledge accurately. Professional Development activities need to address the needs of the alternate placement paraprofessionals. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. All pedagogical staff participates in professional development least one a month. The ENL teacher is also supported by workshops through the Department of Educations Office of English Language Learners. These workshops support the ENL teacher in all aspects of instruction from data analysis to designing curriculum. Classroom teachers of ELL’s receive professional development for English Language Learners through DOE Professional Development Courses, and staff meetings, Topics to be addressed regarding English Language Learners include, but are not limited to, the identification process of ELLs, legal mandates in regard to services provided to ELLs in special education, assessment procedures for ELL’s, the role of the teacher and other support staff, strategies and methodologies to differentiate instruction and support ELL learners in the regular classroom setting, cultural awareness, and assessment procedures for ELLs. 723X ensures that important documents are translated into the students’ home language and that translators are available, if needed. They also maintain an open-door policy if parents have questions or concerns. All teachers, other than those who hold ENL and bilingual licenses, are required to attend 10 hours of ELL training. The following professional developments are incorporated into the 7.5 hours of ELL training for all staff. These workshops will benefit our staff to have a better understanding of our ELL students in the school. These workshops will include but not limited to differentiate instruction, second language acquisition and ENL strategies. Interpreters are available in my school to communicate effectively with ELL parents. Using telephone conference calls to involve interpreters in meetings and attending web-based meetings, can offer the interpreter and the family more opportunities to pick up on subtle meaning and non-verbal feedback to improve communication in ways that cannot be accomplished by telephone alone. Translation is frequently used on special education forms and other important school 2018-19 CEP 60  documents for the parents. This can help parents to make informed decisions and contribute to their children's Individual Education Program. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? The Parent Coordinator at P723X will offer parents of ELLs ongoing information in their home language and training on different aspects of their child’s education such as, home activities to support learning, outside support in their community, and other topics identified as an area of parent’s interest from a survey. Our goal is to increase parent outreach and increase parent participation. Our school will periodically describe the program to ELL parents by providing parent orientation meetings or letters sent home. We will also have a meeting with parents of ELLs to discuss progress made towards language acquisition. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. ELL parents are part of the school community and participate in all meetings and events. At 723X, our parents are involved in the Parent Teacher Association (PTA). PTA meets once a month. The PTA helps parents become involved in their children’s education, support school life and activities, share ideas and enrich their school community. The Parent Coordinator holds several workshops each year to inform parents about topics like promotional policies, ELA testing, and strengthening literacy. The coordinator works closely with staff and students in a collaborative effort to establish concrete programs for students and families through local organizations and community Outreach. Parents are also encouraged to participate in cultural events sponsored by the school. Such events include Cultural Food Celebration and the Family Day in which families take part in the recognition and celebration of various cultures represented in our school building and around the world. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. 2018-19 CEP 61 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Shante Chunn, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 62  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: 723 School DBN: 75X723 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Shante Chunn Title Principal Anna McGovern Assistant Principal Yssalina Morillo Parent Coordinator Natalie Lim ENL/Bilingual Teacher N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Parent Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Anna Marantidis School Counselor Ketler Louissaint N/A Carol Garcia N/A N/A Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member N/A Other Bilingual Speech Provider Other N/A Other N/A Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 06/25/18 6/25/18 6/25/18 6/25/18 n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a 06/18/18 N/A N/A 6/18/18 N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 63  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 75X723 School Name: P723X Superintendent: Ketler Louissai The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this Yssalina Morillo LAC/Parent Coordinator conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. ATS reports, blue emergency cards, the Home Language Information Survey and informal interviews with parents are used to determine if they require assistance(use of native language) when communicating with staff at the school. 723X ensures that all parents are provided with appropriate and timely in a language they can understand. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Arabic 1 0.17 1 0.17 2018-19 CEP 64  Bengali Chinese English Spanish 4 1 503 87 0.67 0.17 84.4 14.6 4 1 501 89 0.67 0.17 84.06 14.93 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. NONE Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Parent Handbook Parent Newsletters School notices & letters IEP Notices Sept Monthly Monthly Yearly Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Yssalina Morillo Yssalina Morillo Luz Napolitano, Yssalina Morillo, Blackboard Connect Yssalina Morrillo, Blackboard Connect 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Monthly parent Workshops Monthly PTA Meetings IEP Meetings Monthly Yearly Parent Teacher Conferences Nov. 2017 and March 2018 interpretation service(s)? Yssalina Morillo, Language Access Coordinator Ms. Campos Language Access Coordinator Ms. Campos Yssalina Morillo, Language Access Coordinator Ms. Campos Bilingual Teachers, Paraprofessional, related service providers and Parent Coordinators. 2018-19 CEP 65  3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. We have a safety plan in place which contains procedures for ensuring that parents who needs language access services can reach the school in case of emergency regardless of language barrier. We will have a bilingual staff who will reach out to these families. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Our school will provide periodic training on the Language Access requirements contained in this regulation along with other resources available to support these requirements. We will provide translated documents in timely fashion in group or one-on-one meetings upon parents' request. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) We will be providing each parent whose primary language is a covered language and who require language assistance services with a copy of the Bill of Parent Rights, signage in different languages and Responsibilities which includes their rights regarding translation and interpretation services. We will also provides parents with the Department's website that provide info in each of the covered languages concerning the rights of parents to translation and interpretation program and how to access such services. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Parents will be provided with a survey. Assist parents in learning how to create conditions that support learning at home. Help parents develop more awareness of the need for literacy and learning in the home. Collaborate with support programs. Provide calendars of school activities and events. Include parents in the active recruitment of other parents for involvement and participation. 2018-19 CEP 66 
