 18K566 School Name: BROOKLYN GENERATION SCHOOL Principal: LOUIS GARCIA 2018-19 CEP-RISE 1  Rise School Comprehensive Educational Plan (R-CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: Executive Summary and Organizing Principles Section 3: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 4: Rise School Narrative Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) Section 7: Community School Partnerships Section 8: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 9: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 10: Title I Program Information Section 11: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP-RISE 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Brooklyn Generation School 18K566 331800011566 9, 10,11, 12 School Number (DBN): 6565 Flatlands Avenue, Brooklyn, NY 11236 718-968-4200 718-444-5419 Phone Number: Louis Garcia Fax: lgarcia32@schools.nyc.gov Email Address: School Contact Person: Community School CBO: Principal: Community School Director: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): Kelli Dunham Louis Garcia Cory Kretschmer Marilyn George Mia Waddy Yvonne George ShantaeGeorge ChantalleGeorge District Information Geographical District: 18 Michael Prayor Superintendent: 1830 Shore Blvd., Brooklyn, NY 11235 Superintendent’s Office Address: mprayor@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-368-8515 Phone Number: 718-368-8517 Fax: Brooklyn South FSC: Field Support Center (FSC) Executive Director: MauriciereDegovia 2018-19 CEP-RISE 3  Executive Director’s Office Address: 415 89 th Street, Brooklyn, NY 11209 mdegovi@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: (718)759-4932 Phone Number: (718)935-3909 Fax: 2018-19 CEP-RISE 4  Section 2: Executive Summary and Organizing Principles The Objective To guide, support and accelerate the early progress demonstrated by the schools graduating out of the Renewal program, as Rising Schools of Excellence (Rise), with a compelling theory of action, clear strategy for sustainment, targeted individualized supports, continued accountability, gradual release of responsibility, such that they independently accelerate their growth trajectory. Background Rise Schools have demonstrated: ● ● they have the will and conditions in place to accelerate student growth and meet school improvement benchmarks. they have the capacity to lead/implement a school improvement strategy. Rise Schools have seen some gains1 across multiple measures including graduation rates, college readiness, state test scores and attendance. As a result, these schools will fully transition out of the Renewal Schools program at the end of the 2017-2018 SY and continue under the guidance of the Office of Field Support, in partnership with the Office of School Support and Supervision. 1All Rise Schools met at least 67% of their benchmarks, are not on the State’s Priority list, and have demonstrated a sustainable school improvement structure that will allow them to build on their progress. Six Rise Keys for Continued Improvement 1. Strengthen the Instructional Core 2. Strengthen Instructional Leadership Capacity 3. 4. Apply a tiered approach to student intervention 5. Promote a positive, inclusive school environment for students, staff, parents and Improve Data Driven Practices community partners Increase monitoring and accountability 6. Theory of Action If the NYC Department of Education provides customized supports to Rise schools and principals designed around the “Six Rise School Keys for continued improvement” then, Rise principals and their teams will have the tools and resources to accelerate outcomes for ALL students and increase students’ access to an excellent and equitable education. Structure of the Rise School Comprehensive Educational Plan (R-CEP) The Rise School Comprehensive Educational Plan (R-CEP) will serve as the organizing and overarching document for each Rise school and will be directly aligned and developed around the elements of the Framework for Great Schools, New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, and Strong Schools, Strong Communities, including the following: ● Rise Benchmarks: please refer to the 2018-19 Rise benchmarks provided to your school. ● Establishing an overarching summative vision aligned with elements of the Framework for Great Schools and documenting key areas of celebration and Rise through analysis of assessments and by envisioning what the desired outcome for each school will be at the end of the School Rise process. ● Setting mid-year point benchmarks that create the path for improvement by focusing on desired outcomes and goals. In this way, the plan will be mapped to the overarching summative vision. In addition to the five discrete goals formed around the elements of the Framework for Great Schools, each school will create an action plan. ● Transformation into a community school in order to increase student and family access to physical and mental health services and other social-emotional supports made available in or near the school. ● Expanded learning opportunities for all students, including additional instruction provided during afterschool and/or summer programming provided in collaboration with community partners. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 5  ● Intensive professional development for all staff to ensure effective implementation of curriculum and instruction aligned to the Next Generation Learning Standards (NGLS) and to support staff in effectively responding to the differentiated academic and social-emotional needs of all students. ● Additional, focused strategies to increase parent and family engagement. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Information on the Framework for Great Schools and the DTSDE Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department has established programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students supports to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and the R-CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Rise School Comprehensive Educational Plan (R-CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint for continuous improvement that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to increase student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five (5) goals and action plans that align with the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 6  The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. Accountability Tools and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is informed by the New York State Education Department’s (NYSED) Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) Tenets, the American Institute of Research (AIR) Needs Assessment, the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYSED’s Six DTSDE Tenets To strengthen the existing system, the NYSED has developed a tool that captures the best practices from each of the current tools – they call it a Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness. This new tool encompasses multiple instruments such as interviews, classroom observations and surveys. The protocol will begin with a clear and cogent statement of the optimal conditions of an effective school and the instruments comprising the protocol will measure how close or far away a particular school is to the optimal conditions identified. Once reviewed, the school and district will create a strategic plan to address the areas in need of improvement. All Priority and Focus Schools and Focus 2018-19 CEP-RISE 7  Districts must use the new tool; and districts that are required to submit District Comprehensive Improvement Plans and Comprehensive Education Plans also will use the tool. The DTSDE protocol includes a rubric, which identifies clear and coherent expectations of the optimal conditions of an effective school and school district across the following six tenets:  Tenet 1: District Leadership and Capacity  Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions  Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support  Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions  Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health, and  Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 2017-18 Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Structures for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:  a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; 2018-19 CEP-RISE 8 a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC)  It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the R-CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the R-CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. Next Steps for R-CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists in every Rise school and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the American Institute of Research (AIR) needs assessment, the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: In Part 1A of the Section 5: Needs Assessment indicate the Rise Key and the corresponding statement of Practice (SOP) from the DTSDE Tenets that will be addressed in the action plan. Schools that received an Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) School Review should use the recommendations from the review to select their SOPs. Schools that did not undergo an IIT review should select SOPs informed by the major findings/recommendations from your most recent Quality Review (QR) or Central-led Review (CLR), and other qualitative and quantitative data.  Step 4: Discuss and respond to the guiding questions under each Framework element.  Step 5: Revisit your school’s current goals, and strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you have identified, and will let your school community know when you have reached your goal.  Step 6: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 7: Update your school’s AIS section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 8: Complete the Expanded Learning Time (ELT) and the Community School sections.  Step 9: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether strategies and activities outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust practices along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Rise Program Priorities Our Rise Theory of Action (page 4) is drawn from research1 on turnaround schools, the DOE Framework for Great Schools, DTSDE Tenets, and the Quality Review, which suggest that these key priorities have the greatest impact on student achievement. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 9  RISE Keys Priorities 1. Strengthen the Instructional Core 2. Strengthen Instructional Leadership Capacity 3. Improve Data Driven Practices 4. Apply a tiered approach to school support and intervention 5. Promote a positive, inclusive school environment for students, staff, parents and community partners 6. Increase monitoring and accountability  A clear focus aligned to students’ instructional needs, including college and career readiness  Access to common, standards-based curricula for all students, including ELLs and SWDs  Explicit and intentional embedding of culturally responsive Instruction in all content areas  Formative and summative assessments for all students in all grades that are aligned to curricula and produce clear evidence of learning  Tiered approach to teacher professional learning opportunities.  Partnership with families to increase engagement in students’ academic success  Implementation of a coherent vision for school improvement - a vision for leading learning, leading people, leading schools and leading change  Development of a system to support distributive leadership and build the capacity and sustainability of teacher leaders through continuous improvement  Developing leadership competencies, specific to turnaround efforts, including leveraging multiple stakeholders, a commitment to student learning and a sustained pursuit of measurable progress. Strategic allocation of resources to support instructional and professional learning plans and family engagement in leadership opportunities Integrative use of formative and summative assessment tools and practices to target resources and support throughout the year to achieve academic priorities    Ongoing analyses of school-wide and student-level data and adjustments to curricular resources and instructional moves  Prioritization of the use of standards and data to inform teaching and learning    Implementation of a tiered intervention system that engages teacher teams in frequent cycles of progress monitoring and adjustments to address diverse student needs School establishes coherent system, adopted by all to ensure that interventions are effective, differentiated and timely Increased use of teacher teams’ data-driven practices to accelerate student achievement  Clear strategy that establishes social norms within the school community and promotes a culture for learning with clear and high expectations for all students, in partnership with CBOs.  The sustainability of an environment where students feel safe, connected and engaged through practices that are culturally relevant and build their scholarly identity  The development of a whole school approach, in partnership with families, with   specific attention to social, physical and behavioral environments Social emotional learning practices embedded in teaching and learning as aligned to the Collaborative for Academic, Social and Emotional learning (CASEL) competencies and supported by CBOs. School leaders implement effective monitoring systems to ensure that instructional practices and interventions are monitored closely at the classroom, team, and school wide level  Establish effective teacher team practices that ensure teachers are accountable for data findings and set timely and appropriate interventions  Data analysis results in adjustments to the programs and priorities to better service   students Foster positive systems for accountability driven by reflection and action planning Support from district leaders to focus efforts toward results and problem solving actions that lead to turnaround success. 1. Darden/Curry PLE – Turnaround Leadership Competencies and Turnaround Action Shown to Influence Student Achievement 2018-19 CEP-RISE 10  Achievement Network – SY 18-19 Foundations Rubric COSEBOC Standards and Promising Practices for Schools Educating Boys of Color Harvard Graduate School of Education and Harvard Business School: Certificate in School Management and Leadership Learner-Centered Initiatives Multidimensional Principal Performance Rubric Monitoring and Accountability ● Rise schools will be monitored for implementation of the Rise Comprehensive Educational Plan (R+CEP) by Superintendents and Office of Field Support. ● Rise schools will be held accountable for making progress according to annual targets set by the Department of Education, as evidenced by their attainment of named benchmark scores for each annualized key metric. Schools not achieving annual targets by June 2019 are subject to additional oversight and consequences, to be determined at a later date. ● OFS will bring increased oversight and accountability by monitoring FSC supports to schools and ensure that these are aligned with the school’s instructional focus, student and teacher needs, and moving the school toward achieving interim goals. ● OSSS will monitor DSR oversight of all supports to Rise Schools. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 11  Section 3: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Directions: All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Rise School Comprehensive Educational Plan (R-CEP). SLT members’ signatures indicates that they have been consulted with and given the opportunity to provide feedback on the plan and the plan’s alignment with the school-based budget to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Expanded Learning Time, Community School initiative, Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. On the chart below: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the second column. 2. 3. In the first column, indicate using an “X” if the person is an SLT member. In the third column, record the position and constituent group represented such as staff, parent, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), or other contributor. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 4. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the R-CEP, not approval. 5. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Signature (Blue Ink) Check if SLT x x x x x x x Name Position and Constituent Group Louis Garcia Cory Kretschmer Marilyn George Mia Waddy Yvonne George Kelli Dunham Shantae George ChantalleGeorge Represented *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Community School Director (staff) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) 2018-19 CEP-RISE 12  Check if SLT Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) x x x x Freda Miller Avalon Roberts Cynthia Gilligan Parent Parent Teacher Melissa Sorger Guidance Counselor Member/ Member/ Staff/Parent/Other Contributor Staff/Parent/Other Contributor Staff/Parent/Other Contributor Staff/Parent/Other Contributor Staff/Parent/Other Contributor Staff/Parent/Other Contributor 2018-19 CEP-RISE 13  Section 4: Rise School Narrative In a brief narrative, describe the current state of the Rise school addressing the following and please use existing data, where applicable: 1. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including your school’s mission statement and a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Identify any special student populations that the school has and what their specific needs are. 2. 3. Describe your school’s approach to family engagement and progress made with establishing families as partners in furthering student achievement 4. Describe how your school is leveraging community school partnerships to support progress in elements of the Framework for Great Schools and your Rise Benchmarks and indicate where this has been a challenge. 5. Summarize the Expanded Learning Time (ELT) opportunities that have been offered to your students this year. About Us - BGS Brooklyn Generation School (BGS) was founded in collaboration by Generation Schools Network (GSN) and the Department of Education (DOE) in 2007. Our mission is to be an exceptional urban public school where generations of learners successfully prepare for life’s responsibilities, challenges and opportunities. BGS’ instructional vision is to create a teaching and learning environment that serves the needs of all learners through building teacher capacity as outlined in the NYC DOE City-wide Instructional Expectations, Danielson framework, and the Framework for Great Schools. BGS intentionally supports development of the whole child, preparing learners academically, socially, emotionally, creatively and physically. To facilitate this, BGS uses time and resources differently to expand the types of learning students can engage in outside of lecture style 45 minute classes to include a blended rotational model, project-based learning, time for peer collaboration, independent work and use of computer skills. This model challenges the conventional school model as it considers the following factors:  Smaller class size : 18-25 students per class with a maximum of 27 students in Studio Courses. This gives multiple opportunities for students to be known, feel safe, supported and challenged by their teachers.  College and Career Readiness: College and Career Intensive Program paired with student advocacy course (College & Career Access).  Expanded common planning time for teachers : Daily common planning time in content-area teams with an additional weekly 80-minutes in grade teams, to provide time and support for teachers’ collaboration. We use time, talent and other resources to ensure students’ experiences are aligned with our instructional philosophy of how students learn best. It has been through our model that BGS has afforded the opportunity of Extended Learning Time (ELT) to our students since the school was founded in 2007. BGS educators understand that it isn’t enough to offer more time or do more of the same for a longer period of time, but rather utilize more time differently. This understanding of use of ELT has provided opportunity to implement curriculum that is more cohesive and aligned in STEM. Students benefit from “linked” learning opportunities that provide cohesive and focused lessons. At its core is an understanding that students learn best when instruction is: ▪ Active ▪ Linked ▪ Student - centered ▪ Focused on understanding and 2018-19 CEP-RISE 14  ▪ Reflective To support the growth and capacity of teachers, BGS is engaged in a teaching environment for reflection of teacher practice, ongoing conversations are taking place with administration and among staff in team meetings and school wide professional development sessions. In doing so, BGS utilizes a distributive leadership approach. In our model, Distributive leadership provides opportunity for teachers to serve as team leaders and be critical friends to peers through inter-visitations and peer feedback, daily meetings around common instructional strategies, review of student work and collaboratively plan for all student groups. As part of the BGS model our students have the following courses. Foundation Courses provide the basic sequence they need to prepare for and pass NY State Regents. Most of these are yearlong courses; certain math and social studies sequences may stretch a year and a half or two years. The Foundation course curriculum follows NYS and NYC curriculum and is aligned to the CCLS and content standards. Studio Courses meet a broad range of students' needs. Studio course curriculum has been developed over time, by teachers, to meet the needs of different sub-groups of students - the curriculum is refined by teachers every year to ensure that the needs of sub-group of students are identified and met. Studio courses include enrichment courses (AVID, Regents prep, Rewards) as well as courses required to graduate (Foreign Language, Physical Education, etc). Advisory Courses ensure two things. First, they ensure that each student is part of an advocacy group and that there’s an adult who advocates for them. This advocate facilitates conversations with all the teachers on the grade team who work with their students, and is the primary point of contact between the school and the student’s family. Second, they teach students the skills they need to advocate for themselves - in high school and beyond. Advocacy course curriculum has been developed over time, guided by the Wellness team, drawing on partnerships with organizations like AVID, Opportunity Network and the Generation Schools Advocacy Guide. Our Students .Our school is comprised of 87% African American students of which 57% are male. Students with Disabilities make up 21%, 18% are ELLs and 85% are economically disadvantaged. Brooklyn Generation School has roughly 84% of students enter 9 th grade academically behind or significantly behind. Many of our students have significant if not multiple social and emotional issues that are huge obstacles to academic success. Our students are more likely to be absent and are at risk of dropping out and as evidenced in the work done with our mental health and crisis intervention staff and partners, and have benefited significantly from immediate therapeutic intervention. Our Community School Partners - UAP & CCMC Urban Arts Partnership (UAP) is our lead community school partner. UAP has over a 30 year track record of leveraging expanded learning time through an arts integration approach. Current programs being offered through UAP at BGS include Story Studio and a coding/science integration. Story Studio is an evidence based, standards based, arts embedded curricula that used the power of storytelling to increase literacy for English Language Learners. Story Studio participants have increased levels of achievement in reading, writing, listening and speaking. Community Counseling & Mediation (CCM) is an innovative, community-based social service organization founded in 1982. CCM provides a wide range of social support, counseling, health, mental health, education and supportive housing services to 7500 at-risk children, youth and family members in some of the poorest minority populated areas of Brooklyn. They also have established school based mental health clinics in New York City public schools. Under the AIDP Community school grant BGS and UAP have subcontracted CCM to expand school counseling services. We have hired a full time program director, 1 full time and 1 part time Licensed Mental Health Counselor, two of which are also Credentialed Alcohol and Substance Abuse Counselors (CASAC). This program has been 2018-19 CEP-RISE 15  designed to help students improve their overall school functioning. The goals of this program are to improve attendance rates, reduce suspensions, and prevent school dropout. The program and services will focus on helping students develop a positive identity, improve communication skills, develop healthy relationships with peers, enhance decision making skills, prevent substance abuse and improve social skills. Since expanding the counseling services family engagement has increased as a result of counselors conducting home visits, ACS conferences and court appearances. CCM will be providing counseling and behavioral health services to students identified as needing additional support to succeed. Some students have been identified as needing additional support around substance abuse issues related to marijuana use. In our efforts to prevent the progression of substance abuse (addiction) we have established substance abuse prevention counseling and education. In collaboration with CCM we have implemented the following counseling initiatives to support school success: Breakfast club: This is a weekly support group for students with low attendance rates (below 85%) as well as excessive lateness. This group is designed to help students explore the barriers that keep them from coming to school on time or at all. In this group they explore solutions, set goals and are given rewards for improved attendance and decreased lateness rates. Brotherhood and Sisterhood: To build a positive school culture “The Brotherhood” was formed in the Fall of 2010 and “The Sisterhood” was created in the Spring of 2010. Sisterhood was used as a way to address conflict between young women that often escalated to violence and to re-engage students in school. It was also used to improve attendance and reduce cutting and suspensions. The primary goals of these two groups is to support students in utilizing positive values and behavioural norms (code of ethics) to counteract self-destructive actions and behaviors. Students are encouraged to explore their current value systems and how it affects their functioning. They are encouraged to practice a new a set of values and behaviors that will help them make the personal changes needed to be productive members of society. Through a variety of in-school activities, discussions and field trips they will begin to develop healthier identities, positive peer relations, improve communication and decision making skills and set higher goals for themselves. Therapeutic Recreation: These groups are designed to provide students with a creative outlet and provide opportunities to explore their talents and interest. This year we have partnered with the Starrett City Boxing Gym and students will be working with a boxing coach and a Student Success Counselor to improve their ability to listen and focus, follow coaching instruction and learn frustration tolerance. We have also hired a professional dancer who is trained in Ballet, Modern, Jazz and Hip Hop. Through participation in dance, art and other physical sports students will build creative skills, self-esteem and enhance social skills. Substance abuse prevention and education: To address substance abuse issues amongst students a Certified Addictions Counsellor has developed a drug education and prevention program. The goal is to provide positive support to students to deter them from drug use. Students will learn about the progression of addiction and alternative ways to cope with stress as they gain an understanding of how marijuana, alcohol and other drugs reduce their motivation to attend school and affect their relationships. They will also learn about how the effects of drugs and alcohol cause them to become irritable and their coping mechanisms are compromised. Thus, increasing the risk of school dropout, confrontations, suspensions, arrest and full blown addiction. Through substance abuse counselling education these risk factors can be greatly reduced. Counseling and Referral Services: Individual, Group and Family Counseling will also be made available to students and families in need. As in past years, challenges to fully implementing this program are related to student and family resistance to counseling and unwillingness to accept that there are serious mental and behavioral problems the children are facing. Many of the students and families sabotage interventions by failing to follow through with counseling recommendations and / or missing scheduled appointments. However, it has been our experience, that through 2018-19 CEP-RISE 16  diligent outreach efforts and persistent engagement counselors are eventually able to develop a therapeutic alliance with the families. Framework for Great Schools Progress and Challenges Based on the 2016 Framework for Great School report, BGS is exceeding expectations in the areas of Rigorous Instruction, Collaborative Teachers, and Effective School Leadership. The school has achieved a score of 4 or higher (indicator of strong areas) while other areas scored above 3. Given these scores, the school is not necessarily experiencing challenges but rather areas to grow and further improve. As in this past year, teacher teams will continue to collaborate and use interim assessments provided with the Core Curriculum materials. The assessment data will be scored and collected in our school's database, SKEDULA . During weekly scheduled collaborative teacher meetings by grade and content level, the data will be assessed and used to identify student group and subgroup progress, teacher instruction and content curriculum adjustments. These resources will be used by content-area teachers to build upon a STEM-based instructional model. Students will integrate and evaluate content using problem-solving and critical thinking skills and competencies to help them gain a deeper understanding and make relevant connections. UAP sat with administration to plan for class integrations that helped the school increase attendance, participation and Regents pass rates. Through our CCM partnership, part-time counselors were hired to create support groups which provided counseling to our students and their families. All male, all female, substance abuse, anti-bullying and grief counseling groups were set in place to provide the support our students needed. Families also benefited from home visits and community school support to court and social service agencies. Additional support from this team was also beneficial to grade teams during our Kid Talk. The CCM counselors joined those team meetings to provide additional support to teachers as they made more and deeper connections to families. BGS’ advocacy structure provides an individualized supportive environment for our students. Every student is paired with an adult and is part of an advocacy group. That Advisor / Advocate is the one person who is responsible for knowing that student’s story. This structure provides time and opportunity for focused and personal connections between student and teacher. The greatest challenge BGS has experienced has been in Strong Family and Community Ties. While BGS has created structures and opportunities to invite and support strong family ties and engagement, BGS has not successfully engaged a large group of parents and families. There is a small cohort of families that commit and enjoy the benefits of the trainings, school partnerships and community support opportunities to the fullest. Our experience with families has unearthed a myriad of challenges that explain the low participation rates for PTA meetings, school events and even individual parent progress report meetings. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 17  Through our intake process and Advocacy we have identified the major challenges for family participation to be that many of our parents/guardians work late hours (multiple jobs), away from home or overnight. Our family units vary from the traditional. We have students being raised or cared for by elderly grandparents, relatives (not a mother or father), and some students who have lost their primary caretaker or their caretakers are at different levels of chronic and in some cases terminal illness. These are our “orphans” who are technically with an adult (family friend etc.) but are really raising themselves. Our outreach to families is well documented in Parent Coordinator logs and activity participation sheets and surveys, our Skedula anecdotals as well as in the Wellness and Preventive teams’ PPC meeting minutes. BGS has addressed some of the family and parent engagement issues by: ● Having a Community School Director who is bilingual in Haitian Creole and an ELT coordinator who speaks both Arabic and French and is able to provide culturally competent support for our Arabic speaking families who struggle not only with language barriers, but barriers of culture. ● Engaging families through targeted grade specific monthly parent and family meetings. ● Structuring family meetings so that families are utilizing the SKEDULA / PUPILPATH tool to look at their student's data while meeting with the school teachers / professionals. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 18  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 18K566 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 195 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 4 4 7 5 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 7 4 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 82.0% % Attendance Rate 74.4% % Reduced Lunch 10.3% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.5% 13.3% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 1.5% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 0.8 0% 4% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 78% 66% 59.3% 5.1% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No No Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A YSH Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A YSH Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A YES No N/A 98 88 90.6% 6.7% 22.6% 80.5% 1.5% 3.1% 2 8% 6.6 N/A N/A 78% 78% 82.5% 7% N/A Yes No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A YSH N/A N/A N/A YSH YSH N/A N/A N/A YSH YES N/A N/A N/A YES 2018-19 CEP-RISE 19  2018-19 CEP-RISE 20  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 3 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 3.2 The school leader ensures and supports the quality implementation of a systematic plan of rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of students. (aligned to Rise Keys 2 and 6) Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction (DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and address student achievement needs. (aligned to Rise Key 3) The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. (aligned to Rise Keys 1 and 4) Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. (aligned to Rise Key 1) 3.3 3.4 3.5 SOP(s) Addressed X X x Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? 1. BGS received a Quality review in 2017. An area of Celebration identified was in 1.4, Positive Learning Environment. The school’s theory of action incorporates personalized interventions, shared cultural expectations, opportunities for meaningful student voice, and a coherent schoolwide approach to supporting positive student behaviors. School structures are in place that allows each student to be well known to at least one adult. BGS received a Quality review in 2017. Area of Focus identified was in 2.2, alignment of assessment to curricula, use on-going assessment and grading practices, and analyze information on student learning outcomes to adjust instructional decisions at the team and classroom levels. 2. BGS school need is to build coherence across all classrooms such that all teachers are providing consistent formative and summative assessments for all students, that are aligned to curricula and produce clear evidence of learning. There needs to be a clear focus on evidence of of a focus on student needs, inclusive of ELL students and students with disabilities. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 21  3. Based on the 2016-2017 School Quality Guide, BGS posted a 61% Regents pass rate in CC Algebra, 66% Regents pass rate in CC English and 52.8% of 3rd year students earning 10+ credits. Rigorous instruction goal will focus on the CC Algebra pass rate and assessment. In June 2018, the Regents passing rates were as follows: Regents passing rates in June 2018: ELA: 45%, SS: 52%, Math: 32%, Science: 47% Based on Advance data, 3 teachers have been rated Developing in MOTP year end scores, other teachers rated Effective. According to observation data, domains 1e, 3c and 3d are areas of focus 4. Quality Review, School Quality Guide, Advance Web Application and Stars Scholarship report/Regents data and Rise benchmarks were used in this review. Part 2 – Summative Vision for Rigorous Instruction What is your school’s instructional focus? What is your vision for promoting the instructional focus consistently across classrooms? BGS Instructional Focus: Modeling and developing a growth mindset to effective problem-solving with an emphasis on building a STEM approach to accomplishing multi-step tasks. To accomplish this, teachers will focus on developing tasks that are rigorous and engaging, with embedded assessments that provide the learner, teacher and family, accurate information about student progress in skills and content. Teachers will utilize time in content teams and Professional Development time, to align curriculum and seek opportunities for collaboration. While BGS is in the piloting stages of STEM-based instruction, we move to codify the program across all grades, this approach is an opportunity for students to experience circular-content study – using problem-solving and project based work to understand the world. Using the CCLS standards that are currently evident in ELA, Global, and US History courses. BGS’ use of the Brooklyn Generation Instructional Philosophy has successfully helped our community by improving school climate, specifically through family engagement. We strive and continue adjust structures to build a student-centered learning environment that is committed to college and career preparation. Our vision is that Brooklyn Generation School will be an environment that links learning to life for all students, specifically through the application of our school’s instructional philosophy. We believe that students learn best when instruction is active, linked to life, student centered, focused on understanding and reflective. Our Career Intensive Engineering courses make school more engaging for students through the application of real-world, experiential learning. Students at BGS have the opportunity to participate in credit-bearing career experiences, and off-site project based-learning opportunities. Students take Career Intensive courses twice during our extended school year; each course lasting up to one month at a time. Through college partnerships with Brooklyn College and Long Island University (Brooklyn), over the next two years BGS will be positioned to offer students the opportunity to earn college credits towards an Associates degree while still attending BGS. How will you implement a standards-aligned curricula that meets the needs of your diverse learners, including ELLs and SWDs? BGS will utilize Imagine Math platform in order to provide adaptive supports for students. Supports are tailored for students based on their performance and progress in Imagine math software, and from teacher daily assessments and modifications. Formative assessment and benchmark assessments will be evaluated in all content areas to look at the success of these strategies and the proper balance of procedural and conceptual tasks. All content departments will delivery instruction that intentionally supports the improvement of literacy. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 22  ELL instruction will be based on AVID ELL curriculum, which provides vocabulary acquisition strategies as well as content-area support. Additionally, we will be utilizing online platforms for literacy remediation and skill building, through our Rise supports, that will provide students with specific skills instruction that is tailored to their needs. ELL teacher is providing content-area support as well through scaffolding and vocabulary acquisition support. SpEd and ELL teachers will be participating in training through our BFSC, additionally. What is your vision for ensuring that all student have access to rigorous coursework that moves them towards career and college readiness? How will you support the personal and academic skills, habits, and behaviors needed for students to be career and college ready? As a Renewal school we have had been given access to many resources to assist with instruction and improving student achievement. Teachers, and students at various grade levels have access to resources such as Imagine Math, LINCT, EdPerformance, and Collections. All of these resources have been imbedded into the respective curriculum, and are used by teaching staff. Think Through Math will be embedded in the curriculum and during ELT to support students’ skills and procedural fluency. Our STEM intensive and intercurricular units will support students applying math to real-world situations through problem solving in engineering, computer programming, and 3D design. Periodically throughout the year teachers deliver collaborative units that are designed to support students and make clearer the connections between disciplines. How do you envision embedding the elements of culturally responsive instruction and how will you know that implementation is successful? Delivery of instruction should be cohesive and make appropriate use of our school’s philosophy, which states that students learn best when instruction is Active, Linked to life, Student Centered, Focused on Understanding, and reflective. All teachers should be using the available resources, and integrating our instructional shifts into their annual and daily planning. Students should see cohesion across content and classrooms though consistent use of school-wide instructional strategies and CCLS. All teachers should be using data to drive and inform instruction and instructional shifts. Through Data-Driven Instruction, teachers will adjust and implement strategies that engage students and promote conceptual understanding as evidenced by benchmark assessments. Additionally, we will be utilizing the Courageous Conversations about Race protocols, which will provide language for teachers, students and families, around engaging in equity work and confronting practices and texts which are not culturally reflective or responsive to the needs of our students. Evidence of successful implementation will be measured in Student Perception Surveys, School Surveys and observation data. What is your vision for the use of a comprehensive assessment strategy (diagnostic, formative, benchmark, and summative) to drive curricular, instructional, and organizational decisions that impact student outcomes? BGS will engage in cycles of assessment as follows: Students will participate in math and reading assessments (Imagine Math and Gates/McGintie, respectively) in order to determine literacy and math interventions (i.e. Imagine Math and Rewards). Content area teams will develop bi-weekly skills assessments, which will be recorded in Skedula database, and utilized as a part of Content-team inquiry, and will inform next steps for instruction. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 23  Assessment data will be utilized as a part of the Instructional Leadership Team's datawise inquiry work, along with the work of A-Net coaching. How do you envision differentiating teacher professional learning opportunities to support instructional foci, meet students’ unique needs and advance culturally responsive education in your school? Teachers will be developing individual goals based on principal feedback and self-assessment. Goals will be set during IPC meetings and strucured into the Professional development plan. Daily Content teams focus on instructional strategies and interventions based on skill/content assessments, and teacher leaders will facilitate professional learning during this time. Whole staff (weekly) pd will address CCAR protocols and school-wide initiatives around Danielson 3C and 3D Weekly Grade team meetings will focus on student-level data (attendance and academic progress) Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Rise Benchmarks. By June 2019, all mathematics teachers will align instruction to CCLS and instructional shifts, resulting in a 10% increase in the number of students passing math regents examinations. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Rigorous Instruction Annual Goal: Which school benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Rigorous Instruction Annual Goal? List of Renewal Benchmarks expected to improve College Readiness Index 4-Year Graduation Rate Progress Toward Graduation - Years 2 and 3 2018-19 CEP-RISE 24  Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. Math teachers will be strategically scheduled to facilitate Common Planning for 80 minutes per week. They will use the Data-Wise Improvement Process to analyze a wide range of data, examine instruction, create appropriate action plans, adjust curricula, plan to assess progress, etc. All students will complete the Imagine Math diagnostic assessment and two additional benchmark assessments. Results will be used to strategically program students for math academic intervention. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Math teachers College Readiness Index, Progress Toward Graduation - Years 2 and 3, 4-Year Graduation Rate Sept 2018 to June 2019 Administration, programmer, Math Model Teacher All students College Readiness Index, Progress Toward Graduation - Years 2 and 3 September 2018, November 2018, March 2019 Administration, testing coordinator, teachers How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) Teacher practice and instructional strategies will reflect a coherent set of beliefs about how students learn best based on the use of student work and data to guide teacher team discussions. Imagine Math Overview, Standards and Student Progress reports will reveal that on average students are advancing through at least one adaptive lesson pathway every marking period. Students must demonstrate mastery of applicable standards in order to advance 2018-19 CEP-RISE 25  -Ongoing professional development on implementing the data inquiry process, and any areas of teacher development need that are unearthed through the examination of instruction -3 hours on site Imagine Math training During targeted parent meetings, parents will receive assistance with logging into Imagine Math Parent Portal, which enables them to monitor students' progress towards the completion of their individual math learning goals Review and track student data for progress reporting. Grade Teams will schedule and meet with parent/guardians of students who are not making adequate progress based on the Math Teachers College Readiness Index, Progress Toward Graduation - Years 2 and 3, 4-Year Graduation Rate Sept 2018 to June 2019 Administration, Math model teacher Parents and guardians College Readiness Index, Progress Toward Graduation - Years 2 and 3 Sept 2018 to June 2019 Administration, Math model teacher, teachers College Readiness Index, Progress Toward Graduation - Years 2 and 3, 4-Year Graduation Rate Sept 2018 to June 2019 Teacher Teams and Administrative team. Parents/ guardians of students not making adequate progress as per formative assessments -Administration will see improvement in lessons being aligned to the CCLS and instructional shifts, cognitively engaging, and appropriately scaffolded to meet the needs of individual and groups of students including ELLs, SWDs, lowest- and highest- performing students PD calendar, team meeting agendas and minutes will show that several professional learning sessions have been held. More than 65% of families will be actively using Imagine Math Parent Portal. There will be a decrease in the number of students who are not making adequate progress. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 26  results of formative assessments. Math teachers will participate in BFSC trainings in curriculum and assessment in math. All math teachers College Readiness Index, Progress Toward Graduation - Years 2 and 3, 4-Year Graduation Rate Sept 2018 to June 2019 (as offered) Teacher Teams and Administrative team. Administration will see improvement in lessons being aligned to the CCLS and instructional shifts, cognitively engaging, and appropriately scaffolded to meet the needs of individual and groups of students including ELLs, SWDs, lowest- and highest- performing students PD calendar, team meeting agendas and minutes will show that several professional learning sessions have been held. 4b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Advisors will engage families in bi-weekly progress reports via Skedula and by phone. Monthly grade-level meetings will be scheduled for parents to engage in monitoring of progress towards College & Career readiness. Guidance counselor and Math Content Leader are responsible for implementation and oversight of these actions. Families will receive monthly newsletter with updates and information that can help to support their children at home. Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment 2018-19 CEP-RISE 27  Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, lead CBO’s community school budget, FSC Supports, etc. Imagine Math Licenses Teacher team common planning ELT - an additional hour of instruction Teacher per session for additional instructional time Teacher per session for professional development time Per diem funds for teacher coverage during teacher professional development during school hours Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Overall goal is a 10% increase in the Math regents pass rates, in January, there will be a 5% improvement in the math regents pass rate. This will be measured by performance on math regents examination(s). Teachers will be submitting bi-weekly benchmark assessment data into Skedula database. This information will be reviewed during bi-weekly Triad meetings with FSC, DSR and DSI. Additiionally, school administration and ILT members will review this information on an ongoing basis. Benchmarks will be formally reviewed in: 1. October 2018, following MP 1 2. December 2018, following Mid-terms 3. February 2019, following Jan Regents and Semester I closing 4. Mid-April Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Imagine math assessments, Advance Observations and Common Core Algebra Regents Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 28  2018-19 CEP-RISE 29  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 5 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 5.2 The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. (aligned to Rise Key 4) 5.3 The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students. (aligned to Rise Key 4) 5.4 All school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health supports tied to the school’s vision. (aligned to Rise Key 5) 5.5 The school leader and student support staff work together with teachers to establish structures to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental health needs. (aligned to Rise Key 5) X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: SOP(s) Addressed 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? 5. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? 1. The core strength of BGS is two-fold. BGS has strong structures in place as well as meaningfully engaging community partners. Implementing the Generation Schools Model, the school provides opportunities to receive services without interrupting core academics. In addition, the BGS’ Advocacy program ensures that each student is known by at least one adult. The Advocates develop relationships with students and families. They can direct students to the right services, and engage families to support students. Many of our students have been identified with a myriad of needs, including but not limited to mental health, social-emotional, family crisis, homelessness, non-custodial, legal issues, that have not been addressed by the time they enroll in our school. During the school day students have access to the following:  Counseling - Counseling is available to help students cope with the life challenges they are facing. Within the school day we offer individual counseling, short term crisis intervention counseling and a variety of support groups. However, BGS has been able to expand these services to our students and families through our Community School Partnership with CCMC. The long term vision is to have a mental health clinic on campus.  Assessment and Referral - Student needs are assessed and services are coordinated with outside organizations to meet identified needs (i.e. Academic Resources, Family Counseling, Social Recreation Programs, Preventive Services, etc.) 2018-19 CEP-RISE 30   Health Resource Room - This resource is primarily supported by two Master Level social work interns from from various universities. Students are provided with information about reproductive health and STD prevention and condoms are available to students who request them. Each year, we also coordinate STD screening and education with the NYC Department of Health. Parents who do not wish to have their children participate in the STD testing or condom availability programs must submit the appropriate opt-out form.  Peer Mediation & Conflict Resolution - Social work interns from Hunter College as well as staff from our partner CCMC, help students learn how to address problems with each other peacefully. They learn how to communicate and express their feelings in appropriate ways.  Academic and College & Career Readiness - With the support of our College and Career Director, College and Career Team and Guidance Counselor, students receive support and guidance around a range of issues related to their high school and post-secondary careers. 2. In May 2018, our school conducted a Needs Assessment during our school's Community School Forum. We provided surveys and discussions to elicit needs for our community based on the Tenets: SCHOOL ENVIRONMENT SUGGESTIONS/NEEDS: Decrease favoritism, move metal detectors or decrease agents “why do you have so many metal detectors if you have all those cops” and “your children are not in prison.” Make the school easier to get into.Open up trips to everyone not just those with good grades. ATTENDANCE SUGGESTIONS/NEEDS: Give higher scholar dollar amounts, use food as incentives, give movie tickets as incentives, more interaction with teachers, have more parents with jobs in the school, check students who are not coming to learn, CURRICULUM AND ENRICHMENT SUGGESTIONS/NEEDS: Assign video games to learn, use youtube videos and other online things that support the way kids today learn. Use social media and games to engage students, use snapchat for events and have students be responsible for these platforms as jobs. HEALTH AND MENTAL HEALTH SUGGESTIONS/NEEDS: Need domestic violence groups for students (mentioned multiple times), anonymous suggestion box, teach students language to express themselves, have peer led groups, address social media bullying, cover mental health in health class, deal with stigma of mental health challenges and the trauma caused by racism. Depression is a problem, as is homelessness as a trigger to other issues. Other needs: address hygiene problems, fear, anxiety and malnourishment as well as gender based health issues FAMILY ENGAGEMENT SUGGESTIONS/NEEDS: Have personal conversations with families calendars in advance with additional reminders, have evening events, have a game night with cash prizes, include all info on website not just on calls etc, allow parent observation of classrooms, allow cameras in class, provide access to more books, post students’ work on website, provide 2018-19 CEP-RISE 31  more encouragement and chances to serve others. Hold parents and guardians accountable for their involvement, use incentive programs, make it clear to parents that family involvement helps with student success. 3. BGS has had consistent increases in the % of students with 90% attendance since 2011, which exceeds the city average by over 5%. YTD attendance – 90.6, and our Rise Benchmark has been increased to 92%. ATS data on our incoming students indicate that almost 27% of the class had below 90% attendance for the last academic year. 4. Data sources include ATS reports, Community School Forum notes, Rise Benchmarks. Part 2 – Summative Vision for Supportive Environment What is your vision for a supportive school environment? How will you, in partnership with each CBO and families, enact your vision? To ensure the school environment is supportive of students’ academic and non-academic needs, teacher growth, and parent engagement, BGS has invested time, developed the capacity of staff, and built strategic partnerships. BGS invests time in each student day for Advocacy. Advocacy Courses ensure two things. First, they ensure that each student is part of an advocacy group and that there’s an adult who advocates for them. This advocate facilitates conversations with all the teachers on the grade team who work with their students, and is the primary point of contact between the school and the student’s family. Second, they teach students the skills they need to advocate for themselves - in high school and beyond. The Advocacy curriculum has been developed over time, guided by the Wellness team, drawing on partnerships with organizations like Advancement Via Individualized Determination (AVID), Opportunity Network, Urban Arts Partners (UAP), Community Counseling and Mediation (CCM), and Generation Schools Network. Effective community partners are critical to ensuring that our students and their families have the wrap-around supports needed to address the many other barriers to learning and growth that persist in their lives. BGS has a Wellness team designed to support the social and emotional needs of students and families to ensure that they succeed in school. The team consists of one Guidance Counselor, a Master-Level Social Workers who supervises a team of Social Work Interns. The team provides a variety of services and BGS has been able to build this team through our Community School grant. Our lead partner, Urban Arts Partnership, via the community schools grant has allowed BGS to be a greater resource for our students, our families and the community. We are using this partnership to provide identified resources to develop strong community-based partnerships and implement personalized and tiered interventions. Noteworthy, BGS in partnership with CCM has been approved to run a full service mental health clinic which will be available to all of our students as well as their families. Describe your plan to implement a culture of trust and high expectations for teachers, students, families and community partners. Attendance team will make outreach at the beginning of th school year to engage all students, especially those with history of chronic absences, to attach mentors and other supports. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 32  Monthly, grade-level town hall meetings. Teachers meet weekly in grade team to utilized Kid Talk protocol, which is intended to provide a forum for staff to help students unpack challenges for success, and to engage families and community partners in helping students to overcome obstacles. Who are your CBO partners? How will each CBO sustain and support the social-emotional and academic growth of your students? CBO Focus AIDP GSN model implementation CBO Partner Urban Arts Partnership Generation Schools Network How will you, in partnership with your CBO, create a supportive and engaging environment for your students’ families? The full time staff provided by UAP are either bilingual or trilingual in the languages most commonly spoken by our families at home and are committed to providing culturally competent comprehensive support most needed by our families. Monthly family and community engagement opportunities will be held to showcase activities happening in the school. Our Annual Community School's Forum, Campus-Wide Talent Show, Thanksgiving Feast, Community BBQ. Additionally, the principal will be hosting a monthly family breakfast to introduce new families to the community and to engage student caregivers. What essential questions, or key themes, will be explored by all staff and students that acknowledge and celebrate the culture and heritage of the student body? International club helps to immediately connect newly arrived students with a community of other recently-arrived students to provide support as they transition to our school. ELL students engage in Story Studio, which helps them to celebrate and articulate their stories and heritage in a public forum. Our school will be continuing our work with Courageous Conversations About Race in order to interrogate issues of race that may play out in our school, and that exist globally. What evidence will you use to gauge the impact of your plan to create a positive school environment? Increased attendance rated, student perception surveys, OORS incidents and Skedula referrals. Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Supportive Environment. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Rise Benchmarks. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 33  By June 2019, through ongoing collaboration with Urban Arts Partnership (UAP) and Community Counseling & Mediation (CCM) we will improve student attendance monitoring and intervention practices, as measured by an increase in student attendance to 92.8% attendance rate by end of the year. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Supportive Environment Annual Goal: Which school benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Supportive Environment Annual Goal? List of Renewal Benchmarks expected to improve Framework: Supportive Environment Progress Toward Graduation - Years 2 and 3 Student Attendance: HS 2018-19 CEP-RISE 34  Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. Teachers will use attendance, credit accumulation, NYSESLAT and OORS data to inform advocacy for individual students Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) Cohort T male students Student Attendance: HS Progress Toward Graduation - Years 2 and 3 August 2018 – June 2019 UAP IMentor program counselor, Advocates with their grade teams Increased credit accumulation Grade teams will meet weekly with a member of the Wellness staff to conduct “kid talk” Cohort T male students Framework: Supportive Environment Student Attendance: HS Wellness team will meet weekly to monitor target student progress, provide and assess interventions Cohort T male students Framework: Supportive Environment Student Attendance: HS August 2018 – June 2019 August 2018 – June 2019 Advocates with their grade teams, Wellness staff. Wellness and Preventive team, UAP Community School Director CCM Crisis Counselors, Principal and Assistant Principal Urban Arts Partnership (UAP) will provide programming during targeted instructional time and during ELT Attendance team will monitor daily and class period attendance. Cohort T male students List of Renewal Benchmarks expected to improve August 2019 – June 2019 Community School Director, ELT Program Director All students List of Renewal Benchmarks expected to improve August 2019 – June 2019 Principal, CSD, Guidance Counselor, Social Worker, FSC Attendance teacher Increased parent engagement and student attendance Increased parent engagement and student attendance increased attendance and credit accumulation Increased parent engagement and student attendance 4b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 35  Weekly contact with Advisor and Americorps intern focused on attendance outreach. Attendance team meets weekly to focus on groups of students. Attendance and wellness teams will assign mentors to each students whose attendance has dropped below 90%. BGS will continue to engage in the Scholar Dollar PBIS program aimed at attendance, and will work with the BFSC to employ research-based strategies that will increase student attendance. Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, lead CBO’s community school budget, FSC Supports, etc. Social worker Teacher Advocates Wellness Team UAP Community School Director CCM counseling staff Teacher per session for additional parent and resource outreach Attendance team Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant X 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Annual goal will be measured by an increase in student attendance to 92.8% attendance rate by end of the year. In January 2019, we will expect to see a similar YTD attendance rate, as attendance would be cumulative over the course of the year. January YTD data will be compared to the 2017-2018 YTD data to measure progress. Monthly PAR review and weekly attendance data meetings also serve as monitoring systems.  Attendance will be monitored for improvement in advocacy daily and reviewed by the team weekly.  Review of OORS and SKEDULA data. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 36  The Community School Director will work with Wellness team and Advocates to monitor student progress. The Community School Director and Parent Coordinator will set a schedule for more frequent check-ins with families. Assessment of the effectiveness of our interventions will take place four times this year: October 2018 December 2018 February 2019 April 2019 Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. SKEDULA Progress reports Attendance Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 37  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 4 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 4.2 School and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. (aligned to Rise Key 2) 4.3 Teachers provide coherent, and appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. (aligned to Rise Key 1) 4.4 Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences and tailored to the strengths and needs of all students. (aligned to Rise Key 4) 4.5 Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, and progress monitoring). (aligned to Rise Key 3) X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: SOP(s) Addressed 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? 1. Teacher support is a critical component of our model at BGS. Time, talent and the use of resources are prioritized to support relationships. The school commits significant time to collaboration and draws on the staff's own expertise to build teacher capacity. Teachers meet daily in teams (in 2018-2019, teachers will meet in Content teams). Scheduling has been built around providing time for teachers to meet, and protocols developed around expected practices. Teacher teams also meet Grade teams to collaborate around student academics and engagement (i.e. KidTalk protocol, student work protocol), planning for Advisory, and parental outreach. 2. Stars data indicates that BGS students had a 67.29% pass rate in Term 1 and a 73.52% pass rate in Term 2. Course pass rates are not consistent with Regents passing rates, and indicate a need for continual refinement of curriculum and alignment with CCLS standards. 3. Development of clear protocols and reflective practices around the use of data to make decisions, and to have teachers work collaboratively on curricula and school wide instructional practices so that students' experiences can be more coherent across the school. 4. Data sources considered: New Visions data sorter, ATS regents results, Stars scholarship reports. Part 2 – Summative Vision for Collaborative Teachers 2018-19 CEP-RISE 38  What is your vision for collaborative teaching? As stated, our model is designed to foster and support teacher collaboration in vertical and horizontal teams. BGS will be offering teacher professional development plans to include: AVID, inter-visitation within Grade teams and Content teams – around Common Instructional Strategies, student interventions, collaboration on curriculum development and revision utilizing ATLAS Rubicon. Teachers will be incorporating the Common Core instructional shifts. ELL and SPED teachers will meet to collaborate with grade teams to support students as indicated by student NYSESLAT and IEP data as well as teacher collected progress data. Teacher teams will use SKEDULA grade, attendance and anecdotal data to craft student success plans. Follow up discussions with review of student work will inform students' next steps and / or additional supports and interventions. Embedded in our work is the use of assessment. We are integrating common assessments, and pedagogical strategies that are consistent across content areas, and the overall philosophy is for teachers to assess and reteach information for students who may be struggling with a concept. What this looks like becomes the work of the content teams and the meetings will focus on articulating content objectives, using the information from assessment data, and being able to make informed, instructional decisions. We will be utilizing an inquiry model as the basis of our professional learning. To support the growth and capacity of teachers, BGS provides significant time for collaborative learning, reflection, and inquiry. BGS utilizes a distributive leadership approach that provides opportunity for teachers to serve as team leaders and be critical friends to peers through inter-visitations and peer feedback, daily meetings around common instructional strategies, inquiry based review of student work and collaboratively plan for all student groups. Teachers are in consistent conversation with the administration and their colleagues. They co-plan school wide professional development sessions. Brooklyn Generation supports collaboration of its teachers by offering professional development for teacher leaders and implementing new protocols. The instructional leadership team will use the Data Wise Improvement Process to structure their meetings and goals. These structures and supports help teachers to ensure that every student in all their classes are and feel safe. Through our advisory model, teachers are able establish relationships with students to assess needs beyond strictly academics. Through our "Kid Talk" meetings, teachers discuss student obstacles and through review of student work establish interventions and strategies to support individual student success. To support the adult learning, teachers will conduct inter-visitations and provide “critically friendly” feedback and use the observation to be reflective of their own practice as an individual and as teams. How do you envision enhancing collaboration amongst your Instructional Leadership Team to improve teacher practices and student learning? The school's Instructional Leadership Team is made up teacher leaders across grade levels and across content. Each member of the ILT leads a Content Team or the AVID site team. The principal meets with the ILT weekly to review student data (i.e. benchmarks), curriculum (i.e. unit/lesson plans) or other relevant information in order to inform an ILT Inquiry cycle. The intention of the ILT Inquiry is to directly impact student learning and teacher practices, and is also building the teacher leadership capacity. How do you envision collaboration within teacher teams to improve teacher practices and student learning? Content teams will meet daily. Teachers will utilize Rise mandated assessments as well as teacher created tasks to design and administer a minimum of four common assessments to determine progress on writing skills in all content areas. English teachers will utilize Rewards program reading intervention. Content team leaders will facilitate protocols 2018-19 CEP-RISE 39  that, as they become embedded practices, will result in more student-centered meetings which will focus on and directly impact student achievement. How do you envision collaboration across teacher teams to improve data driven teacher practices that result in improvement in student achievement? What data will teachers and the Instructional Leadership Team regularly review to ensure that they are reflecting upon needed adjustments to teaching practices and meeting individual student learning needs? Data Reviewed Student work 1-Pagers that were created from IEPs, highlighting students' academic and management needs Item analysis of Global and US History interim assessments Intent Teacher teams will regularly review student work to surface learning gaps in writing in order to guide the selection and adjustments to Writing is Thinking (WIT) strategies. Teachers will review 1-pagers daily when developing lessons to ensure that individual and groups of students, including the lowest- and highest-performing students, ELLs and SWDs have access to the writing curricula and tasks and are cognitively engaged. Teachers will examine the item analysis of Global and US History interim assessments to identify areas of weakness and misunderstanding in order to effectively modify classroom instruction. To determine which students may need additional academic intervention in order to master material. Describe the screening process you use to identify students who need extra help? How do you use this process to determine which intervention to provide? 9th grade students are initially identified based on 8th grade scores in ATS. All students, in September, participate in Rewards, TTM assessments, as well as teacher-created assessments in other content areas. Students receiving ELL and IEP mandated services will be similarly assessed during the first 2 weeks of school. Content teams will analyze the assessment data to determing programming placement in TTM or Rewards classes, and will determine how the AVID elective and regents review classes can support students who need additional assistance. Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Rise Benchmarks. By June 2019. teacher leaders will effectively work in teacher teams to use data to drive instruction resulting in a 5% increase in the accumulation rates for 9-12 based on STARS. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Collaborative Teachers Annual Goal: Which school benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Collaborative Teachers Annual Goal? List of Renewal Benchmarks expected to improve 4- and 6- Year Graduation rates 2018-19 CEP-RISE 40 Progress Toward Graduation - Years 2 and 3 Framework: Supportive Environment 2018-19 CEP-RISE 41  Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. Teacher Advisory Triads will meet weekly to monitor student progress and determine behavioral, academic and other interventions. Non-advisory teachers will be working with Advisory teachers to provide student work, anecdotal information, etc. Teacher content teams will meet daily to engage in data protocols and curriculum revision. -4 common assessments based on writing skills will be administered in all content areas -Global and US History Mock Regents will be administered in December 2018 and May 2019 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) All teachers Progress Toward Graduation - Years 2 and 3, 4- and 6- Year Graduation rates September 2018 - June 2019 Principal, UAP Community School Director All teachers Progress Toward Graduation - Years 2 and 3, 4- and 6- Year Graduation rates September 2018 - June 2019 Instructional coaches, administration Social Studies Teachers Progress Toward Graduation - Years 2 and 3, 4- and 6- Year Graduation rates September 2018 - June 2019 Administration, grade team leaders How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) Increase in course pass rates High quality WITsi tasks and high leverage instructional strategies (based on data) will be evident across all 10th and 11th grade classrooms respectively Teacher teams would have already created assessments one week before they must be administered 2018-19 CEP-RISE 42  Students to use REWARDS in ELA classes USE of AVID school-wide All 9th, 10th and 11th grade eligible students REWARDS assessment report review mid point of marking periods 1 and 2. September 2018 - May 2019 All students Progress Toward Graduation - Years 2 and 3, 4- and 6- Year Graduation rates September 2018 - June 2019 Administration, content team leaders Rewards interim assessments. Principal, AVID site team Teacher observations, AVID informal assessment tools 4b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Our school will introduce students to AVID and have continual progress shared with families during monthly scheduled meetings. Additionally, teachers will contribute shared information with students and families via our monthly newsletter. Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, lead CBO’s community school budget, FSC Supports, etc. Professional development sessions for WITsi Per session for when teachers have WITsi training Instructional coaches - including peer and model teachers Data team meetings Substitute teachers AVID subscription fees Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 43  Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Annual goal indicates a that by June 2019. there will be a 5% increase in the credit accumulation rates for 9-12 based on STARS. By the end of the first term in January 2019, we would expect to see a 5% increase in credit accumulation rate over the credit accumulation rate in January 2018. Scholarship reports will be reviewed after each marking period (six times a year), as well as bi-weekly "spot checks" of Skedula gradebook data to assess student progress in classes. AVID walkthrough observations will take place monthly, and feedback on Advance in/formal observations will take place as teachers are observed. Assessment of the effectiveness of all of our interventions will take place four times this year: October 2018 December 2018 February 2019 April 2019 Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Scholarship reports will be reviewed after each marking period (six times a year), as well as bi-weekly "spot checks" of Skedula gradebook data to assess student progress in classes. AVID walkthrough observations will take place monthly, and feedback on Advance in/formal observations will take place as teachers are observed. Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 44  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 2 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 2.2 The school leader ensures that the school community shares the Specific, Measurable, Ambitious, Results-oriented, and Timely (SMART) goals/mission and long-term vision inclusive of core values that address the priorities outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP). (aligned with Rise Key 2) Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital resources. (aligned with Rise Key 6) 2.3 x 2.4 The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district's Annual Professional Performance Review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. (aligned with Rise Key 1) 2.5 Leaders effectively use evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve critical individual and school-wide practices as defined in the SCEP (student achievement, curriculum and teacher practices; leadership development; community/family engagement; and student social and emotional developmental health). (aligned with Rise Keys 4 and 5) Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: SOP(s) Addressed 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? 1. BGS has established a Community School Engagement Team (CSET) which has a representative from all partner organizations. The CSET will continue to work and meet as a professional learning community (PLC) weekly to discuss and share programming and initiatives. This team will engage in work with teacher teams to provide academic programming and in “Kid Talk” to provide social emotional resources and supports. An attendance team has been created to focus on creating structures for monitoring, engaging and encouraging students to attend school daily. Content teams (above) and Advisory triads function as mechanisms to improve curriculum as well as to focus on granular, student level information. 2. The need to increase students' college readiness index is based on the number of students scoring at college-ready levels on Regents exams, AP exams and SATs. Preparing students to pass exams is important, however, there will also need to be attention paid to the number of students who are passing those exams at levels 3 and 4. 3. Focusing on our 2019 graduating class, and the class of 2020, we will be looking for opportunities to push our students to re-take examinations, and to focus on how to provide more opportunities to prepare for higher levels of competency on exams. 4. We have reviewed our Regents data, Stars pass rates, SAT scores and AP exam results. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 45  Part 2 – Summative Vision for Effective School Leadership What is your vision for effective school leadership at your school? Effective school leadership ensures that students are experiencing instruction that is rigorous, supportive and coherent. While there are pockets of excellence happening at BGS, the vision will be to spread what is going well across all areas of the school, and to build structures that will support, reflect upon and sustain those practices. The intention of using AVID is to provide a framework for instruction, along with a set of tools that can be used to assess the effectiveness and integration of these practices. Additionally, this will provide a common language around which students and families, as well as staff, can really approach school work in a more cohesive way. Once there is more coherence, then students are able to move beyond competence towards mastery. Further, this will provide a structure for professional development, as it gives language to what teachers need support in. The instructional cabinet will revise the professional development plans based on ongoing analysis to share with the whole staff. The administration will work with the instructional cabinet who will work with grade team to support differentiation by grade team and teacher. The administration will align observations, modeling, inter-visitations, etc. with these goals. What are your core belief(s) for school improvement and how they inform your vision for developing instructional leadership at your school? A focus on ensuring to reinforce teaching practices that are aligned to our school's instructional focus through observation and feedback cycles. What is your vision for developing differentiated leadership throughout your school? How will you utilize teacher leaders to build broad capacity within your school? To support the growth and capacity of teachers, they are provided with time daily for collaborative learning, reflection, and inquiry. BGS utilizes a distributive leadership approach that provides opportunity for teachers to serve as team leaders and be critical friends to peers through inter-visitations and peer feedback, daily meetings around common instructional strategies, inquiry based review of student work and collaboratively plan for all student groups. Teachers will co-plan school wide professional development sessions. How will the leader foster collaborative school governance processes, and ensure full family participation together with other stakeholders? The Community School Engagement Team (CSET) which has a representative from school family engagement staff, and CBO partner organizations will meet weekly to identify and plan family engagement activities to support, inform and provide opportunities for collaboration with our families. How will you use evidence-based systems to ensure school and teacher leaders are led by a cycle of continuous learning and use this to inform their teams’ priorities? 2018-19 CEP-RISE 46 Evidence-Based System Support(s) Collaborator(s) ADVANCE Peer Observations Observation data and conference Instructional coaches Learning walks PCT and model teachers Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Rise Benchmarks. By June 2019, school leaders will use the human and fiscal resources to provide teachers with AVID training around incorporating AVID strategies into professional development plan and Advocacy structures that reinforce the schoolwide use of AVID strategies resulting in a 10% increase in college readiness index. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Effective School Leadership Annual Goal: Which school benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Effective School Leadership Annual Goal? List of Renewal Benchmarks expected to improve Framework: Supportive Environment College Readiness Index 4- and 6- Year Graduation rates 2018-19 CEP-RISE 47 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) College Readiness Index September 2018 - June 2019 Instructional Cabinet, Administration Students who haven't met College Readiness levels in ELA / Math How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) Formative assessments, lesson plan feedback September 2018 - June 2019 September 2018 - June 2019 September 2018 - June 2019 Administration, Instructional coaches Observation data Principal and Assistant Principal Observation data Principal and AVID site team PD plan; individual goals for teachers Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. The Instructional Leadership Team will support the professional learning of their colleagues through exploring emerging instructional practices, peer coaching and inter-visitation aimed at improving student learning Instructional Audits through AVID tools All teachers College Readiness Index Cycle of observations and feedback All teachers Framework: Supportive Environment AVID training College Readiness Index AVID site team participate in AVID summer institute and turnkey training with entire staff during PD sessions. 4b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 48  Monthly communication with families via telephone, meeting and newsletter will share information and progress. Parent coordianator and CSD will be responsible to ensure communication with familes happens at scheduled intervals. Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, lead CBO’s community school budget, FSC Supports, etc. CSET meetings Peer collaborating and model teachers Use of collaborative teacher time Establish audit calendar and time for analysis Add additional programming space for CSET and parent programming. AVID annual fees. Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Annual goal articulates a 10% increase in college readiness index by June 2019. By January 2019, we would anticipate a 5% increase in our college readiness index. Assessment of the effectiveness of all of our interventions will take place four times this year through the use of informal observations and AVID audit tools: October 2018 December 2018 February 2019 April 2019 Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Use of AVID audit tools, bi-weekly benchmark data and mock regents examinations. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 49  Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 50  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 6 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 6.2 The school leader ensures that regular communication with students and families fosters their high expectations for student academic achievement. (aligned with Rise Key 2) 6.3 The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders so that student strength and needs are identified and used to augment learning. (aligned with Rise Key 4 and 6) 6.4 The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to support student success. (aligned with Rise Key 5) 6.5 The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school community members centered on student learning and success and encourages and empowers families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their children. (aligned with Rise Key 3) X X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: SOP(s) Addressed 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? 1. The core strength of BGS is two-fold. BGS has strong structures in place such as experience pushing policies and practices as well as meaningfully engaging community partners. The BGS’ Advocacy program ensures that each student is known by at least one adult. The Advocates develop relationships with students and families. They can direct students to the right services, and engage families to support students. Many of our students have been identified with a myriad of needs, including but not limited to mental health, social-emotional, family crisis, homelessness, non-custodial, legal issues, that have not been addressed by the time they enroll in our school. During the school day students have access to the following:  Counseling - Counseling is available to help students cope with the life challenges they are facing. Within the school day we offer individual counseling, short term crisis intervention counseling and a variety of support groups. However, BGS has been able to expand these services to our students and families through our Community School Partnership with CCMC. The long term vision is to have a mental health clinic on campus.  Assessment and Referral - Student needs are assessed and services are coordinated with outside organizations to meet identified needs (i.e. Academic Resources, Family Counseling, Social Recreation Programs, Preventive Services, etc.)  Academic and College & Career Readiness - With the support of our College and Career Director, College and Career Team and Guidance Counselor, students receive support and guidance around a range of issues related to their high school and post-secondary careers. 2. An identified need is to have families participate in higher numbers, and to increase the ways in which families can be an integrated part of the school community. There is a core number of parents who participate in school activites (PA 2018-19 CEP-RISE 51  meetings, SLT) however, the needs of our school are that students would benefit more if families were able to participate in ways that were conducive with their schedules and external committments. 3. Prioritized need is to provide families with information about their child's academic functioning, as well as invite them to the opportunities that we are making available for their child's increased progress. 4. Parental involvement logs, QR report, School Survey and School Quality guide were all referenced here. Part 2 – Summative Vision for Strong Family and Community Ties What is your vision for strong family and community ties at your school? What opportunities exist for the school staff to know the students and their families in order to better communicate and partner with families and communities in the vision for the school? We will ensure that our families are met by a support staff person who will lead them to the Main Office and allow them to meet the Parent Coordinator and the Community School Director. We want to meet the needs of a parent or guardian who takes time to visit the school for any reason. Parent workshops will be created for specific grade levels as we run Town Halls with students so parents can: learn of the many programs offered to the students within their grade level   become more comfortable with one another to collaborate as partners in the students education (i.e. when parents know and begin to trust one another, car-pooling and travel arrangements can be made for students taking advantage of our school affiliate programs). Safety will be less of an issue in determining whether a child is allowed to be in a program after-school or weekends. Our two day college trip created a similar atmosphere for 12 families.  be informed of BGS’ offerings from in-house programs including but not limited to programs at Brooklyn College, TRIO, Medgar Evers, Arthur Ashe, AVID, UAP, and CCMC. At BGS we have a special challenge in engaging our parents/guardians. Many of our students have a family situation in which they may live with a grandparent who cannot travel frequently, or are provided shelter by a distant relative or even non-related guardian. Our challenge is to engage guardians who are sometimes not highly invested or interested in partnering with the school. Possibilities to engage these non-traditional family units would be programs specific to their needs such as:    resources that benefit BGS’ parent/guardian population in things such as health services, assistance with social services and immigration issues. aligning parent/family meetings with school wide celebrations and student events. conversations with the Parent Association team, to closely look at the BGS school year calendar to re-think when General Parent Association meetings will be offered. If we know when each major school event will be held, we will ask for time built in for Association meetings. Our parent/guardian base has many hourly workers and many hold more than one job. To be able to provide the convenience of combining an event with an informational session for our families may change the course of low-attendance numbers that the Parent Association has experienced. We have a small base of families we reach out to in four languages with an English mailing. When necessary, simple messages are translated with GOOGLE TRANSLATOR for quick messages. The parent coordinator works with the ELL teacher sharing resources (i.e. Brooklyn Public Library services for immigration justice corp, ESL classes, the annual ELL conference every spring season, and programs outside of the school for arts enrichment and college workshops for ESL students). 2018-19 CEP-RISE 52  Also, we acknowledge that the high school exam experience as well as an adult’s work experience can be very stressful. Many people have no stress-relieving system in place to feel relaxed and prepared for daily life, so we introduced a yoga class that is currently offered to students as a part of advocacy group, as well as to our families and staff members. We tested several 15 minute sessions with over twenty families at an event in May and our students, parents and staff are excited about a Saturday morning prospective Yoga Class. This year, more parents and guardian than ever registered in PupilPath to have current student progress and status available to them in the house or on-the-go. Aside from the standard letter sent home at the beginning of each trimester, a personal signature inquiry and “how to get started" was in the parent coordinator’s email along with upcoming dates of exams, meetings and events. Parents would call for help or could receive their PupilPath invitation letter via email from the Parent Coordinator. In addition, we are planning a different type of Orientation this year now that BGS is a community school. We have a responsibility to ensure that our families fully understand our new status as a community school. We will hold orientation as a barbecue (informal gathering) instead of in the auditorium, we plan to create a cook-out style environment where families will even greet our UAP Partnership teaching artists at the start of the school year and have an opportunity to sign up for programs of interest within the school day and after-school/weekend programs. These lists can be generated among the staff so students can be encouraged by a few individuals. Within the Community School model, how will families be welcomed into the school and made a part of the school community? What support will administrators, teachers, school staff and school safety officers be given to help create a welcoming environment? Will there be a dedicated space for families in the school? The Family/Community Engagement Center is our dedicated space for families in the school and it is located across from the main office for maximum ease in entry. This space was recently completely redone in order to provide a larger more welcoming area and now includes multiple computer work stations accessible to families who are looking for work, community resources etc as well as help accessing PupilPath. The Center is staffed full-time by the Community School Director, ELT coordinator, Americorps volunteer and Parent Coordinator, who are fluent in the four languages most commonly spoken by our families at home. Families are able to immediately find answers and resources when they come to the school. Our full Community School Engagement Team (including our PA President and AP) participated in the three day Scholastic Karen Mapp Dual Capacity Training and are actively working to disseminate the ideals and ideas of deep parental involvement learned in the professional development. How will the school identify and develop families to take leadership roles in school decision making/school governance structures? Community School Engagement Team monthly targeted parent meetings How will the school engage the community and families? How will they ensure that teachers are able to learn from families about the children being taught? Community School Engagement Team monthly targeted parent meetings Community School forums SLT meetings How do families partner with the school and CBO to support student success? Will there be dedicated space for families? 2018-19 CEP-RISE 53 Family partnerships with school: Community School Engagement Team KID Talk Parent meetings Family partnerships with CBO: Community School Engagement Team Targeted grade level parent meetings Is there dedicated space for these partnerships? Community School forums Yes, Community School Engagement Room What data and student progress feedback loops will be present at the school to ensure that families knowledgeable of their children’s scholastic success, in addition to report cards? The Community School Engagement Team will work closely with the Grade Team Leaders to make sure they are able to articulate the processes they can use to get more information about their student's progress. Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Rise Benchmarks. By June 2019, BGS will expand the number of opportunities for families to engage in school activities, reflective of families' diverse needs around time and access, which will result in a 10% increase in family participation at family engagement activities and family involvement. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Strong Family and Community Ties Annual Goal: Which school benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Strong Family and Community Ties Annual Goal? List of Renewal Benchmarks expected to improve Framework: Strong Family-Community Ties Framework: Supportive environment Family engagement 2018-19 CEP-RISE 54 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Parents and families Promote a positive, inclusive school environment for students, staff, parents and community partners September 2018- June 2019 Community Coordinator, Parent Coordinator, UAP and BGS Administration September 2018 - June 2019 Community Coordinator, Parent Coordinator, UAP and BGS Administration September 2018 - June 2019 Community Coordinator, Parent Coordinator, UAP and BGS Administration August 2017 - June 2018 Community Coordinator, Parent Coordinator, UAP and BGS Administration Promote a positive, inclusive school environment for students, staff, parents and community partners Promote a positive, inclusive school environment for students, staff, parents and community partners Promote a positive, inclusive school environment for students, staff, parents and community partners Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. Utilize Community School Leadership Team to engage families and community partners to provide feedback on needs and provide resources based on family needs Translate all communication to parents and families in home language Parents Host monthly Principal-Parent breakfast meetings and classroom visits Parents and families Students Parents and families Increase family and community ties through scheduled events, service and resource offerings. Such as, immigration and social service guidance, mental health and crisis counseling, job fair and employment training How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) Attendance at monthly targeted parent meetings Review of all family communications reflect home language access as indicated in ATS Community School Engagement team to produce an annual calendar with scheduled monthly events Community School Engagement team to produce an annual calendar with scheduled monthly events 2018-19 CEP-RISE 55  Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, lead CBO’s community school budget, FSC Supports, etc. Parent Coordinator Community School Director Community forums SLT membership and meetings Student and parent incentives Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Annual goal articulates the expectation of an increase of 10% in family participation. By January 2019, we would anticipate a 5% increase in the level of family engagement. Parent coordinator and CSD will monitor on a monthly basis, the participation through PupilPath reports, Community School event attendance and participation reports, and Parent Coordinator attendance and participation reports. Assessment of the effectiveness of all of our interventions will take place four times this year through the use of informal observations and AVID audit tools: October 2018 December 2018 February 2019 April 2019 Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Attendance at meetings Pupil Path data 2018-19 CEP-RISE 56  Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 57  Section 6: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) Program Description Directions: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) activities are directly aligned to the elements of the Framework for Great Schools, Rigorous Instruction, Supportive Environments, and Strong Family and Community Ties. ELT provides enriching educational experiences that happen outside of the traditional school day and blend skill acquisition, relationship-building and fun to foster academic and social-emotional growth. Summer learning, afterschool programming, and extended-day ELT models, when well-implemented, play a critical role in supporting students in all grades and ensuring that they graduate from high school, college and career ready. SED requires that Priority schools offer a minimum of 200 additional student contact hours as Expanded Learning Time in addition to the current mandated length of 900 hours of instruction per year (25 hours per week) in grades K-6 and 990 hours of instruction per year (27.5 hours per week) in grades 7-12. Effective ELT models will blend school staff with community partners, and will provide a balanced curriculum that can include ELA, math, STEM, arts, physical activity, and leadership development. Complete the sections on this page to demonstrate how the school will meet these requirements. Part 1 – ELT Program Goal(s) Describe the summative goal(s) of the ELT program for the 2018-19 school year. Goals for ELT should aligned to the Rise Benchmarks. How will the school will ensure that all students’ individual needs are served during the Rise ELT and how the school’s vision for ELT will impact both academic achievement and social emotional growth? Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. By June 2019, BGS will use ELT to support student learning in an effort to increase graduation rate. Part 2 – ELT Program Type Is the ELT program voluntary or compulsory? Voluntary X Compulsory Rise ELT – Describe what accountability structures the school will employ to ensure participation of all students, including special populations, will participate fully in Rise ELT. Additional ELT - If there is a voluntary ELT program in addition to the compulsory Rise ELT, indicate how you will actively encourage the participation of all students, with the goal of serving at least 50% of students. Students will have Credit Recovery options for classes that need to be repeated, and will be provided with extended opportunities for arts-based programming, College & Career Readiness coursework increasing students’ participation College & Career Intensive programming in all grades, beginning in August. Additionally, we will utilize existing partnerships with college partners (Long Island University Fast Track & Brooklyn College College Now) to provide college preparation coursework. Students will also participate in counseling, social-recreation and arts-based activities through Community Schools programming administered by Urban Arts Partnership. Part 3 – ELT Program Description Target Population: The ELT program for a Rise School will be offered to all students in the school. Describe how the school will meet the following SED requirements for an ELT program: How will the school integrate academics, enrichment, and skill development through hands-on experiences that make learning relevant and engaging? How will CBO staff and the school’s teachers be integrated to provide a seamless learning day?  Offer a range of activities that capture student interest and strengthen student engagement in learning so as to promote higher attendance, reduces risk for retention or drop out, and increases the likelihood of graduation.  Actively address the unique learning needs and interests of all types of students, especially those who may benefit from approaches and experiences not offered in the traditional classroom setting. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 58   What new content areas and opportunities will be offered to students? How will the school ensure all IEP and language mandates are met during ELT?  Contain components designed to improve student academic, social, and emotional outcomes, including opportunities for enrichment programs such as in music and art.  Ensure instruction in any core academic subject offered in the program will be delivered under the supervision of a teacher who is NYS certified in that particular content area.  How will community educators receive professional development? Are there plans to provide joint PD to school faculty and community partner staff?  What content will be led by pedagogical staff and what content will be led by CBO partners?  How will the school best utilize CBO partners to impact student achievement?  How will effective outreach be conducted to families?  How will programming be made easily accessible to students and families in order to encourage participation? UAP provides support for ELL students through the Story Studio program an evidence based arts and English language integration program. Through the power of visual arts and storytelling, Story Studio advances literacy development for low-income English Language Learners by increasing comprehensive ELA achievement in reading, writing, speaking and listening. ELT is being offered to students through increasing the school year calendar, which has been an integral part of Brooklyn Generation’s model. Students participate in core academic classes beginning in August and through mid-winter recess, which provides an additional 16 - 20 days of instruction. Additionally, by staggering teacher time, the BGS school day schedule is increased by 30 minutes. Over the course of the year, students will be receiving 181 additional credit-bearing instructional hours. Through our model, students will have the opportunity to earn 18 - 20 credits per academic year. In the 9th grade, students will be offered an additional block of instruction in math. In the 10th grade, students will be offered an additional block of Global instruction. In 11th grade students will be offered an additional block of ELA instruction. Course offerings for students in the 12th grade will be determined upon student need to meet and / or exceed graduation and college readiness requirements. Our CBO, Urban Arts Partnership, is collaborating with us to provide programming during the school day in Humanities and STEM classes. Additionally, we are able to provide support services to our ELL students through UAP programming. During the 2016-2017 school year, we are scheduled to have integrated classes with UAP our ELL students and through a science/coding integration. UAP is also scheduled to provide programming at the end of the school day in the areas of UAP Dance, and UAP Step and Service Learning Internships. Additionally, UAP will continue collaboration with Row New York, an innovative program that pairs training in fitness and competitive rowing with rigorous academic support in order to build the values of tenacity, focus, teamwork, and confidence In addition to increasing student engagement by offering enrichment activities that have not available at BGS, this partnership will afford teachers opportunities to create and collaborate with our CBO to provide an even wider array of offerings centered on student interests and needs. Since the 2016-2017 school year, Urban Arts Partnership has also offered two sections of iCONNECT, a peer mentoring program in which school or UAP alumni are trained as mentor and advocates who then meet one on one and in groups with students to foster a safe space where students can set personal and academic goals, share successes and challenges and develop leadership skills. iCONNECT empowers students to advocate for themselves and to seek out supports both in and outside of the school in order to help them navigate the path to graduation. In addition, iCONNECT mentors meet weekly with their mentees who are struggling with attendance which they help troubleshoot the causes of their missed days. They work together to brainstorm solutions to situations which challenge their regular attendance. Students who are identified as having serious social-emotional issues that adversely affect their school attendance and overall performance will be referred to the Wellness team who will assess the student and family needs to implement the appropriate interventions. iConnect has been extremely 2018-19 CEP-RISE 59  successful in the 2017-2018 school year, regularly engaging more than 20 of our lowest attendance students with exceptionally trained peer mentors. Our school model provides for weekly 80-minute professional development sessions, which will be offered to CBO partners. Additionally, each grade team participates in daily common planning time, part of which will be utilized for CBO planning and collaboration. Our model also allows teacher teams to have 15-20 days of PD which is scheduled at the beginning of the school year, part of which will be scheduled for integration and collaboration with CBO staff. Outreach will be made to families in several ways: - UAP Community Resource Coordinator, CMCC counseling staff and Parent Coordinator will be conducting outreach to new BGS families through summer 2016, through home visits, calls, welcome postcards, email and text. - Students identified in need of attendance intervention will be assigned to a member of our school’s Wellness team (comprised of a full-time social worker, social work intern/s, Guidance Counselor and CMCC Counseling staff), who will be required to conduct family outreach via phone calls, letters, and home visits. In addition, the Community School Director will work with the Wellness team, students and families to proactively address stated family and household needs that pose barriers to student attendance and performance such as lack of health insurance and health care, pressing immigration difficulties, housing instability, and time competition between student’s responsibilities for child and elder care and school attendance and time for homework - UAP will be conducting summer programming off-site, which will be an additional opportunities to make connections with families. Part 4 – ELT Program Implementation and Oversight Part 4a. Who will implement the ELT program? Who will oversee the program? 1. Indicate the key personnel that will be responsible for implementing and overseeing the ELT program, including school-based staff and any high-quality community partners that will be involved. If applicable, describe the scope of involvement of all community partners and how the joint ELT program is structured. How will the school assess the impact of ELT on individual student achievement and social emotional development? 2. 3. 1. UAP partner has an on-site Community Resource Coordinator, who will administer the logistics of CBO programming. In addition, each UAP teaching artist meets regularly with their content area team leader within UAP and their content team leader visits, observes and provides feedback for at least two sessions per semester of programming. As ELT time will be taking place during the school day, school administration will oversee the program as a part of the observation/evaluation cycle. School-based social worker will also be responsible for the oversight of CMCC counseling partners. 2. UAP programming is currently in place during the school day and will be increased to serve more students. CMCC counseling partners are currently working with targeted students, and are working with community partners to provide recreational venues for students. 3. In school ELT courses will be evaluated using the classroom observation tools, scholarship data and benchmark assessment data. 4. Attendance and OORS data will be reviewed weekly by counseling staff to measure the effectiveness of the program. Part 4b. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 60  Course and program effectiveness will be assessed throughout school year -in November, March and June. Part 5 – ELT Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the ELT program. Community School Director CCMC counseling staff Content Teachers for credit bearing classes LIU partnership Brooklyn College partnership Arthur Ashe partnership Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support the ELT Program. Note: If the program is funded by 21st Century Community Center Learning Funds, it must be offered in conjunction with a high quality, high capacity community partner. 21st Century Title I 1003(a) X Tax Levy X Title III Title I SWP PTA Funded Title I TA SIG Grant P/F Set-aside C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 6 – ELT Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Assessment of the effectiveness of all of our interventions will take place four times this year through the use of informal observations: October 2018 December 2018 February 2019 April 2019 We will be looking at the following areas: Ongoing monitoring of students: 2018-19 CEP-RISE 61  Skedula / PupilPath progress reports Credit accumulation Attendance and participation rates in ELT Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. New Visions Student Data Sorter - Progress to Graduation tool. Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 62  Section 7: Community School Description Directions: The Community School strategy is directly aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. Community Schools bring schools and community partners together and integrate academics, health, youth development, and family engagement to provide students with the tools and opportunities they need to succeed. The Core Services in Community Schools are Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness. Part 1 – The Community School Program Goal(s) How is the Community School strategy integrated into academic instruction at your school, and what impact has it had on student academic outcomes? Community School has been increasingly connected to instruction. UAP Story Studio has been integrated into our ELL support class, and has helped to connect ELL students to their core academic classes and increased language acquisition, as indicated by course pass rates and improvement on the NYSESLAT. UAP has provided Step Dance instruction, which has increased Physical Education course pass rates for the participating students. This year, UAP will be working to connect seniors with internship opportunites, and will create chances for students to explore fields of their choosing in order to build connections between what they are learning in school, and the world of work. Indicate the summative goal(s) of the Community School program for the 2018-19 school year. Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. By June 2019, raise the attendance rate of students with a 2017-2018 attendance rate of 70% - 89% by a minimum of 5%. Please answer the following question as it relates to meeting your Community School Program Annual Goal(s): How will achieving your Community School Goal(s)--in ELT, Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness--support your academic goals for students? Many students who are not attending school and disconnected, and need multiple opportunities to engage and have activities to look forward to in school. Our CS approach is to monitor and encourage students to attend school more often, to connect them with adults who are interested in their success, and to support them as they help to navigate the obstacles that may have inhibited success in the past. We believe that all students will be successful if given the opportunities and resources, and this approach will also support our academic goals. Part 2 – Community School Program Description Part 2a. Identify the CBO partnerships that you will develop in ELT, Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness, their target student population(s), and scope of the services provided. As well as supporting schools’ supportive environment and attendance work, CBOs should be helping to support your school’s instructional focus. CBO Partnership Target Population Scope of Service Row New York Brooklyn College TRIO ELL students 9th & 10th grade Brooklyn College STEP 9th - 12th Daily instruction College access, tutoring and test prep 3-5 days per week Focus on Science and Technology programs schedule TBD CCM Mental Health Clinic All referred studetns Individual and family counseling 2018-19 CEP-RISE 63 UAP Internship program Targeted 12th grade students Queen Geniuses & Giant Thinking Targeted attendance intervention students Internship coordination and management 6 week program for girls/boys groups culminating in a weekend retreat at Ramapo Part 2b. Describe how the school will partner with the Lead CBO to do the following: 1. Community Schools are expected to partner with a community-based partner organization (CBO) and together with members of the School Leadership Team, hire a Community School Director. The Director will lead implementation of the asset and needs assessment process, and other critically important coordinating activities. Indicate how you will leverage this aspect of the work. Community Schools are expected to personalize the needs of all students, through strategic programming and services, as determined by the asset and needs assessment, and must also offer Expanded Learning Time (ELT) and mental health programming. In completing this section, ensure that you think about how: (1) the right services are provided to the right students and families at the right time; and (2) how you will seamlessly coordinate services with instructional programming happening throughout and outside of the school day. Indicate how you will implement this work, and describe other programming you anticipate to be in place to strengthen this initiative. Community Schools are expected to emerge as Partnership Schools, which are places where parents and families feel welcome, actively participate in the conversation and decision-making around the renewal of their schools, and have many opportunities to advocate for their children. Monthly meetings and Community School Forums engaging families and community stakeholders will be a critical part of this family engagement strategy. Describe how you will implement this aspect of the work. Community School Principals are expected to meet on a weekly basis with their Community School Director, select Assistant Principals, key staff, and other CBOs, to analyze trends in data and case manage individual students. Data tools – including the New Visions Data Sorter - and training will be available for schools to use. Indicate how you will implement this aspect of the work. 2. 3. 4. The Community Schools structure will provide the needed resources to develop strong community-based partnerships and implement personalized and tiered interventions to address our students’ and families challenges. BGS will host monthly forums for parents, students, family and community members which will not only engage families and students in the community school process but also share needed resources and information around a different theme each month (for example, immigration, health insurance, etc.). Brooklyn Generation School along with our community school partners, Generation Schools Network (GSN) and Urban Arts Partnership (UAP), will provide services through three structures. First, the school will leverage existing Advocacy programs. Second, the school will use the flexibility of Studio Courses to integrate staff and new course offerings; some of the new courses might be academic, while others offer services, remediation or additional enrichment opportunities. Third, a minimum of an additional hour added to our day will offer extended school programming for students and families some of which will have continued weekend programming. UAP is the lead partner on our Community School and has subcontracted work with Community Counseling and Mediation Center (CCMC) to collaborate and implement services in five key areas: 1. Mental health services 2. Drug education and abuse prevention 3. Legal assistance and alternatives to incarceration 4. Expanded school-based intervention programs (violence prevention, peer mediation, leadership development) 5. Enrichment (Therapeutic Recreational Programs) 2018-19 CEP-RISE 64  To address the social emotional needs of the students and families of BGS, the mental health team will conduct outreach to target students and meet with their families to do a comprehensive mental health assessment. They will work with the families to develop success plans (treatment plans) and connect them to additional resources in the community to meet the identified needs. The counselors will offer individual, group and family therapy, incorporating non-traditional forms of therapy, such as music and movement (dance) therapy. Counselors will also conduct home visits as needed and conduct quarterly psycho-educational workshops to parents on topics such as teen substance abuse, suicide prevention, understanding disorders of childhood and adolescents, and effective parenting/raising successful children. The counseling staff will also assist with family engagement through the development of a parent support group that will meet once a week to provide parents with the space to share the challenges of parenting teens as well as to obtain peer support, develop parent skills and gain access to additional resources. In an effort to develop therapeutic recreational programming the clinical consultant of CCMC will collaborate with and provide supervision to recreational staff to assist them with developing activities to address the social emotional and mental health needs of students. Together, the recreational staff and mental health staff will collaborate to develop social-recreational curricula that are geared toward helping students develop specific social-emotional skills to help them manage emotions, develop impulse control (thus reducing violence), improve decision makings and problem solving skills. The mental health staff will also collaborate with CBOs whose mission is to reduce violence in the community and gang involvement (CBOs: Man Up, Guns Down, Life Camp) to develop an anti-violence campaign. To assist students with developing pro-social skills geared toward leadership development ELT enrichment activities will include the development of a Brotherhood/Sisterhood rites of passage program. This program will focus on helping students develop positive identities, healthy self-esteem and positive value systems that guide their behavior. The Brotherhood/Sisterhood will meet twice a week. All activities will be geared toward exploring and practicing a variety of principles (integrity, honesty, trust, cooperation, loyalty, respect, responsibility /reliability, determination). The need for a GSA (Gender and Sexuality Alliance_ was identified in early community school discussions within the BGS and greater South Shore Community. In the 2016-2017 school year, UAP staff, in conjunction with a Wellness staff Social Work intern and a Social Worker from CAMBA who works with another school on the South Shore campus began work on a GSA club but found challenges in the form of institutional (outside of BGS) apathy and low attendance. After experimenting with different formats and times, the program was changed to be a lunch group. This group will continue to meet in 2017-2018 and we plan to increase our outreach to develop a fully functioning, student-led GSA in order to provide support for our LGBT or questioning students on the South Shore campus who have historically struggled with deficits in attendance, social emotional integration into peer groups, and family difficulties. To ensure the work of the partner organization, the school principal will meet with the Community Engagement Team twice a month to review student and family participation data, discuss high need family and / or student social-emotional interventions and reflect on the work to best inform next steps. The team will use the New Visions Data Tool to review individual student data as well as look for positive and negative trends. Part 3 – Community School Partnerships Oversight 2018-19 CEP-RISE 65  Part 3a. Key Staff and Partners 1. Name and describe the scope of involvement of all community partners working in the school (include partners supporting ELT, counseling, enrichment, etc.) 2. Name the members of your Community School Team and how meetings will be organized and structured to engage all stakeholders and be focused on results. 3. Explain data strategies including the use of the data sorter, and steps that the school will take to ensure that the appropriate interventions are provided to the right students School administration (Principal, Assistant Principal, Director of Wellness & Prevention) will each oversee aspects of the program. Partner organizations will supervise their staffs (partners include GSN, UAP and CCMC). The leadership of each organization will meet monthly to discuss progress and plans for growth. The Principal and Assistant Principal will oversee the academic aspects of the ELT programs. The Director of Wellness and Preventive is an LCSW-R, with extensive experience in managing mental health programs and developing therapeutic recreation programs will oversee the counseling services and therapeutic recreational programs. The Community School Coordinator will responsible for facilitating the monthly CSLT meetings, developing partnerships with identified CBO’s and conducting outreach to the community to inform them of services and programs available on campus. Early in the 2015-2016 school year, we hired an ELT coordinator who assumed responsibility for for coordinating activity schedules, securing space, supplies/resources, food /snacks for students, coordinating trips and managing the intricate details of running an afterschool program. The coordinator also assist with tracking data for program evaluation and keeping attendance records. She also participates as a member of the Community School Engagement Team which meets weekly in order to coordinate all efforts with community and school engagement, and supports the work of the Parent Coordinator. In 2016-2017 Our ELT coordinator has coordinated the delivery and distribution of DOE provided meals for BGS students involved in onsite ELT programs and requesting meals. this service will continue in 2017-2018 and we will develop a core of student volunteers to assist the ELT coordinator. In addition, in the 2016-2017 school year. we leveraged the services of the Americorps volunteer provided for us through the Office of Community Schools who is also bilingual in Haitian Kreyol and a 2012 alumni of BGS. In 2015-2016 this volunteer provided invaluable support for both parent engagement and peer mentoring. In 2016-2017, the same volunteer will return to BGS to develop several programs that were conceived in the past school year, including an onsite ELL program for families, a lunchtime free-write/poetry program to increase literacy and engagement and a narrative storytelling program that will involve both parents and students in creating first person narratives about life experiences in order to support literacy and ELL efforts, social emotional learning and parent/caregiver and student relationships. CCMC will be responsible for developing the mental health clinic, providing counseling services, facilitating parent support groups, and psycho educational workshops. CCMC will also work collaborate with the Director of Wellness to assist with obtaining an OMH licensed to establish a school based clinic. The Consulting Clinical Supervisor will be responsible for providing Clinical supervision to counseling staff and staff members hired to facilitate therapeutic recreational programs. Other partnerships will be developed with CBO’s to provide services and resources to meet the needs of students and families identified in the needs assessment. The effectiveness of the program will be evaluated by reviewing benchmark data, attendance data, and OORs data. The Principal, Wellness team, Community School Director and ELT Coordinator will meet to review attendance and student academic progress to assess student achievement. Part 3b. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the Community School program. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 66  For the counseling staff (Guidance counselor, 2 social work interns) they will need professional development that focuses on trauma treatment, additional counseling, family counseling and school mental health. The ELT Coordinaror will need training on understanding mental health issues of children and adolescents and behavior management. Part 3c. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. For our Community School AIDP, the program will be implemented over the course of 5 years: September 2014 – June 2019 CSET team meets weekly to review progress, and the CSD and Principal will monitor effectiveness four times a year: October 2018 December 2018 February 2019 April 2019 Part 3d. Mental Health Work Plan Separate from this R-CEP, schools will complete a Mental Health Work Plan that will become an addendum to this document. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 67  Section 8: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Scaffold questioning, repeated readings, writing to learn, MYON online reading program. Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Rewards Reading Intervention during ELT During daily class instruction and additional tutoring takes place during lunch and after school. Small group, daily instruction during school day five days a week for 55 minutes and afterschool for 2 hours weekly with small group tutoring Scaffold questioning, repeated readings, writing to learn Small group, daily instruction during school day five days a week for 55 minutes and afterschool for 2 hours weekly with small group tutoring During daily class instruction and additional tutoring takes place during lunch and after school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Gates-MacGinitie Grade team Kid Talk conducted weekly Data from formative and summative assessments Think Through Math/Imagine Learning Placement Assessment Grade team Kid Talk conducted weekly Data from formative and summative assessments Science Grade team Kid Talk conducted weekly Scaffold questioning, repeated readings, writing to learn Small group, daily instruction during school day five days a week for 55 minutes During daily class instruction and additional tutoring takes place during 2018-19 CEP-RISE 68 lunch and after school. During daily class instruction and additional tutoring takes place during lunch and after school. During the School Day and after school and afterschool for 2 hours weekly with small group tutoring Small group, daily instruction during school day five days a week for 55 minutes and afterschool for 2 hours weekly with small group tutoring Guidance Counselor and Social Workers and Social Work Interns deliver one on one and small group counseling Mental health services delivered by CCM (CBO) Data from formative and summative assessments Grade team Kid Talk conducted weekly Social Studies Scaffold questioning, repeated readings, writing to learn Data from formative and summative assessments At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Weekly PPC meetings - Students with IEP’s -Students with less than 90% attendance Group and individual Counseling based on the identified needs. Assessment and referral services -Students exhibiting social emotional behavioral problems that are affecting academic and social functioning. -Parents and teachers can also refer student for services. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 69  Section 9: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) Three (3) 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. STH students will have the following made available to them: 1. All necessary school supplies 2. Shoes and clothing as necessary for attending school as well as outerwear for cold and inclement weather 3. Crisis and intervention counseling through our Mental Health Center 4. Glasses through city vision program 5. Access to health services through SSEC school based health clinic (anticipated opening Fall 2017) Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). NA 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 70  NA 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. NA 2018-19 CEP-RISE 71  Section 10: Title I Program Information Directions:  All schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. BGS teacher recruitment team is comprised of classroom teachers as well as Generation Schools staff who utilize DOE systems (New Teacher Finder, Open Market, etc.) to recruit and vet teacher applicants. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the strategies and activities for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, staff, and paraprofessionals that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Monthly professional development will be provided to all staff in the areas of: 1. Instructional shifts 2. Blended learning - CCLS with technology tools 3. Quality formative assessments 4. Creating authentic questions to generate student discussion 5. Performance task design Selected teachers will participate in an Instructional Cabinet, which will align and make manifest the instructional focus. They will develop model classrooms facilitate learning conversations around student performance in grade-level Inquiry Teams. Teachers will participate in grade-level Inquiry Teams which meet daily during Common Planning time. Objectives and agenda are informed by classroom observation, student data and Instructional Cabinet. Further, teachers will also participate in teacher-led Content-teams to norm instructional strategies and revise vertical alignment of skills and content. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 72  Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. Not Applicable 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). Not Applicable Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/information, early intervention services, etc.). Not Applicable 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. All teachers are members of a grade team and a content area team. The grade teams, led by grade team leaders, meet every day during a common planning time and content area teams meet once every two weeks. During these meetings, teachers discuss instruction and the assessments that help inform their next steps. Through these conversations, examination of student work and review of instructional strategies, the teachers decide on and work with a set of assessment tools. Professional development around this work is provided to full staff once a month and once a week with grade teams. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds enables, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (R-CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 73  Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Title I Part A (Basic) Title I School Improvement 1003(a) Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funds Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 137,420 16,979 0 0 0 0 1,763,182 X X NA X Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) NA 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows: 2018-19 CEP-RISE 74   Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I School Improvement 1003(a): To support implementation of school improvement activities identified through the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) reviews or a school review with district oversight and included in the DCIP/R-CEP.  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: To support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs.  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan.  Title I Priority and Focus School Parent Engagement Set-aside: Additional set-aside is to enable greater and  more meaningful parent participation in the education of their children. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process, including Title I 1003(g) SIG funds: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 75  Section 11: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current R-CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Brooklyn Generation School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students Brooklyn Generation School will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 2018-19 CEP-RISE 76  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; ● providing workshops/trainings to parents on navigative NYCDOE and Pupil path sites to engage them in student academic tracking for completion of high school requirements and college readiness The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. We offer families health insurance options and info/opportunities for idNYC program/four-week computer skills training to empower caregivers. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; 2018-19 CEP-RISE 77  ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; The parent coordinator assists the college preparation director in engaging parents/caregivers for grade-level specific monthly/quarterly meetings now held as focus groups. The parent coordinator with the community engagement team sponsors a dinner evening with ELL families to share information, make a comfortable, trusting environment for the special-interest group to get the most out of their high school experience. The parent coordinator joins with the College Prep Academy to sponsor college trips for parents/caregivers to attend with their children. These events foster the importance of families making college decisions together as one. ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; BGS has several bi-lingual staff member willing to translate info on-demand at conferences for our haitian-creole, french, arabic, spanish speaking families. Documents are continually set-up with translation lines for all families to engage in their native languages. ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; Parent Association meetings now take place during school-wide or grade-specific events in addition to traditional general meetings scheduled to streamline engaging families as special- interest groups This has raised to comfort-level and trust-level between parents, staff and students. ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; BGS's efforts to continue building strong programming displaying student achievement resulted in an additional very 2018-19 CEP-RISE 78  successful Award ceremony for Parents. Students honored their caregivers with self-written speeches (student-coached/proofed) by parent coordinator and teachers. Parent leaders/ Wellness and special Ed departments nominated parents recipients. ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; Have books to lend to parents and students;. Looking for a dedicated case/area in room (in progress). ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; Ongoing progress during the year as we register, train parents to use PUPIL PATH site/app. ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; Parent coordinator keeps a current list of parent emails. Share news, info, opportunities, send links for Learning environment survey, other time-sensitive items as well as daily school news on student-school achievement. ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) Brooklyn Generation School ,in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; 2018-19 CEP-RISE 79  ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; Parent-teacher conferences held more than once per semester in grade-specific focus groups. parents are welcome to set appointments with grade teacher teams at any time if neccessary. ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; 2018-19 CEP-RISE 80  ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; 2018-19 CEP-RISE 81  ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 82  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 18 School Name Brooklyn Generation Borough Brooklyn School Number 566 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Louis Garcia Coach Nora Hyland ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Teacher/Subject Area Cynthia Gilligan / Special Ed Teacher/Subject Area Louise Bogue English Related-Service Provider Kelli Dunham Community Coord. Superintendent Michael Prayor Assistant Principal Coach type here School Counselor Melissa Sorger Parent Parent Coordinator Robin Simmons Field Support Center Staff Member Jose Garcia Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics 2018-19 CEP-RISE 83  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 239 Total number of ELLs 15 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 6.28% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 0 1 2 3 4 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Currently, BGS uses SCANTRON Performance Series for reading assessment. Student test scores for the NYS Regents and the NYSESLAT are also used to evaluate student reading and writing levels. This data will help inform our school's instructional plan in the following ways: the school has identified model teachers who will demonstrate and review best and promising instructional practices, work with teachers in model classroom settings and provide resources for instruction of ELLs as part of teacher teams' weekly professional development. The administration has provided for formalized Small Group Instruction, in the form of Special Classes, for students needing further support in foundational reading and writing as well as math skills. Finally, our Free Standing ESL Program has been organized into classes that reflect the students current level of English acquisition, such as Emerging to Expanding, allowing instruction to be more focus on the individual needs of homogeneous 2018-19 CEP-RISE 84  groups of students. BGS continues to provide Push In support for History, and extended day instruction in our other content classes. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? BGS evaluates the use of resources and support staff before the start of each semester. Administration considers how to best allocate resources to benefit ELLs. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? In order to best understand the results of our Annual Yearly progress, we review students test scores on the Regents, Common Core, and NYSESLAT exams. Grade and content teams also review individual student transcripts to evaluate their progress toward the next grade level. Once percentage rates are calculated for students making progress, and those who need targeted support, programming is deliberately structured to provide as much time as possible for academic intervention for identified groups and for individual students. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Administration together with school leadership team and grade teams periodically evaluate summative data to target growth in all academic areas. The data will provide direction for professional development of pedagogical staff and refinement of any intervention programs in place for ELLs. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] We are a 9-12 school. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The data patterns reveal that while students continue to progress in the ENL classroom by either moving to the next level on NYSESLAT, or by testing out, they continue to need support in the areas of reading and writing in English. We are now however a community and renewal school, and as such have the opportunity to further support our ELLs language development through our extended Block G classes, and through our collaboration with community based agencies such as the Urban Arts Project, Brooklyn College, and Arthur Ashe Urban Health Initiative. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? The school community is well aware of school-wide data. They are discussed at great length during staff meetings. Student academic growth is also a subject of discussion in periodic team meetings. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Students receive instruction in heterogeneous cross grade level groups, according to homogeneous language levels. b. TBE program. If applicable. Not applicable c. DL program. If applicable. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 85  Not applicable 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Hours of instruction are aligned according to the students NYSESLAT and NYSTELL Results, and provided by placing them into an ESL class that is in accordance with their current level of English acquisition. Additional Push In and extended day instruction is also provided to meet mandates and further support students in the content classes. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. BGS continues to use ED Performance as an assessment to evaluate student performance as well as Regents test scores, to determine how best to focus instruction for our ELL students. A considerate effort is made to deliver challenging material using visual images when possible. It helps teacher and student make connections to real-life and culture. We continue to use our school-wide instructional strategies that include the Question Formulation Technique, Reading and Writing to Learn, Socratic Seminar and Literature Circles. In addition, we provide leveled reading materials that are content specific, and differentiated materials such as vocabulary word banks, graphic organizers and texts in the home language. Dictionaries and thesaurus are available in every classroom. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? BGS works closely with the school's Borough Assessment Center to ensure that testing materials are provided and applied as needed, such as the NYSTELL, LOTE and the Spanish Lab R. We also work closely with the school Special Education Committee, NYC Department of Education Translation office, and we have staff that act as translators for parents of ELLs and during IEP meetings as needed. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Differentiated instruction is provided as follows: SIFE and newcomers have similar academic needs. Students are encouraged to take academic risks by increasing participation levels in speaking. They are also coached to edit their work carefully. SIFE and Newcomers receive the mandated hours of instruction of 540 minutes via freestanding ESL plus additional extended day and after school instruction. Longterm ELLS require special consideration as BGS evaluates the conditions for which an students continues to be a in the category of Longterm ELL. Before instructional adjustments are made, students' patterns are reviewed. BGS wants to understand how attendance, test scores, and credit accumulation play a part in them being a Longterm ELL. Developing and Longterm ELLs receive 360 mandated minutes of instruction, and additional content/ESL instructional support in the content classroom. Former ELLs who are successful in attaining a passing score on the NYSESLAT modalities continue to be a population in need of support. These students continue to be programmed into push-in classes when possible. They are also the subject of discussion during team meetings while considering interventions, evaluations for success and conducting action research. Former ELLs are provided with push in ESL support, after school tutoring, block G or 7 th period instruction as needed, and are provided with time and a half on state exams as mandated. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? 2018-19 CEP-RISE 86  Our instructional strategies include a school-wide framework that is Active, Linked, Student-Centered, focused on Understanding, and Reflective. Grade level materials include non-fiction texts, Project based Learning, and Writing to Learn strategies, and Hochman Writing Strategies. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Brooklyn Generation uses curricula, that is aligned with the Common Core, and provides opportunities for students to make connections across content areas and to the real world. This is accomplished by allowing content teachers, such as English and Science for example, to co-plan lessons that support mutual concepts in both subjects. In addition, our scheduling allows for more class time, because BGS provides students with 55 minute classes, and an additional block of instruction known as Block G. This is an end of the day period, that provides students additional opportunities for remediation. The Special Education team as well as the ELL Coordinator meet weekly to review student progress in the content classrooms. Interventions that support student learning and achievement of IEP goals include moving students into smaller class settings known as skills-based classes, where the ratio of students to Special Educatin teachers can range from five to eight students per class. This type of scheduling is meant to provide students with more personal attention and small group instruction reflected in their individual IEP goals. Other programming includes Resource Room, ICT, and Push In provided by the Special Education and ELL Coordinator in conjunction with the content team teachers. We also offer opportunities for content teams to provide feedback on students progress and/or need for further remediation. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. The range of interventions at BGS include extended day schedule for our beginners and under credited ELLs. We provide one-on-one tutoring and small group instruction for all language levels, and we provide students with bilingual staff/paraprofessionals (that are bilingual in the students home languages) so that translation can be supplemented during instruction. Targeted instruction in ELA includes students participation in AVID and in Writing to Learn strategies. Students at all levels of language acquisition are provided with opportunities to read leveled text based on their performance on the Common Core and Ed performance scores, and are actively engaged in hands on projects that focus on collaboration between students and content teachers, so that fluid connections are made by the students as they move from class to class. In our Free standing ESL classroom, students adhere to a weekly schedule that targets reading using Drop Everything and Read strategies, Journal and writing response to a text, Peer editing, and daily vocabulary worksheets, as well as the use of graphic organizers, and technology to promote understanding in English such as Breaking News English.com, and TED Talks. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Improvements to the school include the additional block of instructional time, and the increase in wellness support with the hiring of three new certified social workers, and one substance abuse counselor. This year, BGS is fortunate in that we are now a Community School, which has provided additional funding for collaboration with community based agencies such as the Urban Arts Project, College Now and TRIO programs. Our transition to becoming a community school will further provide learning opportunities for students in school as they progress toward college readiness and increase their understanding of the skills they need to acquire in school and in their communities. The programs that community grants allow our students to partake in include TRIO, Urban Arts Partnership and College Now. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? No programs will be discontinued at this time. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. After school services are provided to all students including those identified as ELLs, every day after school from 3:30 to 4:30 pm. The ELL Coordinator also provides lunch time tutoring, 3 times per week, based on student need. Equal access to school-wide activities is provided through parent information packets available in the parent's home language, letters sent home in 2018-19 CEP-RISE 87  the home language, and outreach to the New York City Department of Education Translation Unit to ensure understanding and clear communication. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Instructional materials provided in the ESL classroom include daily reading of non-fiction texts, graphic organizers, vocabulary word worksheets, bilingual dictionaries and explicit signage and materials set up as stations in the classroom to promote student learning and application of key concepts expressed in the texts or projects. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Home languages are supported through the NYC DOE Translation Unit, through bilingual staff members at BGS, and by ensuring that translated text are provided for both students and parents as needed, such as parent letters, or instruction in the ELA classroom. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. The School uses ED Performance, NYSITELL, NYSESLAT and Regents scores to determine the students current reading and writing levels, and will use grade level text, along with teacher created differentiated lessons and projects. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Instructional materials provided in the ESL classroom include daily reading of non-fiction texts, graphic organizers, vocabulary word worksheets, bilingual dictionaries and explicit signage and materials set up as stations in the classroom to promote student learning and application of key concepts expressed in the texts or projects. Class curriculum is laced with opportunities for teachers to connect situations in text to community environment to foster development of social skills. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). BGS provides orientation sessions for families where they have ample opportunities to learn about our school and ask questions. Newly enrolled ELLs are invited to get to know the school over the summer by participating in a summer institute for students that includes trips to Ramapo State Park, and an art and poetry group. Since we want to make every effort to make sure our new students are part of the community, bilingual staff including the principals, parent coordinator, and our community school administrators reach out and invite families and students of newly enrolled ELLs to participate in these activities to foster the understanding that BGS is a community and a community school. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Students may take an elective in French. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? NA 2018-19 CEP-RISE 88  Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Professional Development opportunities are prescribed by the Principal. That may include monthly off campus trainings, or instruction by supervisory pedagogues from the CUNY Network. Professional Development is provided for all teachers and paraprofessionals on a weekly basis by Brooklyn Generation Network, and/or the Principals, as well as Master Teachers on the content team. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. The school works closely with the wellness team, guidance counselor, and community school coordinator to ensure successful student and parent orientation, curriculum night, and parent teacher meetings are in place to support student transition into high school. Records of professional Development are maintained and kept by the Principal. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? We review our school calendar and designate specific dates in collaboration with the Parent Coordinator, and with the approval of the Principal, for Parent Orientation. IEP meetings are set by the Special Education teachers and Special Education Coordinator, and individual Parent Meetings to discuss student goals and progress are also initiated by individual content teachers at their discretion. Communication regarding student progress or the need for a meeting to discuss assessment results is well documented in Skedula. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. In addition to Parent Orientation, BGS actively recruits ELL parents to participate on our school leadership team, and continues to engage in home visits during the summer. Our Community School Coordinator has identified a former ELL graduate and soon to be graduate to help with outreach to parents of ELLs, by making follow up phone calls, and providing translated materials regarding school events. Furthermore, all parents at BGS are encouraged to take the school survey so that we can be fully informed in addressing parent and student concerns. Parents and families of BGS students are provided with opportunities to participate in the Parent Association, The School Leadership team, parent academic activities that relate to building strong home-school partnerships, NYS Regents information sessions, workshops which promote understanding of performance standards and promotion criteria. BGS also trains parents to effectively access information from DOE and community resources and services. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Brooklyn Generation School has been fortunate that, as of our 2015-16 school year, we have been designated as a Community and Renewal School. As such, we are able to increase our programming and instruction for students by providing them with opportunities to participate in College Now, Arthur Ashe Urban Health Initiative, Brooklyn College Credit Accumulation while in 2018-19 CEP-RISE 89  High School, and collaborative hands on projects and schoolwide competition through Urban Arts Partnerships that provides students with a platform to express themselves through art and public speaking. We are a small but dedicated school that imparts to all of our students the importance of our motto - Dream bigger, Work harder, Care More. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 90 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, , testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 91  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: School DBN: Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Title Principal Assistant Principal Parent Coordinator ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 2018-19 CEP-RISE 92  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 18K566 School Name: Brooklyn Generation School Superintendent: Michael Prayor The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Sophia Lyttle ELL Teacher No No * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. The data and methodologies used to assess our school's written translation and oral interpretation needs include Parent orientation sessions for newly admitted students and their families and individual student interviews. Entitlement and Continued Entitlement letters and translation of any school flyers, Parent Teacher Conferences, and use of the New York City Department of Education's Translation Services Unit to ensure full communication and inclusion of parents who speak languages other than English. Parents also have access to the Parent Portal as part of Skedula, to maintain communication with their child's teachers. In our transition into being a Community School, we have hired staff who are bilingual in two of our highest needed languages - Haitian Creole and Arabic and also Spanish. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 93  Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral English Spanish French Arabic Haitain Creole Urdu Fulani 233 14 3 4 15 4 2 84.73 231 5.09 1.09 1.45 5.45 1.45 0.73 15 3 3 16 5 2 84 5.45 1.09 1.09 5.82 1.82 0.73 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. NA Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Our school would require that all documents be translated, as we make those translated copies available to the population of students and their families that we have identified would have the need. As a best practice, we include a line at the bottom of every letter that is sent home that reads "If you need this communication in (fill in language) please contact our Parent Coordinator at the school number" - that line is written in Haitian-Creole, Spanish and will now include Arabic. Monthly This information is translated in house. Curriculum Night Awareness September 15 Parents Teacher Conference November 1 This information is translated in house. School staff translated letter. This information is translated in House. n/a n/a n/a 2018-19 CEP-RISE 94  2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? Our list of Parent/Family formal meetings and other interactions include and are not limited to: Parent / Family Orientation, Curriculum Night, College Guidance and Planning, PTA meetings, SLT meetings, Community School Meetings, Grade level Conferences, IEP meetings, Mental Health and Crises interventions, Progress to Graduation, Academic interventions and student success planning. Monthly We have Kreyol, Arabic, French and Spanish speaking staff. Parent/ Family Orientation August 29 Curriculum Night Awareness September 21 parent Teacher Conference November 1 We have recruited capable staff that are stationed in different areas in the building. A day before event, teachers receive a list of those stations together with the language and interpreter's name. They are called at their respect extension and asked to assist in a particular room. We have recruited capable staff that are stationed in different areas in the building. A day before event, teachers receive a list of those stations together with the language and interpreter's name. They are called at their respective extension and asked to assist in a particular room. We have recruited capable staff that are stationed in different areas in the building. A day before the event, teachers receive a list of those stations together with the language and interpreter's name. They are called at their respective extensions and asked to assist in a particular room. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 95  3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. We have various ways of communicating with our parents. We solicited the services of Global Connect which the ability to reach a large or small group of parents. Messages can be recorded in any language and sent quickly. Because BGS employs its own parent coordinator, we count on an up to date list of cell numbers and emails. These are also ways we can communicate quickly with families of limited-English Proficient students. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Administration covers the importance of Chancellor's Regulation A-663 at our first staff meeting. It is references in the BGS teachers' handbook. Staff is continuously reminded throughout the year prior to any event requiring school to parent communication. Staff understands administration stands ready to assist when needing the services of the interpretation and translation unit specially if staff member is engaging in this process for the fist time. Parents made aware of Chancellor's A-663 during all school visits. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) The parent coordinator is usually the first staff member parents encounter. She is well inform and so does relate information to parents of their rights to receive information and documents in their native language. We will ensure that appropriate intake, parent choice, and entitlement information is provided for parents as a result of our parent orientation and completed Home Language Identification Survey. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? In addition to the DOE mandated Parent School Survey, we share our own in house survey. The document is made available in the home language. Families have an opportunity once a year to provide their input on how they feel we are serving their language needs. We ask a couple of pointed questions and space is provided for parent note to school. In implementing the feedback, we have increased the level of oral communication by increasing person to person contact via phone. Our school is in constant communication with families and gather oral and written feedback though the following: 1. Community Engagement meetings 2018-19 CEP-RISE 96  2. Grade level parent outreach via phone and on-line parent portal 3. SLT 4. PTA 5. Parent Coordinator workshops and events. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 97 
