 28Q008 School Name: J.H.S. 008 RICHARD S. GROSSLEY Principal: KATIANA LOUISSAINT 2018-19 CEP-RISE 1  Rise School Comprehensive Educational Plan (R-CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: Executive Summary and Organizing Principles Section 3: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 4: Rise School Narrative Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) Section 7: Community School Partnerships Section 8: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 9: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 10: Title I Program Information Section 11: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP-RISE 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information J.H.S. 008 Richard S. Grossley 28Q008 342800010008 6-8 School Number (DBN): 108-35 167th Street Jamaica, NY 11433 718-739-6883 718-526-5419 Phone Number: KatianaLouissaint Fax: KLouiss2@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Community School CBO: Principal: Community School Director: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): Email Address: IngrisCoronado KatianaLouissaint Laura Flanagan Jenny Perez Cassandra Kennedy Jennifer Martinez N/A District Information Geographical District: 28 Mabel Sarduy Superintendent: 90-27 Sutphin Boulevard, Jamaica, NY 11435 Superintendent’s Office Address: MSarduy@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-557-2622 Phone Number: 718-557-2623 Fax: Queens FSC: Field Support Center (FSC) Executive Director: Marlene Wilks 2018-19 CEP-RISE 3  Executive Director’s Office Address: 8201 Rockaway Boulevard, Queens, NY 11416 mwilks@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-281-3259 Phone Number: 718-281-3259 Fax: 2018-19 CEP-RISE 4  Section 2: Executive Summary and Organizing Principles The Objective To guide, support and accelerate the early progress demonstrated by the schools graduating out of the Renewal program, as Rising Schools of Excellence (Rise), with a compelling theory of action, clear strategy for sustainment, targeted individualized supports, continued accountability, gradual release of responsibility, such that they independently accelerate their growth trajectory. Background Rise Schools have demonstrated: ● ● they have the will and conditions in place to accelerate student growth and meet school improvement benchmarks. they have the capacity to lead/implement a school improvement strategy. Rise Schools have seen some gains1 across multiple measures including graduation rates, college readiness, state test scores and attendance. As a result, these schools will fully transition out of the Renewal Schools program at the end of the 2017-2018 SY and continue under the guidance of the Office of Field Support, in partnership with the Office of School Support and Supervision. 1All Rise Schools met at least 67% of their benchmarks, are not on the State’s Priority list, and have demonstrated a sustainable school improvement structure that will allow them to build on their progress. Six Rise Keys for Continued Improvement 1. Strengthen the Instructional Core 2. Strengthen Instructional Leadership Capacity 3. 4. Apply a tiered approach to student intervention 5. Promote a positive, inclusive school environment for students, staff, parents and Improve Data Driven Practices community partners Increase monitoring and accountability 6. Theory of Action If the NYC Department of Education provides customized supports to Rise schools and principals designed around the “Six Rise School Keys for continued improvement” then, Rise principals and their teams will have the tools and resources to accelerate outcomes for ALL students and increase students’ access to an excellent and equitable education. Structure of the Rise School Comprehensive Educational Plan (R-CEP) The Rise School Comprehensive Educational Plan (R-CEP) will serve as the organizing and overarching document for each Rise school and will be directly aligned and developed around the elements of the Framework for Great Schools, New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, and Strong Schools, Strong Communities, including the following: ● Rise Benchmarks: please refer to the 2018-19 Rise benchmarks provided to your school. ● Establishing an overarching summative vision aligned with elements of the Framework for Great Schools and documenting key areas of celebration and Rise through analysis of assessments and by envisioning what the desired outcome for each school will be at the end of the School Rise process. ● Setting mid-year point benchmarks that create the path for improvement by focusing on desired outcomes and goals. In this way, the plan will be mapped to the overarching summative vision. In addition to the five discrete goals formed around the elements of the Framework for Great Schools, each school will create an action plan. ● Transformation into a community school in order to increase student and family access to physical and mental health services and other social-emotional supports made available in or near the school. ● Expanded learning opportunities for all students, including additional instruction provided during afterschool and/or summer programming provided in collaboration with community partners. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 5  ● Intensive professional development for all staff to ensure effective implementation of curriculum and instruction aligned to the Next Generation Learning Standards (NGLS) and to support staff in effectively responding to the differentiated academic and social-emotional needs of all students. ● Additional, focused strategies to increase parent and family engagement. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Information on the Framework for Great Schools and the DTSDE Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department has established programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students supports to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and the R-CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Rise School Comprehensive Educational Plan (R-CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint for continuous improvement that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to increase student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five (5) goals and action plans that align with the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 6  The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. Accountability Tools and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is informed by the New York State Education Department’s (NYSED) Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) Tenets, the American Institute of Research (AIR) Needs Assessment, the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYSED’s Six DTSDE Tenets To strengthen the existing system, the NYSED has developed a tool that captures the best practices from each of the current tools – they call it a Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness. This new tool encompasses multiple instruments such as interviews, classroom observations and surveys. The protocol will begin with a clear and cogent statement of the optimal conditions of an effective school and the instruments comprising the protocol will measure how close or far away a particular school is to the optimal conditions identified. Once reviewed, the school and district will create a strategic plan to address the areas in need of improvement. All Priority and Focus Schools and Focus 2018-19 CEP-RISE 7  Districts must use the new tool; and districts that are required to submit District Comprehensive Improvement Plans and Comprehensive Education Plans also will use the tool. The DTSDE protocol includes a rubric, which identifies clear and coherent expectations of the optimal conditions of an effective school and school district across the following six tenets:  Tenet 1: District Leadership and Capacity  Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions  Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support  Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions  Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health, and  Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 2017-18 Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Structures for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:  a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; 2018-19 CEP-RISE 8 a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC)  It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the R-CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the R-CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. Next Steps for R-CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists in every Rise school and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the American Institute of Research (AIR) needs assessment, the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: In Part 1A of the Section 5: Needs Assessment indicate the Rise Key and the corresponding statement of Practice (SOP) from the DTSDE Tenets that will be addressed in the action plan. Schools that received an Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) School Review should use the recommendations from the review to select their SOPs. Schools that did not undergo an IIT review should select SOPs informed by the major findings/recommendations from your most recent Quality Review (QR) or Central-led Review (CLR), and other qualitative and quantitative data.  Step 4: Discuss and respond to the guiding questions under each Framework element.  Step 5: Revisit your school’s current goals, and strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you have identified, and will let your school community know when you have reached your goal.  Step 6: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 7: Update your school’s AIS section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 8: Complete the Expanded Learning Time (ELT) and the Community School sections.  Step 9: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether strategies and activities outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust practices along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Rise Program Priorities Our Rise Theory of Action (page 4) is drawn from research1 on turnaround schools, the DOE Framework for Great Schools, DTSDE Tenets, and the Quality Review, which suggest that these key priorities have the greatest impact on student achievement. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 9  RISE Keys Priorities 1. Strengthen the Instructional Core 2. Strengthen Instructional Leadership Capacity 3. Improve Data Driven Practices 4. Apply a tiered approach to school support and intervention 5. Promote a positive, inclusive school environment for students, staff, parents and community partners 6. Increase monitoring and accountability  A clear focus aligned to students’ instructional needs, including college and career readiness  Access to common, standards-based curricula for all students, including ELLs and SWDs  Explicit and intentional embedding of culturally responsive Instruction in all content areas  Formative and summative assessments for all students in all grades that are aligned to curricula and produce clear evidence of learning  Tiered approach to teacher professional learning opportunities.  Partnership with families to increase engagement in students’ academic success  Implementation of a coherent vision for school improvement - a vision for leading learning, leading people, leading schools and leading change  Development of a system to support distributive leadership and build the capacity and sustainability of teacher leaders through continuous improvement  Developing leadership competencies, specific to turnaround efforts, including leveraging multiple stakeholders, a commitment to student learning and a sustained pursuit of measurable progress. Strategic allocation of resources to support instructional and professional learning plans and family engagement in leadership opportunities Integrative use of formative and summative assessment tools and practices to target resources and support throughout the year to achieve academic priorities    Ongoing analyses of school-wide and student-level data and adjustments to curricular resources and instructional moves  Prioritization of the use of standards and data to inform teaching and learning    Implementation of a tiered intervention system that engages teacher teams in frequent cycles of progress monitoring and adjustments to address diverse student needs School establishes coherent system, adopted by all to ensure that interventions are effective, differentiated and timely Increased use of teacher teams’ data-driven practices to accelerate student achievement  Clear strategy that establishes social norms within the school community and promotes a culture for learning with clear and high expectations for all students, in partnership with CBOs.  The sustainability of an environment where students feel safe, connected and engaged through practices that are culturally relevant and build their scholarly identity  The development of a whole school approach, in partnership with families, with   specific attention to social, physical and behavioral environments Social emotional learning practices embedded in teaching and learning as aligned to the Collaborative for Academic, Social and Emotional learning (CASEL) competencies and supported by CBOs. School leaders implement effective monitoring systems to ensure that instructional practices and interventions are monitored closely at the classroom, team, and school wide level  Establish effective teacher team practices that ensure teachers are accountable for data findings and set timely and appropriate interventions  Data analysis results in adjustments to the programs and priorities to better service   students Foster positive systems for accountability driven by reflection and action planning Support from district leaders to focus efforts toward results and problem solving actions that lead to turnaround success. 1. Darden/Curry PLE – Turnaround Leadership Competencies and Turnaround Action Shown to Influence Student Achievement 2018-19 CEP-RISE 10  Achievement Network – SY 18-19 Foundations Rubric COSEBOC Standards and Promising Practices for Schools Educating Boys of Color Harvard Graduate School of Education and Harvard Business School: Certificate in School Management and Leadership Learner-Centered Initiatives Multidimensional Principal Performance Rubric Monitoring and Accountability ● Rise schools will be monitored for implementation of the Rise Comprehensive Educational Plan (R+CEP) by Superintendents and Office of Field Support. ● Rise schools will be held accountable for making progress according to annual targets set by the Department of Education, as evidenced by their attainment of named benchmark scores for each annualized key metric. Schools not achieving annual targets by June 2019 are subject to additional oversight and consequences, to be determined at a later date. ● OFS will bring increased oversight and accountability by monitoring FSC supports to schools and ensure that these are aligned with the school’s instructional focus, student and teacher needs, and moving the school toward achieving interim goals. ● OSSS will monitor DSR oversight of all supports to Rise Schools. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 11  Section 3: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Directions: All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Rise School Comprehensive Educational Plan (R-CEP). SLT members’ signatures indicates that they have been consulted with and given the opportunity to provide feedback on the plan and the plan’s alignment with the school-based budget to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Expanded Learning Time, Community School initiative, Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. On the chart below: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the second column. 2. 3. In the first column, indicate using an “X” if the person is an SLT member. In the third column, record the position and constituent group represented such as staff, parent, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), or other contributor. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 4. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the R-CEP, not approval. 5. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Signature (Blue Ink) Check if SLT X X X X X X Name Position and Constituent Group Katiana Louissaint Laura Flanagan Jenny Perez Patricia Richards Jennifer Martinez Ingris Coronado NA NA Represented *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Community School Director (staff) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) 2018-19 CEP-RISE 12  Check if SLT Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) X X X X X X X X X X JanetMoore Patreece Stewart DeborahTubbs SymonHarry Parent Parent Parent Parent Cassandra Kennedy Bernqulin Hayes-Brown UFT, Teacher/SLT Chair UFT, Paraprofessional Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP-RISE 13  Section 4: Rise School Narrative In a brief narrative, describe the current state of the Rise school addressing the following and please use existing data, where applicable: 1. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including your school’s mission statement and a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Identify any special student populations that the school has and what their specific needs are. 2. 3. Describe your school’s approach to family engagement and progress made with establishing families as partners in furthering student achievement 4. Describe how your school is leveraging community school partnerships to support progress in elements of the Framework for Great Schools and your Rise Benchmarks and indicate where this has been a challenge. 5. Summarize the Expanded Learning Time (ELT) opportunities that have been offered to your students this year. Contextual Information The New Preparatory Middle School 8, located in South Jamaica , Queens serves a diverse community of learners with many students from the Caribbean, South American and Asian nations. The school is a Title I school with more than seventy -five percent of students entitled for free and reduced lunch, 73% free and 5% reduced. The school's population consists of 393 students which is an increase of 14% from the 2017-2018 school year. 18% of the student population are classified as Students with Disabilities (SWDs) and 12% of students are categorized as English as a New Language (EN:s). School Vision: New Preparatory Middle School 8's students will become critical thinkers and ambassadors of their own learning to meet the challenges of the 21st century. School Mission: New Preparatory Middle School 8's mission is for students to learn and apply real life concepts through cooperative learning, use of technology and engaging activities to ensure college and career readiness. Unique/Important Characteristics: The New Preparatory Middle School 8 provides a focused, data-driven learning environment, where teachers provide meaningful instruction and all learners are empowered to succeed! Students are prepared to enter the high school of their choice, as knowledgeable thinkers and self-directed learners. The school has established a uniquely structured governing body, which empowers staff, parents, administrators, and community members to be responsible for setting policy, creating and implementing programs, monitoring adherence to high standards and assessing progress. In support of this mission professional development and technical assistance is provided by experts in their field. The New Preparatory Middle School has graduated from the Renewal Schools program and has transition into RISE status Our journey towards RISE has been marked by the students' and staff's commitment to continuous improvement. This focus on continuous improvement is anchored in our Core Beliefs that: Students learn best when instruction is engaging and interactive; and when students participate in cooperative learning, use technology and there is respect for all. As a result our beliefs and commitment to improvement, our staff has worked on strengthening our instructional capacity over the past few years in the following ways: A.) Ensuring Rigorous Instruction through Teacher Collaboration: 2018-19 CEP-RISE 14  Instructional staff members engage in 90 minutes of common planning during the school day one time per week. They review and revise curriculum maps, analyze data, and develop common lesson plans, per grade, per subject. Various resources are used to enhance instruction such as, The Webb's Depth of Knowledge Wheel, and the Hess' Cognitive Rigor Matrix which guides teacher questioning. Additionally, we have developed the "Four Question Quadrant" chart. On this chart teachers post quality questions which encourage critical thinking. These questions are scaffold from low order to higher order thinking to support students. The instructional staff engages in 80 minutes of professional learning weekly. Our professional learning calendar is informed by the pedagogical needs of the staff and is based on our needs assessment, feedback from administrators, and Advance data for individual teacher's (Measures of Teacher Practice (M.O.T.P.). Professional learning cycles are facilitated by administrators, our United Federation of Teachers (U.F.T.) Teacher Center Consultant, Queens Field Support Center staff, and (PCT's) teacher leaders. In June of School Year 2017-2018, the staff engaged in collaborative reflection on our current state data and co-crafted an Instructional focus that will guide our work in School Year 2018-2019: School Year 2018-2019 Instructional Focus "At New Prep, we will use a variety of assessment methods to ensure that students are able to set goals, and monitor their own progress resulting in increased achievement for all learners." Our instructional focus solidifies the importance of using formative assessment (checks for understanding) to identify learning gaps and support all learners. Asking students to demonstrate and prove their understanding of the subject matter is critical to the learning process; it is essential to evaluate whether the educational goals and standards of our lessons are being met. Assessment inspires us to ask these hard questions: "Are we teaching what we think we are teaching?" "Are students learning what they are supposed to be learning?" "Is there a way to teach the subject better, thereby promoting better learning?" Changes in the skills base and knowledge our students need require new learning goals; these new learning goals change the relationship between assessment and instruction. We are committed to not only taking an active role in making decisions about the purpose of assessment and the content that is being assessed, but also to ensuring that our scholars shoulder that responsibility as well, thereby encouraging them to be ambassadors of their own learning. B.) Ensuring a Supportive Environment for All Stakeholders The New Preparatory Middle School 8 is a learning community for all learners. there is on site UFT Teacher Center supported by a full time UFT Teacher Center Instructor. The instructor provides differentiated professional development and daily support for teachers and paraprofessionals. In keeping with youth development, there are various programs to create a culture where students feel that they are part of the school community. Girl’s Empowered Motivated for Success (GEMS), program focuses on activities such as etiquette, hygiene, hair, make-up and a host of things related to femininity. Young Men’s Initiative (YMI) developed specifically for male students, YMI is an empowerment group focusing on mentoring and instructional tutoring to close the achievement gap, while building character and developing positive self – esteem. Project Boost supports students who score at levels 3 and 4 on State Exams and perform at the highest 3rd within our school community. Students learn about college and career readiness, visit colleges, participate in community service activities, attend Broadway plays, enjoy physical activities such as ice skating and experience enriching events. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 15  The Child Center of NY maintains a School Based Clinical Coordinator at the school. The Child Center of NY offers group, individual and family counseling for our students and their families. Strategic Collaborations, Partnerships and Special Initiative Integrated Algebra Regents. Grade 8 students are given the opportunity to accelerate their learning by taking 9th grade math instruction in order to take the Integrated Algebra Regents. Historically, 98% of students pass the course and the exam. Living Environment Regents. Grade 8 students accelerate their learning and high school experience by preparing for and taking the Living environment Regents. Middle School Quality Initiative (MSQI) supports New Preparatory Middle School by developing literacy across classrooms to prepare them for success in high school and college. The program helps the school implement research-based adolescent literacy framework for improving reading comprehension. The program also provides resources, professional development and a site-based coach to support teachers. Arts In Education. The "I Will Graduate" program, and C.A.R.E. (Children Achieving Results Effectively, LLC) partner with our school and provide students education through the ARTS. Students may choose chorus, martial arts, dance, band, fine art, journalism, Y-Rap or drum line. Students engage in 90-minute sessions of Arts in Education once a week. Simultaneously, teachers engage in 90 minutes of common planning and inquiry. Brain Power Wellness Program supports the social and emotional wellness of students where students engage in mindfulness activities in the classroom. Urban Advantage: New Preparatory Middle School 8 is a part of the Urban Advantage program that supports science education at the school. Teachers have opportunities to engage in ongoing professional development to support lesson planning and designing classroom environments where students engage in authentic science investigations. Additionally, students and families participate in excursions to New York City's science-rich cultural institutions. CHAMPS Middle School Sports & Fitness: The goal of the CHAMPS Middle School Sports & Fitness program is to improve student fitness levels and overall health by increasing opportunities for students to engage in physical activity, regardless of athletic ability. The program promotes health-related fitness through a mix of several after-school and before-school activities including traditional sports such as basketball and baseball as well as non-traditional sports such as, flag football and fitness activities. The ultimate goal is for students to grow to be CHAMPS — Cooperative, Healthy, Active, Motivated, Positive Students for life. Practice Makes Perfect. Research reveals, two-thirds of the ninth-grade achievement gap between lower and higher income youth can be explained by unequal access to summer learning opportunities. Students lose between 2.5 to 3.5 months of academic learning each summer. Subsequently, our school partners with Practice Makes Perfect, a comprehensive summer education program with a proven “near-peer” model to support students from kindergarten through college matriculation. This research based summer program was developed to help close the learning gap that negatively affects student learning during the summer months. As a remediation and enrichment program, students in grades 6 and 7 have an opportunity to work in an environment where the adult to student ratio is 1 to 4. This full day summer program takes place Monday - Thursday from 9:00a.m. – 4:00p.m. C.) Family and Community Engagement At New Preparatory Middle School 8 that is an open door policy with great administration and teachers that builds the trust of our families and reinforcing our open door policy and creating opportunities for collaborative efforts among the school staff, parents, and other relevant institutions. Our school collaborate with families to create opportunities of learning and sharing resources. We aim to provide meaningful volunteer experiences and matching volunteer 2018-19 CEP-RISE 16  strengths to support the school’s needs. We work on identifying resources to address the issues of language and cultural barriers. New Preparatory School 8 has an engaging parent room staffed by the parent coordinator and P.T.A. president. The yearly parent calendar, developed in conjunction with school officials, benefits all school stakeholders and informs parents of all school activities. Monthly instructional learning walks are included in the calendar. When parents are included in learning walks they are able to observe the schools goals in action. During our School Leadership Team (S.L.T.) meetings parents will have the opportunity to share their experiences and provide feedback to all stakeholders regarding instruction. P.T.A. members continue to take an active role in supporting our school community by volunteering services once a week after school hours. They work closely with the BEACON program director to foster collaboration, making family engagement seamless across all school activities. Weekly parent meetings and workshops with teachers assist with strengthening the "home school connection". Our parents are able to stay abreast of teaching and learning through the use Pupilpath, the online grading system. Additionally, parents attend monthly excursions to enhance their own learning from our partner organization Urban Advantage. The P.T.A. in collaboration with the Parent Coordinator and the youth development team (A.P., dean, guidance counselors, S.A.P.I.S. counselor, school psychologist, community assistants, and family worker) schedule weekly parent workshops. These workshops help to strengthen parents role in the school and increase the level of communication between parents and school staff. Parents are invited to the school once a week to attend relevant workshops lead by staff members as well as to dialogue with teachers about student progress. Parent workshops led by the Parent Coordinator will be held weekly and cover topics such as: Instruction for ELL and SWDs  Test sophistication and unpacking the NYS K-12 Common Core Learning Standards  Close Reading strategies  Higher-Order Thinking Skills  Test-Taking Strategies   Graduation Requirements  Parent Led Workshops  Health and Nutrition  Aerobics   How to talk to your children about drugs  Cyber Safety and Cyber Bullying  How to Relieve Stress Learning how to Navigate Pupil Path CBO Partnerships The BEACON program under the umbrella of the Southern Queens Park Association (SQPA) collaborates with New Preparatory Middle School 8Q, engaging in a cohesive partnership. This historical collaboration continues as administrators and stakeholders from each organization meet monthly to plan activities for the benefit of all students in the community. Extended Learning Time (ELT) Our Extended Learning Time (ELT) program, in collaboration with the Beacon Program include a shared vision to provide students with activities to support the Common Core and the social-emotional aspects of adolescents. Our ELT program focus on increasing student academic achievement through instructional enrichment, as well as sports 2018-19 CEP-RISE 17  and arts activities. The program’s academic content is aligned with C.C.L.S.. Instruction is delivered by qualified staff who can facilitate high-quality academic content. Success Academy Program S.Q.P.A. in conjunction with the school based BEACON program has developed a partnership with our school to also provide extended day services. Our extended day collaborative program provides instructional services to students and families that go beyond the school day. Students have an opportunity to attend the program during the week and on Saturdays. Our Success Academy includes a component targeted specifically for the ENL students, providing them with small-group instruction to enhance learning. The proposed ELT program will increase the amount and quality of learning time, through the after-school, Saturday and summer programs, by providing an enriched and accelerated curriculum. Student Attendance New Prep 8Q has an aggressive attendance team, led by the shared attendance teacher. Members of the team also include the principal, assistant principal, guidance counselors, school psychologist, attendance teacher, pupil accounting secretary, community assistant(s), parent coordinator and family worker. The team meets weekly to analyze attendance data and develop next steps for improvement. Our yearly attendance rates are as follows: 2018: 90.8% 2017: 89% 2016: 90% 2015: 91% 2014: 92% 2013: 89% New Prep 8Q attendance data resulted in a 1% increase from SY 2017 to SY 2018. We will continue to utilize our best practices which include incentives celebrating monthly attendance with the winning class(es), parents and staff members. Distributive Leadership Teacher Leaders The principal and the administrative team understand the importance of making a good organization great by having the, “right people on the bus” (Collins, 2012). Subsequently, teacher leads were developed when a select group of teachers took the initiative and ownership of their professional learning. They now function as PCT.s (peer collaborative teachers) and are in conjunction with administration empowered to unsure the professional growth of themselves and that of their colleagues. They weekly engage in the following: 1. Facilitate professional learning workshops for colleagues. 2. Lead common planning teams. 3. Lead inquiry teams 2018-19 CEP-RISE 18  4. Meet with the principal weekly as part of the professional learning committee. 5. Share best practices and conduct classroom inter-visitations to observe best practices. Student Leaders "The Leader in Me" is a leadership model that brings a new climate and culture into schools. This school wide initiative is aligned with content and concepts practiced by global education theorists. It provides a logical, sequential and balanced process to help schools proactively design a culture that reflects their vision of an exemplary school. Leader in Me has been recognized for its ability to meet State mandates, Common Core Standards, and social/emotional mandates. It teaches 21st century leadership and life skills to students and creates a culture of student empowerment based on the idea that every child can be a leader. School Strengths: New Preparatory Middle School 8 builds upon existing strengths, identify challenges, and mutually devise systems and pathways allowing focus areas to become part of the core functioning of the school. We envision rigorous instruction that is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned with Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS). High Standards are set and students actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing of critical thinking skills, all within a supportive environment at school. Our teaching staff collaborates in service to each another, their students, the school and wider community. Such a system includes effective school leadership that nurtures the professional growth of teachers and staff and the fostering of strong family-community ties. Teachers have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Teachers, school leaders and SQPA Staff leverage community resources via partnerships with families, local cultural centers, businesses, post-secondary institutions, and other community- based organizations. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 19  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 28Q008 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 339 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 69 66 14 16 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 9 9 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 91.0% % Attendance Rate 86.4% % Reduced Lunch 12.7% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) 14.5% % Black or African American 22.1% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 0.9% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 1.1 0% 0% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 31.5% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) No N/A 47 49 90.8% 3.8% 19.8% 44.8% 17.7% 14.5% 2 3% 9.8 29.1% 28% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No Yes Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No No Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups SWD, Black, Hispanic, ED Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged YES YSH N/A NO NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS YES NO N/A NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A NO YSH N/A YSH NO NO YSH N/A YSH NO YES N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP-RISE 20  2018-19 CEP-RISE 21  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 3 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 3.2 The school leader ensures and supports the quality implementation of a systematic plan of rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of students. (aligned to Rise Keys 2 and 6) Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction (DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and address student achievement needs. (aligned to Rise Key 3) The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. (aligned to Rise Keys 1 and 4) Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. (aligned to Rise Key 1) 3.3 3.4 3.5 SOP(s) Addressed X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? The New Preparatory Middle school 8 has been identified as a Rise school. As a Rise school that has graduated from the Renewal Schools program there is evidence of sustainable school improvement structure that will allow New Prep to build on its progress. According to the most recent Rise Schools Benchmark data, our progress target to be met for the 2018-2019 school year is 94 for Performance Index on the New York State English Language Arts exam and 2.41 for Average Math Proficiency Rating. Additionally, score an average of 3.82 in the areas of Rigorous Instruction and Effective School Leadership on the School Quality Guide. As per the 2017-2018 New York State Assessment results, 32% of students met State standards on the State English Language Arts (ELA) and 29% of students met State standards on the State Math test. This percentile resulted in a 10% increase in proficiency levels in ELA and 11% increase in proficiency levels in math. The school did not receive a Quality Review for the 2017-2018 school year. However, data for the the Quality Review Report for 2016-2017 informed some of the school's decision around curriculum. In the 2016-2017 Quality Review the school was rated proficient in Curriculum. It revealed, " While school leaders and staff ensures performance tasks are aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards, they are not yet strategically integrating the instructional shifts. There are purposeful decisions to emphasize rigorous habits and higher-order thinking skills with an emphasis on all of the Webb's Depth of Knowledge embedded questions. School leaders support and monitor quality implementation of rigorous, coherent curricula of the Common Core Learning Standard to meet the needs of students. Grade teams meet each Friday for 90 minutes of combined inquiry and common planning sessions. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 22  Our Next Step for Improvement Although our Quality Review rating was "proficient" in Curriculum, our next step of improvement is to focus on common planning and teacher teams to consistently utilize student work and data to determine aligned standards of challenge and plan and revise curriculum, lesson plan and task to address student learning gaps. In order to improve learning outcomes, tasks will be differentiated, appropriately challenging with scaffolds as needed (i.e. graphic organizers, sentence starters, etc.) and consistently emphasize rigorous habits and opportunities for higher-order thinking. The level of curriculum review and tasks refinement will take place regularly and consistently. It will become practice across grades and content areas so that all students including ELLs and SWDs have access to curricula and tasks that meet the cognitive demands of the standards. . Part 2 – Summative Vision for Rigorous Instruction What is your school’s instructional focus? What is your vision for promoting the instructional focus consistently across classrooms? Our instructional focus at New Prep 8Q for the 2018-2019 school year is to use a variety of assessment methods to ensure that students are able to set goals and monitor their own progress resulting in increased achievement for all learners. To implement our instructional focus, students will have access to various strategies to engage in self-reflection and peer feedback. Students will self-assess using standards based rubrics and success criteria aligned to rigorous tasks. Teachers, during instruction will provide one-to-one and small group conference sessions. We will ensure the analysis of assessment results leads to highly effective teaching practices across the vast majority of classrooms. We have begun this work by examining the June Instructional Reports from 2017-2018. We will continue to improve in this work by making adjustments in curriculum, developing school-wide assessments and make changes in pedagogy so that we can improve upon the challenge areas highlighted in the June Instructional Report. As we move forward, teachers will continue to teach purposefully with high expectations using cognitively engaging lessons supported by Common Core aligned curricula such as, Go Math, Expeditionary Learning and Teachers College Writing in Literacy, Passport to Social Studies and PBIScience. Explicit teaching methodologies such as teaching through explanation and demonstration that appeal to diverse learners and cultures will continue to be embedded to enable all students to make meaning in multiple ways. Collaboration among teachers will ensure coherence in all classrooms across the grade and content area. Across classrooms, teachers use benchmark assessments that are aligned with the school's curricula to determine student performance levels and mastery. We have been using and will continue using Ready as our benchmark assessment and I-Ready, an Internet-based program, as our diagnostic. I-Ready diagnoses the instructional deficits of our students and then provides one-to-one instruction for each student so that they can be brought up to grade level. In the past year, we have had a "Data Day" providing teachers with the time to disaggregate individual student data, look at questions, and identify students' misconceptions. Teachers then designed a 6-week intervention plan for students. Students also assessed their learning using the "Do You Know Yourself" form, where they were able to identify their own academic strengths and weaknesses, and set academic goals. Assessment practices also consistently reflect the use of ongoing checks for understanding and student's self/peer assessment using TAG. Pedagogical Practice Teachers follow New Prep 8’s school mission to engage students in the application of real life concepts through structured cooperative learning strategies, and the use of technology support programs to serve their individual learning needs. We believe that students learn best when presented with clear models of teachers' expectations. Therefore at the beginning of our lessons, teachers set the expectation for the learning by deconstructing learning 2018-19 CEP-RISE 23  Targets which are written in student friendly language so that students are aware of the focus for learning. Success Criteria is then presented and/or created with students prior to the independent practice portion of our lessons. Teachers provide mentor texts or samples of the finished product on an expected task, along with a rubric, which is used as a road map following the Understanding By Design (UBD) paradigm. The majority of the class time is centered around students working in cooperative learning groups. These learning groups are structured for the purpose of creating responsive, positive and interdependence among students. Teachers then monitor groups to assess, provide feedback, and provide targeted instruction. Discussion tools such as DOK Question Quadrant and discussion protocols such as Math Solutions Math Talk Moves and "Two- Cent" are required to engage students in rich discourse. Other models of instruction evident in our school include Small Group Instruction, and One-to-One Conferencing. Rigorous Learning During Expanded Learning Time During expanded learning time, students will be engaged in cycles of academic learning experiences in ELA and Math. Assessment data will dictate instructional strategies, skill focus and grouping of students during the extended learning time. The extended learning time will create opportunities for teachers to engage students in small-group instruction, book club, small group tutoring sessions and creating instructional groupings using the I-Ready diagnostic. Additionally, interventions from Wilson, Just Words and Orton Gillingham will be provided for targeted groups of students. Student activities will involve thinking logically and analytically as they navigate through high quality, high interest instructional enrichment content. Mentoring and small group tutorials will be scheduled to deepen their understanding and interaction with authentic content. Students will self-assess using standards based rubrics and success criteria aligned to rigorous tasks. Students will be engaged in tiered questioning from the Depth of Knowledge (DOK) wheel to promote critical thinking using prompts and cues that promote thinking. Administrators will use the Danielson Framework to provide constructive feedback that strengthens instructional practices while PCT's revise and make adjustments to curricula via Rubicon Atlas. In addition, the UFT teacher center consultant, teacher leads and school administrators will provide professional learning as per the Professional Learning calendar. How will you implement a standards-aligned curricula that meets the needs of your diverse learners, including ELLs and SWDs? The vision for implementation of the CCLS-aligned curricula is for every student to gain access to rich instructional activities according to their individual learning styles and academic needs to allow them to successfully meet the benchmarks of standards based assessments. This will be established by teachers utilizing key data from subgroups to inform planning, curriculum mapping, unit studies, unit assessments and create benchmarks in order to assess the effectiveness of their. work. Teachers will design purposeful tasks that are scaffold to build on deeper understanding of the concept. This will impact students’ student learning in the classroom. Additionally, a systematic tool will be developed to evaluate effectiveness that would assist the school and teacher teams in making targeted adjustments and tracking benchmark progress for subgroups and individual students towards all goals. What is your vision for ensuring that all student have access to rigorous coursework that moves them towards career and college readiness? How will you support the personal and academic skills, habits, and behaviors needed for students to be career and college ready? The vision for diverse programming includes an emphasis on technology. Various software and hardware will be utilized as an instructional tool to enhance learning across all classrooms and content areas. Reading and writing activities will 2018-19 CEP-RISE 24  include varied level questioning (DOK) to promote critical thinking. Additionally, a strong focus on vocabulary, one of the instructional shifts, will be embedded in daily instruction. How do you envision embedding the elements of culturally responsive instruction and how will you know that implementation is successful? Teachers will work together during designated common planning periods and inquiry team meetings to design student-centered lessons that incorporates different learning styles, culture and other teaching modalities. To ensure the elements of culturally responsive instruction is embedded school leader consistently monitor teacher pedagogy, structures, and systems.s. Frequent and cyclical classroom observations will be conducted and timely feedback utilizing the Danielson Framework for Teaching as the standard for professionalism and quality instruction will be provided to teachers Using the workshop model of instruction, students will be supported in the following manner:  Unpacking of the learning target (whole group or turn and talk and share out)  Modeling- by sharing an exemplar sample of a finished product students will be clear about the expectations of  a task. Success Criteria- whether teacher directed or class created all scholars will be given clear parameters regarding the successful completion of a task.  Close Reading Strategies- teachers will continue to model best practices for reading comprehension (annotating, identification of sign-posts' etc.)  Readily available resources- The use of scaffolds (student choice) and targeted interventions (teacher driven) will provide students the support needed to gain access to and understanding of complex tasks. Self and Peer   Assessment- Mid-lesson and close of lesson checks for understanding are utilized to inform instruction for the following lesson, conferencing, and re-teaching(adjustments to the Unit of instruction.  T.A.G. strategy used for students to reflect on their work performance while engaging in self and peer assessment. What is your vision for the use of a comprehensive assessment strategy (diagnostic, formative, benchmark, and summative) to drive curricular, instructional, and organizational decisions that impact student outcomes? Analysis of state exam scores is one of the major factors for explaining our data-informed classrooms. Careful reviews of scores and outcomes from the ELA and Math item analysis inform unit and lesson plans to address deficit areas. Subsequently, instructional groupings within classrooms are developed from the data. The item analysis yields results of CCLS deficits and mastery is the springboard for classroom instruction. A root cause analysis is conducted with the data to understand the underlying cause/s of deficit areas. Teachers go deeper into the CCLS by asking probing questions and focusing on specific units within the curriculum resources. Unit pre-tests are developed by teachers and administered to gauge what students know and which areas need specific targeted focus. In September, a baseline assessment is administered to evaluate student’s foundational skills and skills taught in the previous grade. Once these data are analyzed, teachers use the results to identify skills needed as a pre-requisite to be taught in alignment to the curriculum. A gap analysis between the CCLS and our curriculum resources is often 2018-19 CEP-RISE 25  performed to inform curriculum and lesson planning. Staff members ultimately research and implement additional resources to close the gaps. In the process of analyzing and identifying deficit skills, teachers collaborate to create weekly and vocabulary quizzes across each discipline. Weekly and vocabulary quizzes are aligned to the topics in the curriculum. Quizzes are administered, students are evaluated, the results from the data are analyzed, and students’ performance and progress are tracked and monitored to identify next steps. Furthermore, teachers engage students in learning tasks using various modalities, scaffolds and hands-on activities to meet students at their individual entry points. The use of comprehensive assessment includes pre and post assessments, unit assessments and daily exit slips. The data will be collected, scanned and presented in the form of a spreadsheet. During teacher teams, teachers will analyze the data. Teachers will conduct item and error analysis, which indicates what students were able to master. The data will be reviewed for common misconceptions to determine how students are thinking, and to guide lesson planning. Administrators, members of the core leadership team and teacher team leaders will be responsible for determining school-wide instructional next steps. How do you envision differentiating teacher professional learning opportunities to support instructional foci, meet students’ unique needs and advance culturally responsive education in your school? Our Professional Learning Plan will provide staff members with Professional Learning (PL) in 6 week cycles in order to build capacity and gain mastery in topics that will improve student outcomes. All PL activities are centered around our school’s Goals, Mission, Vision and Instructional Focus. Based on a needs assessment survey, learning walks, informal and formal professional learning opportunities will be available to cohorts of teachers to support instructional foci, meet students' unique needs and advance culturally responsive education for our school. Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Rise Benchmarks. By June 2019, 27% of SWDs in grades 6-8 will increase their average proficiency rating in Mathematics from 1.98 to 2.41 through utilizing sense-making strategies to support students in solving multi-step problems, implementing Specially Design Instruction (SDI) based on students' IEP, and setting student goals to monitor growth through I-READY benchmarks. Student proficiency rating will be measured using 6 mini- assessments aligned to the power standards. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Rigorous Instruction Annual Goal: Which school benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Rigorous Instruction Annual Goal? We will improve our ELA SED Growth Percentile. We will improve our Math SED Growth Percentile. We will improve the grade 8 Science percent of level 3 and above We will improve the Math Level 2 & above. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 26  Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. Create a six-week strategic intervention plan for pushables focusing on power standards. Implement the use of sense making strategies, specially designed instruction (SDI) and setting goals as it aligns with the instructional focus to address IEP goals and bridge gaps in student understanding and conceptual thinking. Go Math will be used daily to provide instruction in mathematics. GoMath includes Investigations, inquiry based problem solving tasks, which Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Students with Disabilities Mini-Assessments January 2019.- May 2019 Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Math Pedagogues How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) Benchmark Diagnostics Students with disabilities I-Ready baseline and benchmark diagnostics. December- 2018 – June 2019 Special Education Teachers Pre and Post Unit assessments 2018-19 CEP-RISE 27  strengthen critical thinking skills. All students September 2018 - June 2019 Appropriate strategies for ENLs and SWDs will be emphasized as needed. Designed modified materials will be used to meet the learning style and unique learning needs of each learner. Adaptations will be made on units of study with a focus on integrating comprehension, critical and problem solving strategies. Teachers will use close reading strategies to promote understanding of complex text, "Sign-Posts" SWDs, I Ready baseline Sept. 2018- All Pedagogues Benchmark ENLs, and others with exceptional needs June 2019 Diagnostics ELA teachers I-Ready Diagnostic Sept. 2018- June 2019 All Pedagogues Benchmark and diagnostics 2018-19 CEP-RISE 28  Utilize online programs such as I-Ready, and MyOn to evaluate ELA and Math skills. All Students I-Ready baseline and benchmark diagnostics. Sept.2018- June 2019 All staff Renewal Benchmarks MaxScholar -online corrective reading program Practice Makes Perfect (PMP) summer program to improve reading and math scores, and to prevent the "summer slide". SWD students I-ready and Max Scholar assessment Sept 2018 ELL Teacher June 2019 July 2019 All staff -READY pencil and paper test Students scoring at Level 1's and 2's 4b – Parent and Family Engagement Diagnostic assessments from I-ready will measure the progress for students Benchmarks will guide this effort. Post test results How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. At New Preparatory Middle School 8 parents and families will be engaged and supported in understanding of Rigorous Instruction and the New York State standards through opportunities to participate in parent learning walks and attending professional learning sessions for parents. Additionally, members of the Parent Engagement Group will meet quarterly to discuss the academic progress of their child and strategies to support the learning both at home and school. Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, lead CBO’s community school budget, FSC Supports, etc. Human Resources Lead teacher funding; hired one peer collaborative teacher Hired consultants from National Training Network 2018-19 CEP-RISE 29  Hired Tutors from Practice Makes Perfect. Instructional resources Skedula.com Pupilpath.com I-Ready Web-based Software MaxScholars Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding X C4E Other Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By February 2019, there will be a 2% growth in ELA and Math on mid-year benchmark and I-Ready diagnostic Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. I-Ready and mid-year benchmark assessments. Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 30  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 5 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 5.2 The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. (aligned to Rise Key 4) 5.3 The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students. (aligned to Rise Key 4) 5.4 All school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health supports tied to the school’s vision. (aligned to Rise Key 5) 5.5 The school leader and student support staff work together with teachers to establish structures to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental health needs. (aligned to Rise Key 5) Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: SOP(s) Addressed x 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? 5. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? The Capacity Framework element of Supportive Environment is an area of strength and celebration, although there is still room for improvement. In order to maintain proficiency and aim toward a Highly Effective rating in this area, our youth development team will continue to monitor the daily attendance of our students. To holistically address and closely monitor students' attendance we will implement a system by which attendance mentors are assigned to each homeroom class. In addition to homeroom teachers recording the attendance daily, attendance mentors call the homes of each absent scholar to connect with families and to share the importance daily attendance in school. These communications are ilogged in the ATS system. Classroom teachers and attendance mentors make joint calls together if ever absences become consecutive. Attendance celebrations are hosted twice a year to address and acknowledge improvement. For severe at risk cases, parent conferences are held with the scholar and each are asked to respectfully adhere to a binding attendance contract. Attendance contracts have proven to be powerful and effective. Part 2 – Summative Vision for Supportive Environment What is your vision for a supportive school environment? How will you, in partnership with each CBO and families, enact your vision? 2018-19 CEP-RISE 31  Summative Vision Our vision for a supportive environment is to provide students with a community of attentive and concerned adults who are committed to their individual and collective success academically, socially, and emotionally. To this end we take a comprehensive approach to ensuring that scholars attend school daily. Student attendance is monitored closely through the CAASS ID system. Students enter the building and their attendance is immediately recorded. The attendance team, comprised of the principal, assistant principal, attendance teacher, pupil accounting secretary, guidance counselor, family worker, community assistant and the parent coordinator meet weekly to closely monitor student attendance. This team develops systems and strategies to improve the present attendance rate of 92%. The rate of students with chronic absenteeism will improve with the implementation of our “soft mentoring” program” where one adult meets with an identified student to encourage improved attendance. One absence of a student triggers the response of a phone call the same day by the assigned attendance mentor. These calls are reported and tracked in the I-LOG system of ATS. In addition the schools automated system calls the homes of every student marked absent for the day. Whereas attendance is an important focus, so too is the development of students’ interests and engagement in school activities as they aid in improve and maintaining consistent student attendance. Our programs activities support and address the whole-child, academically, socially, and emotionally. All stakeholders of New Preparatory Middle School (MS8) will facilitate activities to promote a safe and supportive environment, where everyone works collaboratively to ensure the success of all learners. Teachers, administrators, parents, and support staff will work in unison, to encourage and challenge students to become critical thinkers and work at their highest potential. CBO/ Student Social Emotional Growth Our Extended Learning Time has the following community partners: Southern Queens Park Association and the Beacon Program . We have a shared vision to provide students with activities to support the common core and the social-emotional aspect of their lives. Our program will be based on research from the National Center for Research on Evaluation Standards and student testing (CRESST) report reflecting on two decades of evaluations on out-of-school-time programs. The following research-based instructional strategies and activities, characteristic of successful after-school programming, will be developed collaboratively between school administrators and our CBO representatives: ● Clearly defined program goals and funding that aligns to them. ● Strong, experienced leadership at the E.L.T. program to effectively communicate and manage staff. ● Staff members who motivate students. ● A program that is well-aligned to the school day, but provides new, different, and engaging learning opportunities for participants. ● Continual evaluation and assessment of the program by a staff member to ensure goals are being met.  Our ELT program will focus on increasing student academic achievement through instructional enrichment as well as, sports and arts activities  Our ELT program will be delivered by Middle School 8 staff who are committed to members and community school staff. Student Leadership 2018-19 CEP-RISE 32  Students will have the opportunity to develop social-emotional and leadership skills by participating in activities through a variety of programs such as Student Government, Girl's Empowered Motivated to Succeed, Young Men Initiative, National Junior Honor Society, Music Honor Society, Project Boost, Peer Tutoring, and Peer Counseling. Social-Emotional Learning Framework To support students’ individual social and emotional needs, our framework includes a variety of rewards and incentives as part of our positive behavior management program, including the implementation of PAWS (Practicing Respect, Accepting Responsibility, Working Together and Safety Matters), teacher incentives, as well as awards and recognitions for positive behaviors, attendance, and achievements. Our CBO will provide additional support through on-going counseling and intervention services to our students and their families. Social and Emotional Skills School-wide implementation of the The Leader In Me curriculum and Brain Power Wellness Program will be implemented over the course of the year to ensure the continued social-emotional support of all learners. Parental involvement will also be encouraged through direct communication from teachers, parent coordinator, counselors, club and activity advisers, and school administrators. Counseling of students will occur individually or, in small groups through referrals from teachers and submitted to the Pupil Personnel Team (PPT), CBO, Mobile Response Team, and guidance counselors. BEACON, in partnership with the SLT, will set up protocols for ongoing communication, continue to build broad parent and community engagement, identify mental health service enhancements and, ELT opportunities, as well as, finalizing the initial Community School Plan. Community School Director and the SLT: ● will identify an assistant to School Community Director that can assist in outreaching tutors and additional school support to enhance academics, assist in tracking student assessments and progress, assist in data collection and research of new resources. ● will be responsible for building a strong Community School Team (CST) as a subcommittee of the SLT. ● will organize monthly meetings and quarterly meetings to review the status of implementation, address current issues, and identify next steps for improvement. The Community School Program will be implemented by the Community School Director and the Community School Team. The team will include the principal, assistant principals, selected members of the SLT, selected teachers PTA president or designee, Parent Coordinator, student representatives, community leaders and other partners of SQPA Advisory, and SQPA current supervisory team to work together to achieve the goals of the community school approach. Student trust, safety and character building Substance Abuse Prevention and Intervention Specialist (SAPIS counselor) will present weekly classes for 10 weeks in all of the science classes about drug prevention using the evidence-based curriculum, " Too Good For Drugs". Students will learn refusal and character-building skills to make better decisions. Community Affairs from the NYPD will be scheduled to facilitate workshops for parents and students. ● Small Groups of 8-10 Students will be seen one time per week for 14 weeks and will be learning using a curriculum called Life Skills . The SAPIS counselor will facilitate the sessions. Life Skills is based on scientific evidence of what causes substance abuse and uses a comprehensive approach to learning. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 33  ● SAPIS counselor will introduce the 3 B’s approach which speaks to the Bullied, the Bully and the Bystander. Action plans will be in place for all three. Educating the school body as a whole is essential to the safety and well-being of our school. Ensuring every child is safe in the classrooms Teachers continue to monitor and revise all students’ progress using scholarship and attendance data. Students are closely monitored through daily attendance, section sheets, along with a full-time dean and two full-time guidance counselors that support targeted interventions to assist students at risk. In addition, there is a school-wide “Three Strike Rule” which outlines policies for lateness, detention, suspensions, and student anectodals as well as “Student Management Plans” for students who need careful monitoring of their attendance. MS 8 also has a full time SAPIS worker who targets students most at-risk for substance abuse and bullying issues who attends bi-weekly PPT meetings with the school psychologist, guidance counselors, administrator, dean, family worker, Beacon (CBO) family worker, IEP teacher and general education teachers to ensure that students in danger of not progressing receive targeted interventions. Data and Students’ Social and Emotional Needs Review of Individualized Educational Plan (IEP) data, student observation data and staff referral data will provide information to address the social and emotional needs of students. The social-emotional development of students will be measured through attendance, Online Occurrence Reporting System (OORS), and in academic performance data. These data will be reviewed periodically to evaluate progress and identify areas of need. Describe your plan to implement a culture of trust and high expectations for teachers, students, families and community partners. 1. Promote student voice through student government 2. Implement various activities for parents during Tuesday parent engagement 3. Host open forums to share and communicate high expectations 4. Family Handbook 5. Staff manual Who are your CBO partners? How will each CBO sustain and support the social-emotional and academic growth of your students? CBO Partner CBO Focus Southern Queens Park Association Instructional tutors are assigned to each ELA and Math classroom. They will provide instructional support daily on basic skills and differentiated tasks. Mentors will meet with students weekly during student's lunch periods or, after school to provide extra-curricular emotion support during one on one sessions . The focus will be on study skills and organizing notebooks, folders, etc. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 34 SQPA coupled with Child Center of NY The Mental Health Clinic has been implemented, providing emotional support for students and families. Parents must give consent and students meet weekly with licensed social workers during the school day. How will you, in partnership with your CBO, create a supportive and engaging environment for your students’ families? The CBO partner is an integral part of our school community. We invite our Community School Director (CSD) to participate during instructional walk-throughs, parent workshops and all school events. Monthly meeting take place with CSD and she has developed and convenes the monthly Community School Team (CST). What essential questions, or key themes, will be explored by all staff and students that acknowledge and celebrate the culture and heritage of the student body? As a school community, how do we build a school culture that is inclusive of all cultures and heritage of the student body? What evidence will you use to gauge the impact of your plan to create a positive school environment?  Various clubs including GEMS, Project Boost, and National Honors Society, ARTS club, Culture Club, Lunch Bunch and Young Men's Initiative coordinators support students as they grow and develop skills of leadership and citizenship Student government projects  Various celebrations of cultures and heritages   Adjustment to PAWS program to include points for each (Teacher to student  Weekly grade level assemblies (Anti-Bullying, Cyberbullying)  Child Center of NY Support of social emotional growth of children/Beacon Preventive  Monday Tuesday (Socio-Emotional Wellness program/ Walking in My Shoes Curriculum)  Respect for All Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Supportive Environment. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Rise Benchmarks. By June 2019, chronic absenteeism will decrease by 10% as measured by ATS reports. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Supportive Environment Annual Goal: Which school benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Supportive Environment Annual Goal? Community School Model Implementation School Survey-Safety Student Attendance Average Math Proficiency Rating 2018-19 CEP-RISE 35 How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) Daily attendance % report Weekly monitoring of RSAL, RDAL, RCUA Reports Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. Attendance Team: Comprised of : Administrator, CSD or assistant, guidance counselor(s), family worker, school aide, attendance teacher, community assistant and parent coordinator. They will meet weekly to ensure an attendance rate of above 92%. *Email notification to school staff daily. *Send out notices to homes *Call homes *Identify 407's Refer students to the CSD/ Americorps. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Attendance Teacher, Pupil Personnel Secretary, guidance counselor(s), parent coordinator, community assistant, school aide CBO staff, Beacon and Americorp. Implement Community School Model Sept. 2018-June 2019 Monitored weekly; Each Thursday. ATS reports New Visions Portal Heat Map All students 2018-19 CEP-RISE 36  Provide incentives to individual students. Chronically Absent Students Provide incentives to classes with 100% or high attendance.. School Messenger All students Call logs and daily reports. Sept. 2018 - June 2019 Community Daily reports generated Automated system, calls homes daily. Provides reports for team members. Includes email and text message component for parents. Assistant Parent Coordinator Monitored daily Attendance Mentors Al-Risk/Chronically Absent Students One-to-one meetings Sept 2018- June 2019 Administration Teachers, Staff, CBO Staff New Vision Portal NA NA NA 4b – Parent and Family Engagement Weekly NA NA NA How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. There is a need to strengthen parent and family engagement by the continued development of the home-school relationship between our administrators, teachers, staff, PTA, SLT and parents in order to promote New Preparatory Middle School 8 students’ social, emotional, and academic success. We seek a mutual effort to reach out to the parents on a regular, consistent basis to help get them involved. In that spirit, we have a PA or PTA that defines its Leadership in the Service that it renders. The Parent Coordinator plays an active and visible role in this effort. The Parent Association will seek to be an active group that generates Goals and Objectives, as well as means of support, both moral and financial to the overall school program 2018-19 CEP-RISE 37  There are identified priorities for 2018-2019 to increase parental and family engagement starting in September 2018 - June 2019.  To continue to improve communication between home and school through our Parent Coordinator, monthly calendar, and Backpack Information home to the parents.  Administrators, teachers, staff, and parents need to work feverishly to build a strong membership by encouraging parent participation. To this end, the Parent-Teacher Association will continue the collaboration between the parents, administrators, teachers and the neighborhood Beacon program housed in our building, as well as PTA hopes that continuing to establish clear expectations and a comprehensive parent involvement plan, parent participation will increase within the school. The PTA embraces the notion that “Action Speak Louder than Words.”   Professional Learning Sessions  Workshops for parents  Analyze data for attendance  Planning Respect for All week  Plan events for parents and families Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, lead CBO’s community school budget, FSC Supports, etc. Programming the building for a ninety minute block on Fridays for AIE to work with students by grade level. This time becomes available to the teachers to engage in common planning by grade level as their students attend classes given by AIE instructors. Period eight on a Tuesdays is also built into the school’s master program as a time for the PPT team, guidance counselors, administrators, , dean, family worker, and school psychologist to meet and discuss students on a case by case basis and develop actionable strategies to assist targeted students. Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding X C4E Other Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By February 2019, chronic absenteeism will decrease by 5% as measured by the ATS reports. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 38  School ATS reports will measure progress. Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 39  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 4 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 4.2 School and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. (aligned to Rise Key 2) 4.3 Teachers provide coherent, and appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. (aligned to Rise Key 1) 4.4 Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences and tailored to the strengths and needs of all students. (aligned to Rise Key 4) 4.5 Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, and progress monitoring). (aligned to Rise Key 3) Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: SOP(s) Addressed X 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? The school has a culture where all teachers work in partnerships within and across grades and subjects vertically and horizontally on a regular basis targeting student development, what is taught and why it is taught. All teachers participated in instructional teams. Teachers met regularly with colleagues and administrators to strengthen pedagogy. Ninety minutes of common planning was and will continue to be dedicated to teacher team and inquiry work. Teacher's program schedules reveal time to collaborate during common planning sessions and during preparation periods throughout the week. The following support the instructional practices and strategies to meet and establish student goals and promote high level of inquiry:  Teachers have a transparent, targeted plan that is informed by data (summative, interim, attendance, IEPs, NYSESLAT, etc.), grade-level and school-wide goals for all groups of students.  Teachers use instructional practices and strategies that are aligned to plans and include accommodations for groups of SWDs and ENLs and English proficient students to provide timely and appropriate instructional interventions and extensions for all students.  Teachers create short- and long-term goals based on data with learning trajectories for groups of students based on identified and timely needs that lead to student involvement in their own learning. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 40  Part 2 – Summative Vision for Collaborative Teachers What is your vision for collaborative teaching? 2018-19 CEP-RISE 41  Organization of school to promote teacher collaboration To promote teacher collaboration, the school is organized into inquiry teams that meet weekly. Additionally, professional learning is conducted in six week cycles with cohort of teachers. These cycles are organized around topics of teacher interest, feedback from an administrator’s observation, and the school’s instructional focus. This learning is facilitated by the UFT TC Consultant, administration, teacher leaders and is monitored through surveys, reflections, and teacher feedback collected and reviewed by facilitators weekly. Teaching and learning Teaching and learning are informed by data both qualitative and quantitative. Teachers discuss student learning and progress in teacher teams on a weekly basis that is monitored through detailed minutes and followed by corresponding feedback through ongoing observations by administration. Students track their progress and create goals using information from multiple data sources. Students then use the "Data Chat" tracking sheet to create and monitor their quarterly goals. Teachers analyze student work with protocols then find research based strategies to meet the learning needs of all learners in all areas of weakness. Underlying principles in creating units and lesson plans Understanding by Design (UBD) or backward planning is one underlying principle that would continue to influence the creation of units and lesson plans. Another would be Webb’s Depth of Knowledge (DOK) for higher-order questioning and critical thinking. A third principle is cooperative learning to promote cooperation and student discussion and interaction. Teachers work on units and lessons in teams Common planning sessions are held weekly and grade level teams collaborate to implement the CCLS and instructional shifts with the instructional focus in their planning . They will continue to review and revise curriculum maps on Google docs, analyze lesson plans, and develop common lesson plans, per grade and per subject area on a weekly basis. Learning for higher-achieving students An opportunity to peruse their goals folders and work on activities that address a specific goal from a data source or classroom data wall. Engaging in an activity framed around DOK question level 3 or 4 as it relates to Danielson 3b Teachers review data regularly to ensure they plan for individual student needs Teachers analyze students’ data on common grade-wide assessments, item-level analysis, and standards-level analysis (Bambrick-Santoyo, 2012) for a root cause analysis to understand the underlying cause/s of deficit areas (Preuss, 2003). Skills analysis chart is used to group students based on their performance on assessments. Based on the results, the 2018-19 CEP-RISE 42  curriculum is adjusted to re-teach specific deficit skills to the lower performing and intermediate groups during small-group instruction; teachers also provide enrichment activities for the higher-performing students. Reviewing student work collaboratively in teams Teachers meet in common planning teams to discuss results from the data and determine next-steps including, how to make adjustments to the curriculum and re-teach using a different approach to meet the needs of individual and small groups of students . In the process of analyzing and identifying deficit skills, teachers collaborate to create weekly and vocabulary quizzes across each discipline. Weekly and vocabulary quizzes are aligned to the topics in the curriculum. Quizzes are administered, students are evaluated, the results from the data are analyzed, and students’ performance and progress are tracked and monitored to identify next steps. Leveraging resources from community educators/partners for a collaborative teaching approach ● Our CBO Partnership with BEACON program provides extended day instructional services to students after school hours. ● AIE students choose from and engage in a weekly 90-minute session of: Chorus, Karate, Band, Art, Journalism, Y-Rap and Korean Fan Dance. ● Utilize the Child Center of New York to assist and refer families to specific agencies to meet their needs. How do you envision enhancing collaboration amongst your Instructional Leadership Team to improve teacher practices and student learning? Weekly meetings take place with administrators and teacher leaders. During the Instructional Leadership Team weekly meetings, the team analyze data from multiple sources to determine trends and patterns. The team in conjunction with teachers decide on "Absolutes" -these are non negotiable that must be evident in all classrooms. Weekly instructional walk-through focus is identified and communicated to the school community through the school's weekly newsletter. Instructional walk through are conducted to monitor teacher practices and student learning. Teacher leaders are assigned teachers to support in lesson planning, differentiation, using data to support student earning. The team reconvene to assess the implementation of the strategies and make adjustments through progress monitoring. How do you envision collaboration within teacher teams to improve teacher practices and student learning? Teachers will continue meeting weekly to collaborate on implementing the CCLS and instructional shifts in their planning. They will review and revise curriculum, analyze lesson plans and develop common lesson plans per grade and per subject using curriculum resources such as Expeditionary Learning, Go Math, PBIScience and Passport. The UFT teacher's center consultant and teacher leaders will formulate and facilitate teacher teams. The teams collaborate to analyze student data, identify priority standards that increase with the addition of model teachers to facilitate teacher team initiatives. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 43  How do you envision collaboration across teacher teams to improve data driven teacher practices that result in improvement in student achievement? What data will teachers and the Instructional Leadership Team regularly review to ensure that they are reflecting upon needed adjustments to teaching practices and meeting individual student learning needs? Data Reviewed Intent Sept 2018 Baseline ELA, Math, SS and Science assessments. Data review. January 2019 Benchmark ELA, Math, SS and Science assessments. Data adjustment. May 2019 End of Year ELA, Math, SS and Science assessments. Evaluation. Describe the screening process you use to identify students who need extra help? How do you use this process to determine which intervention to provide? Administer I-Ready diagnostics and various formative assessments to use to identify students who need extra help. Based on the results of the diagnostics and formative assessments to plan intervention. Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Rise Benchmarks. By planning collaboratively teacher teams will utilize the cycle of inquiry to implement evidence based interventions, resulting in 75% of teachers rated in ADVANCE as Effective and/or Highly Effective in 1E and 3C by June 2019. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Collaborative Teachers Annual Goal: Which school benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Collaborative Teachers Annual Goal? List of Rise Benchmarks expected to improve Rigorous Instruction Average Math Proficiency Rating Performance Index on State ELA Exam 2018-19 CEP-RISE 44  Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) Student performance assessment scores on post assessments Sept. 2018 to June 2019 Teacher inquiry teams Inquiry All teachers Performance Index Weekly cycles of inquiry will inform best practices. Teachers meet weekly in cohorts and to look at student work. Teams will follow the specific inquiry protocols, review student work and adjust instructional practices. Common Planning All teachers SED benchmarks Teachers meet weekly to collaborate, plan lessons, review student data and revise curriculum maps. Inquiry practices and protocols will strengthen the work of inquiry teams around Sep. 2018-June 2019 All teachers and administrators Danielson Domains 1a and 1e All teachers Performance Index and Proficiency Rating Sep. 2018-June 2019 All teachers Pre and Post assessments. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 45  the school's instructional focus. The work of our teams will be guided by: (1) To what extent is the instructional focus evident in student work? (2) How does the teacher's learning target align with and support the instructional focus? NA NA NA na na NA 4b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. To forge the home school connection, strategies which are implemented school-wide will be shared with parents weekly in order to empower them to support their children at home. -weekly meetings PupilPath - Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, lead CBO’s community school budget, FSC Supports, etc. We will continue to support the school (Fullan & Hargreaves, 2014) to strengthen the work of teacher teams and collaboration by: ● Funding to schedule the school program and provide students with the ARTS in Education programs, while teacher teams simultaneously engage in 90-minute weekly grade level horizontal common planning sessions, embedded in their schedules. ● Title I funding for Peer Collaborative Teacher ● Instructional and human resources from National Training Network and EDUCATE LLC Funding for educational consultant to support teacher teams Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 46  X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding X C4E Other Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. In September, 2018 all teachers will take a survey indicating a professional learning item that they would like to refine and master. By February 2019, all teachers will engage in one professional learning experience and will implement the learning at least 4 times. They will evaluate their learning using the professional learning evaluation form and identify next steps. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Professional Learning Teacher evaluation form and survey. Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 47  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 2 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 2.2 The school leader ensures that the school community shares the Specific, Measurable, Ambitious, Results-oriented, and Timely (SMART) goals/mission and long-term vision inclusive of core values that address the priorities outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP). (aligned with Rise Key 2) Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital resources. (aligned with Rise Key 6) 2.3 2.4 The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district's Annual Professional Performance Review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. (aligned with Rise Key 1) 2.5 Leaders effectively use evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve critical individual and school-wide practices as defined in the SCEP (student achievement, curriculum and teacher practices; leadership development; community/family engagement; and student social and emotional developmental health). (aligned with Rise Keys 4 and 5) X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: SOP(s) Addressed 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? New Prep continues to strengthen its practices around strategically using data and progress monitoring. Our Instructional Leadership Cabinet meets regularly to examine student performance, instruction, professional learning, and other school-wide practices. The Instructional Leadership Team consist of administration, Director of Renewal, Community Schools Director, and Lead Teachers. Our team engages in analysis of data from targeted intervention groups, formative assessments, I-Ready, and Ready to monitor performance of all students (ELL’s, SWD’s, pushables, slippables, on or above level students). We examine curriculum and pacing calendars. Highlighted Strengths Clearly articulated Instructional Expectations – One Page Wonder Literacy and Math blocks Assessment Calendar Planning weekly professional learning activities for teachers 2018-19 CEP-RISE 48  Frequent Instructional Walk-throughs Regular feedback conversations with teachers that include student data Dedication of time for Teacher Teams and Instructional Leadership Team to meet for 90 minutes Though we have invested time in professional learning, peer collaborative teaching and actionable feedback, improving teacher practice continues to be an area of development. As a result, we have prioritized SOP 2.5 as a lever to shift the way teachers deliver instruction. We have identified 1e- explicit instruction, 3b- questioning and discussion, and 3d assessment as areas of focus. Progress monitoring will drive how structures that support teaching and learning are adjusted to support the goal. Additional supports to instruction will include encouraging rich class discussion, on going checks for understanding, small group instruction with an emphasis for ELL’s and SWD’s, and actionable feedback. Part 2 – Summative Vision for Effective School Leadership What is your vision for effective school leadership at your school? 2018-19 CEP-RISE 49  Shared Vision: During monthly SLT meetings, weekly core curriculum meetings, teacher team meetings and parent workshops, all stakeholders will work together to formulate and discuss the goals of the school and develop a vision and action plan that will move the instruction forward. Monthly newsletters will be distributed to the community at large to share the vision for improvement and increase stakeholder involvement. The fundamentals of distributive leadership will require teacher leaders to impart the vision by facilitating professional learning experiences for staff and parents as well as CBO participants. Strong CBO Partnership Collaborative planning and goal setting is key, toward the vision to improve the instructional core of the school. The CBO director is a working participant of the School Leadership Team (SLT), and contributes to decision making which fosters, “buy-in”. A strong partnership will be evident through the implementation of the Community School’s collaborative work plan. Weekly meetings, setting time-lines and completing tasks will continue to strengthen the partnership. CBO Collaboration: Based on the work plan and constant and continued professional learning, the CBO and staff will work in consort during common planning sessions. Together, teams will use student data from formative assessments to develop SMART goals, geared toward enriched teacher pedagogy which will yield improved instructional outcomes for students. Evidence Based Systems Systems based on data are necessary for improvement. Consequently, a well-developed professional learning plan based on data from teacher evaluations will guide this work. The school leader will meet with teachers regularly to have data conversations around student work products. With support from the assistant principal, the director of renewal schools and the CBO director, individual low inference teacher data meetings will provide evidence where student outcomes will be discussed. Student and Staff Programs Teacher programs will be designed to increase time on task. This means that the usual 45 minute instructional periods will increase. Using the school’s budget creatively, 90 minute instructional blocks will allow more time for students to engage in rigorous learning and for teachers to implement pedagogical initiatives. Observations and Feedback A calendar of observations will be developed at the inception of the school year. Struggling teachers will be a priority on the calendar and therefore, will be observed first. Immediate post observation discussions (same day) will include and actionable feedback, no more than 5 days after the observation will improve instructional practices. Shared Accountability 2018-19 CEP-RISE 50  The principal and the CBO director will review of the work plan and the professional learning plan to assist with the improvement of teacher pedagogy. The CBO will be responsible for providing supplemental support for teachers and stakeholder, through 3 rd party providers when necessary. Student Behaviors The youth development team, consisting of guidance counselors, SAPIS counselor, dean and teachers, in collaboration with CBO partners will provide bi-monthly professional learning sessions and parent-teacher workshops on restorative justice practices and positive behavior management systems. Implementation and timelines will ensure that completion of specified goals are met. Revisions for improvement will be ongoing. Delegation of Responsibilities Through monthly meetings and collaborations with assistant principals and the community school director, joint responsibilities of monitoring student attendance, academic progress and intervention strategies will be assigned. Notices will be disseminated with clear expectations and time lines for activity completion. What are your core belief(s) for school improvement and how they inform your vision for developing instructional leadership at your school?  Developing strong teams will be my focus. Developing leadership competencies, specific to turnaround efforts, including leveraging multiple stakeholders will allow execution of the vision outlined which includes a commitment to student learning and a sustained pursuit of measurable progress. What is your vision for developing differentiated leadership throughout your school? How will you utilize teacher leaders to build broad capacity within your school? The vision of the school requires the development of distributive leadership which will allow teacher leaders to impart this vision by facilitating professional learning experiences for staff and parents as well as CBO participants. The Peer Collaborative Teachers, DSR and Field Support Center (FSC) instructional staff and instructional coaches will leverage leadership by formulating teacher teams and sub-committees toward implementation. How will the leader foster collaborative school governance processes, and ensure full family participation together with other stakeholders? School leaders will meet weekly with the parent coordinator, community assistants and CBO director to review goals and organize systems and sharpen pedagogy to include families within the team. Families will be represented at SLT and town hall meetings, PTA and open house gatherings as well as other school meetings that discuss school governance and community affairs. Translators are at the ready through volunteer stakeholders and staff. How will you use evidence-based systems to ensure school and teacher leaders are led by a cycle of continuous learning and use this to inform their teams’ priorities? 2018-19 CEP-RISE 51 Evidence-Based System Support(s) Collaborator(s) Teachers will regularly review ELA and Math school-wide assessments aligned to the Common Core State Standards. This data will inform a deep dive into the curriculum. The Core School Leadership Team (CSLT) will support teachers with pedagogy to ensure they are following the curriculum maps and engaging students with rigor instruction. Teachers will engage in collaborative inquiry by reviewing the Social Studies and Science Teacher teams led by the PCT and model teachers will guide the inquiry work. CSLT, teacher leaders and administrators will collaborate to ensure teacher practice and data are aligned rubric PCT and Model teachers. Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Rise Benchmarks. By June 2019 most teachers will improve their pedagogical practices through participation in professional learning cycles, as measured by 90% of teachers receiving an overall rating of Highly Effective/Effective in 4E of the Danielson Rubric. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Effective School Leadership Annual Goal: Which school benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Effective School Leadership Annual Goal? List of Rise Benchmarks expected to improve Effective support for teachers and the building of teams and modeling the way. Emotional support for students through various culture building programs. Revising curriculum for student achievement. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 52  Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Professional Learning School-wide-all Formal and Informal Observations Teachers September 2018 – June 2019 Administrators, teachers, Lead teachers (Model and Peer Collaborative) How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) Pre and Post assessments. and UFT TC Consultant ● Monthly workshops on Reading and Writing Project by Lucy Calkins ● Opportunities for differentiated professional development for staff members on critical thinking, comprehension and supportive strategies that align with Framework for teaching and 1E Instructional Rounds ● Implementation of Instructional Rounds (one per month) to foster ongoing teacher inter-visitations based on need and professional growth. Professional learning Leaders SED Sept. 2018-June 2019 School and CBO Staff Tri-State QR rubric Benchmark assessments. The principal , administrators and lead teachers will continue to meet formally and informally with all 2018-19 CEP-RISE 53  instructional staff to plan together, revise, and refine instructional practices and examine data. Instructional Coaching Teachers Informal and Formal observations Sept. 2018- Consultants June 2019 Formal and Informal observations Consultants from Queens Borough Field Support will provide individual and group coaching for ELA teachers with the Teacher's College Writing Process. Consultants from National Training Network (NTN) will provide individual and group coaching to all math teachers. Consultants from Urban Advantage will provide science coaching to individual and groups of teachers. NA NA NA NA NA NA 4b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. There is a need to strengthen parent and family engagement by the continued development of the home-school relationship between our administrators, teachers, staff, PTA, SLT and parents in order to promote New Preparatory Middle School 8 students’ social, emotional, and academic success. We seek a mutual effort to reach out to the parents on a regular, consistent basis to help get them involved. In that spirit, we a PA or PTA that defines its Leadership in the Service that it renders. The Parent Coordinator plays an active and visible role in this effort. The Parent Association will seek to be an active group that generates Goals and Objectives, as well as means of support, both moral and financial to the overall school program 2018-19 CEP-RISE 54  There are identified priorities for 2018-2019 to increase parental and family engagement starting in September 2018 - June 2019.  To continue to improve communication between home and school through our Parent Coordinator, monthly calendar, and Backpack Information home to the parents.  Administrators, teachers, staff, and parents need to work feverishly to build a strong membership by encouraging parent participation. To this end, the Parent-Teacher Association will continue the collaboration between the parents, administrators, teachers and the neighborhood Beacon program housed in our building, as well as PTA hopes that continuing to establish clear expectations and a comprehensive parent involvement plan, parent participation will increase within the school. The PTA embraces the notion that “Action Speak Louder than Words.”  Professional Learning Sessions  Workshops for parents  Analyze data for attendance  Planning Respect for All week  Plan events for parents and families Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, lead CBO’s community school budget, FSC Supports, etc. ● Funding to schedule the school program and teacher teams to meet simultaneously and engage in 90-minute weekly grade level horizontal common planning sessions, embedded in their schedules. ● Funding for Peer collaborative teachers ● Funding for UFT TC consultant. ● Per session funding for additional professional learning opportunities. Funding for professional reading materials to develop professional learning communities. Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding X C4E Other Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By January 2019, all teachers will participate in at least 4 instructional planning sessions with the principal during inquiry and/or common planning, measured by teacher's logs of assistance sign off sheets. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 55  Teacher's Logs of Assistance sheets. Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 56  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 6 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 6.2 The school leader ensures that regular communication with students and families fosters their X SOP(s) Addressed high expectations for student academic achievement. (aligned with Rise Key 2) 6.3 The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders so that student strength and needs are identified and used to augment learning. (aligned with Rise Key 4 and 6) 6.4 The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to support student success. (aligned with Rise Key 5) 6.5 The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school community members centered on student learning and success and encourages and empowers families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their children. (aligned with Rise Key 3) Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? According to the 2017-2018 School Survey, our school received a rating of approaching in Strong Family-Community Ties. Based on the Pupil Path data, only 5% of our parents are taking advantage of reviewing student's academic grades. Parents need additional training on the data system to review student progress and achievement. Additionally, parents and teachers would benefit from increased dialogue electronically, through emails and anecdote's generated by the many online systems available. Part 2 – Summative Vision for Strong Family and Community Ties What is your vision for strong family and community ties at your school? What opportunities exist for the school staff to know the students and their families in order to better communicate and partner with families and communities in the vision for the school? Summative Vision Our vision for building strong family and community ties is to provide a welcoming environment, keep parents informed and actively involved in planning and decision-making, support rigorous instructional for our adolescents. Additionally, provide support to families by creating diverse and meaningful opportunities for volunteering and engaging with the school using multiple points of entry focused on student learning and development. Welcoming Environment/Dedicated Space for Families 2018-19 CEP-RISE 57  The school creates a welcoming environment for families and community stakeholders. Once signed in to the campus, school representatives greet visitors at the entrance and escort them to the parent room. Our parent room, facilitated by our parent coordinator, is a comfortable environment for parents to engage in conversations, have meetings, use the computers and observe educational videos on a large screen television. The school community proactively cultivates trusting and respectful relationships with diverse families and community stakeholders. Parent involvement and engagement The Parent Coordinator, in collaboration with the Parent Teacher Association (PTA) executive board members schedule activities to meet the needs of our diverse community. The youth development team, consisting of the dean, guidance counselors, SAPIS counselor, school psychologist, community assistants, a family worker as well as teachers, will schedule and execute parent workshops and information sessions weekly, including, but not limited to: ● Information about the NYS P-12 Common Core Learning Standards. ● ELA and Math workshops to help students with higher-order thinking skills. ● Workshops to improve test-taking strategies. ● Workshops that include instruction and strategies for ENLs and SWDs. ● Technology workshops - using PupilPath, MyOn. ● Information sessions about the high school application and graduation requirements. School Safety Agents (SSAs) and our Youth Development Team (YDT) will attend monthly building campus safety meetings to collaborate best practices and ensure the safety of all stakeholders. Additionally, SSAs and staff will periodically attend school-based workshops that address the social and emotional needs of our students. SSAs will be given a platform to speak to parents at evening conferences. In conjunction with the (YDT) and BEACON’s Preventive Service (our CBO), safety agents will be invited to attend and also facilitate workshops on: ● De-escalation Strategy ● How to deal with special needs students ● Conflict Resolution, and ● Peer Mediation All will feel welcome when they enter the doors of our school. During our parent orientation in August, the introduction of our SSAs will be part of the agenda. Our Level III – Sergeant will introduce the SSAs and begin developing a welcoming environment. Additionally, various aspects of the school environment that welcome students and parents are: ● Student artwork that adorns the school; ● Our Keep it Clean campaign and Sustainability Committee encourages students to maintain a clean school environment. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 58  ● Students, staff, parents and guests are greeted with smiles and friendly greetings when entering the building. Our Tuesday afternoon weekly parent engagement sessions, will strengthen the home-school connection and increase the level of communication between parents and school staff. Parents will be invited to the school to attend relevant workshops lead by staff members. Additionally, parents will dialogue with teachers about student progress. Class parents will assist teachers in the classroom and serve as role models for students. Parent workshops led by our Parent Coordinator Mrs. Martinez will be held weekly and cover topics such as: ● Health and Nutrition ● Aerobics ● Learning how to navigate Pupil Path ● How to talk to your children about drugs ● Cyber Safety and Cyber bullying ● How to relieve stress Community and Family Engagement Engaging the community and families is a collaborative effort. We engage families through face to face conferences, mailing notices and letters to homes. Individual telephone calls are made consistently and logged onto our telephone logs. Most importantly, phone calls are made from School Messenger , our automated telephone system on a daily basis to notify families about student attendance, punctuality and school events. Teacher and Family Collaboration Parent conferences are memorialized by logs submitted by staff members and used to maintain records of family communication. Students and families will be engaged in yearly community events, such as ● College tours ● Career Day ● Multicultural Day ● Arts in Education: ● Health Fair ● Community Giving (Food Drive) (Clothing Drive), and ● NY Cares Day ● Winter and Spring Concerts ● Prom Dress Giveaway showcasing Middle School 8’s Fashion Boutique 2018-19 CEP-RISE 59  Teachers will encourage parents to take an active role in student’s academic progress. Teachers will give parents tips on how they can help their child grasp the lessons that are taught in school. They will also engage in strategies for helping with conduct problems in the classroom. Both parents and teachers will work together for the benefit of students. CBO Partnership: Servicing Our Community The Southern Queens Park Association (SQPA) sponsors the BEACON program which is housed in the Middle School 8 campus. Our CBO offers after school and summer program services to families within the community, which include homework help, as well as music, dance, and art. Events and activities are programmed to engage community members of all ages. For instance, classes and workshops teaching English as a second language, computer & technology, General Education Degree (GED), resume writing, job search, job interview readiness, Common Core Learning Standards, anti-bullying, child and adult healthcare, and time management are offered to all community stakeholders. Student Data and Progress Families can access student data and progress through, an online system that provides information on student progress. Students’ grades can be accessed along with anecdotal on behavior and email communication between staff and families. Workshops will be held during specified times to train parents on using the system. There is also the DOE’s School Accounts for parents to view critical information about their child's, including grades, attendance records, and contact information on file at the school. Parents will be able to view state test scores as well as use mobile devices such as, cell phones and tablets to access the system. Within the Community School model, how will families be welcomed into the school and made a part of the school community? What support will administrators, teachers, school staff and school safety officers be given to help create a welcoming environment? Will there be a dedicated space for families in the school? The parent room is dedicated for families. Our parent coordinator (PC) greets parents when called by SSA's at the front desk. Parents are welcomed to engage in "class parenting", weekly workshops, monthly meetings and a monthly meeting with the principal. How will the school identify and develop families to take leadership roles in school decision making/school governance structures? Parents participate on the required School Leadership Team (SLT) but will be invited to engage with staff on the CSLT. We will invite parents to head committees within the teams and engage with school staff on monthly instructional walk-through with the CSLT members. How will the school engage the community and families? How will they ensure that teachers are able to learn from families about the children being taught? Meet and Greet night will give parents and opportunity to develop the home-school connection. Families will be invited to collaborate with staff and conduct community workshops that will enhance instructional practices for parents to help students at home. How do families partner with the school and CBO to support student success? Will there be dedicated space for families? Family partnerships with school: Parents are welcomed into the school to partner with teachers in the classroom, attend weekly workshops and monthly meetings. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 60  Family partnerships with CBO: The CBOhas various programs for families to meet and interact. The CBOprovides support for families both educationally, throughthe GEDprograms, job opportunities, health care referrals, as well as emotional support throughfamily and individual counseling Is there dedicated space for these partnerships? The school and the CBO has dedicated meeting areas and a fully equipped parent room. The PC greets families and strengthens the connection between the school and the home. Beacon preventative staff members provide varying supports for families. What data and student progress feedback loops will be present at the school to ensure that families knowledgeable of their children’s scholastic success, in addition to report cards? Parents can log on to PupilPath for all grades and academic progress. Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Rise Benchmarks. By June 2019, at least 15% of our parent population will be engaged in school activities such as attending weekly and monthly workshops, measured by sign in sheets and logs. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Strong Family and Community Ties Annual Goal: Which school benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Strong Family and Community Ties Annual Goal? List of Rise Benchmarks expected to improve Community School Model 3-8 Math SED Growth Percentile 3-8 ELA SED Growth Percentile 2018-19 CEP-RISE 61  Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) Sign in sheets Indicators from electronic log ins. September, 2018- June 2019 Parent Coordinator, Community Assistants, Guidance Counselors, Parent Coordinator, and Teachers Professional Learning for families All families Parent logs and sign in sheets Parent coordinator will offer and provide training to parents for our school's electronic application tools including: Skedula, Pupil Path, NYC Schools Accounts, Remind, and Edmodo (please see links) Parent involvement All families Parent logs and sign in sheets The school parentroom is set for parents to enter daily and use computers for fostering ongoing collaboration. Parents will be invited to attend monthly workshops aligned with our school's instructional focus. September, 2018 - June 2019 Parent Coordinator, Community Assistants, Guidance Counselors, Parent Coordinator, and Teachers Sign in sheets 2018-19 CEP-RISE 62  Parents will be invited in to participate in: Meet and Greet Night Parent teacher conferences Student led conferences and; Open House Parent Communication All families Parent logs and sign in sheets September, 2018 Administration, teachers Indicators from log ins. June, 2019 Parents will receive the following communication throughout the year. Yearly calendar, notices and newsletters are distributed during the school year to inform parents of ongoing school events, Curriculum and, instructional activities. Notices and school newsletter distributed in different languages, Specifically for ELLs. Translation services provided for each non-speaking parent during parent workshops 2018-19 CEP-RISE 63  NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, lead CBO’s community school budget, FSC Supports, etc. Fund the parent coordinator, community assistants and guidance counselors. Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding X C4E Other Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By February, 2019, parent engagement will increase by 7%, evidenced by parent attendance logs at school sponsored events, parent workshops, and conferences. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Sign in data from Skedula, parent sign in sheets. Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 64  Section 6: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) Program Description Directions: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) activities are directly aligned to the elements of the Framework for Great Schools, Rigorous Instruction, Supportive Environments, and Strong Family and Community Ties. ELT provides enriching educational experiences that happen outside of the traditional school day and blend skill acquisition, relationship-building and fun to foster academic and social-emotional growth. Summer learning, afterschool programming, and extended-day ELT models, when well-implemented, play a critical role in supporting students in all grades and ensuring that they graduate from high school, college and career ready. SED requires that Priority schools offer a minimum of 200 additional student contact hours as Expanded Learning Time in addition to the current mandated length of 900 hours of instruction per year (25 hours per week) in grades K-6 and 990 hours of instruction per year (27.5 hours per week) in grades 7-12. Effective ELT models will blend school staff with community partners, and will provide a balanced curriculum that can include ELA, math, STEM, arts, physical activity, and leadership development. Complete the sections on this page to demonstrate how the school will meet these requirements. Part 1 – ELT Program Goal(s) Describe the summative goal(s) of the ELT program for the 2018-19 school year. Goals for ELT should aligned to the Rise Benchmarks. How will the school will ensure that all students’ individual needs are served during the Rise ELT and how the school’s vision for ELT will impact both academic achievement and social emotional growth? Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. By June 2019, our school will meet the Rise School Performance Index on State ELA Exam of 94 by increasing student's seat time using I-Ready by 5 %; and meet the Average Math Proficiency Rating of 2.41as indicated on the Rise Benchmark Menu by increasing student usage using I-Ready daily by 5%. Part 2 – ELT Program Type Is the ELT program voluntary or compulsory? Voluntary X Compulsory Rise ELT – Describe what accountability structures the school will employ to ensure participation of all students, including special populations, will participate fully in Rise ELT. Additional ELT - If there is a voluntary ELT program in addition to the compulsory Rise ELT, indicate how you will actively encourage the participation of all students, with the goal of serving at least 50% of students. Our ELT program is compulsory. All students will participate. Part 3 – ELT Program Description Target Population: The ELT program for a Rise School will be offered to all students in the school. Describe how the school will meet the following SED requirements for an ELT program: How will the school integrate academics, enrichment, and skill development through hands-on experiences that make learning relevant and engaging? How will CBO staff and the school’s teachers be integrated to provide a seamless learning day?  Offer a range of activities that capture student interest and strengthen student engagement in learning so as to promote higher attendance, reduces risk for retention or drop out, and increases the likelihood of graduation.  Actively address the unique learning needs and interests of all types of students, especially those who may benefit from approaches and experiences not offered in the traditional classroom setting.  What new content areas and opportunities will be offered to students? How will the school ensure all IEP and language mandates are met during ELT?  Contain components designed to improve student academic, social, and emotional outcomes, including opportunities for enrichment programs such as in music and art. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 65   Ensure instruction in any core academic subject offered in the program will be delivered under the supervision of a teacher who is NYS certified in that particular content area.  How will community educators receive professional development? Are there plans to provide joint PD to school faculty and community partner staff?  What content will be led by pedagogical staff and what content will be led by CBO partners?  How will the school best utilize CBO partners to impact student achievement?  How will effective outreach be conducted to families?  How will programming be made easily accessible to students and families in order to encourage participation? Academic Enrichment and Skill Development We will address the needs of each student according to their individual deficits. I-Ready, the online instructional tool will be used to engage students in online lessons with a push toward college and career readiness. Our technology lab will be used for the sole purpose of scholars engaging with I-Ready. Various online tutorial interdisciplinary program will address students who do not meet proficiency (levels 1 and 2) on the 2018 NYS math assessment. The ELT program will continue to increase the amount and quality of learning time, through before and after-school, Saturday and summer programs, and other opportunities by providing an enriched and accelerated curriculum. Our extended learning program has the following community partner: Southern Queens Park Association and the Beacon Program . We have a shared vision to provide students with activities to support the common core and the social-emotional aspect of their lives. Our program will be based on research from the National Center for Research on Evaluation Standards and Student Testing (CRESST) report reflecting on two decades of evaluations on out-of-school-time programs. The following research-based instructional strategies and activities are characteristic of successful after-school programming: ● Clearly defined program goals and funding that aligns to them. ● Strong, experienced leadership at the ELT program to effectively communicate and manage staff. ● Staff members who motivate students. ● A program that is well-aligned to the school day, but provides new, different, and engaging learning opportunities for participants. ● Continual evaluation and assessment of the program and a staff that ensures goals are being met. Our ELT program will focus on increasing student academic achievement through instructional enrichment, as well as sports and arts activities. Our ELT program’s academic content aligns with CCLS and the Chancellor’s Citywide Expectations. Our ELT program will be delivered by staff qualified to deliver high-quality academic content. Parents will be notified of our ELT program during the following meetings and communication efforts: Introductory letter backpacked home. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 66  Back to School Night. Monthly PTA and SLT Meetings. Parent Teacher Conferences. Monthly telephone calls using School Messenger system of communication. Parent Grade Meetings. Part 4 – ELT Program Implementation and Oversight Part 4a. Who will implement the ELT program? Who will oversee the program? 1. Indicate the key personnel that will be responsible for implementing and overseeing the ELT program, including school-based staff and any high-quality community partners that will be involved. If applicable, describe the scope of involvement of all community partners and how the joint ELT program is structured. How will the school assess the impact of ELT on individual student achievement and social emotional development? 2. 3. Key Personnel includes: School Principal, Assistant Principal, Teachers, ELT Planning Committee, CBO Director, School Leadership Team, Attendance Team, and Lead Teachers (Model teachers, Peer collaborative teachers. The scope of involvement will include CBO providing instructional support in small group interactions utilizing tutors, mentors and teacher assistants. The ELT program will work on a rotational cycle of four to six weeks targeting ENLs, and Students with Disabilities (SWDs). Evaluation of the program will be implemented through baseline and benchmark assessments and further reflected in NYS Math and ELA increases . Part 4b. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. September 2018: Review of data and identification of target population(s) to receive targeted Tier 2 interventions. September 2018-June 2019: Delivery of the program(s) with ongoing progress monitoring January 2019: Mid-year assessment of student progress through ELA and Math baseline-benchmark data. June 2019: Review of student progress of 2018 NYS ELA and Math assessments. Part 5 – ELT Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the ELT program. The schedule will be designed to target student deficits for low performing student and enrichment for those who are grade level and above. Individualized instruction will be focused to improve learning outcomes. Instructional resources include: Wilson Program, REWARDS and Just Words. Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support the ELT Program. Note: If the program is funded by 21st Century Community Center Learning Funds, it must be offered in conjunction with a high quality, high capacity community partner. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 67  21st Century Title I 1003(a) X X Tax Levy X Title III Title I SWP PTA Funded Title I TA X P/F Set-aside SIG Grant School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 6 – ELT Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By February 2019, there will be a 2% increase per grade on student's ELA and Math mid-year assessment scores. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. I-Ready, online technology program will measure progress. Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 68  Section 7: Community School Description Directions: The Community School strategy is directly aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. Community Schools bring schools and community partners together and integrate academics, health, youth development, and family engagement to provide students with the tools and opportunities they need to succeed. The Core Services in Community Schools are Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness. Part 1 – The Community School Program Goal(s) How is the Community School strategy integrated into academic instruction at your school, and what impact has it had on student academic outcomes? Teacher Assistants work collaboratively with classroom teachers to provide scholars with academic support. It is anticipated that the data will relieve growth across content.. Indicate the summative goal(s) of the Community School program for the 2018-19 school year. Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be an increase of 2% in student attendance as measured by ATS attendance reports. Please answer the following question as it relates to meeting your Community School Program Annual Goal(s): How will achieving your Community School Goal(s)--in ELT, Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness--support your academic goals for students? IT will inform next steps. Part 2 – Community School Program Description Part 2a. Identify the CBO partnerships that you will develop in ELT, Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness, their target student population(s), and scope of the services provided. As well as supporting schools’ supportive environment and attendance work, CBOs should be helping to support your school’s instructional focus. CBO Partnership Target Population Scope of Service Attendance Rigorous instructions Teacher support All students All students TIP teachers Mentors Teacher Assistants Teacher mentoring, PL and coaching from Ramapo for Children. Community School Team CST members including students and parents Planning events to improve school environment and instruction. Part 2b. Describe how the school will partner with the Lead CBO to do the following: 1. Community Schools are expected to partner with a community-based partner organization (CBO) and together with members of the School Leadership Team, hire a Community School Director. The Director will lead implementation of the asset and needs assessment process, and other critically important coordinating activities. Indicate how you will leverage this aspect of the work. Community Schools are expected to personalize the needs of all students, through strategic programming and services, as determined by the asset and needs assessment, and must also offer Expanded Learning Time (ELT) and mental health programming. In completing this section, ensure that you think about how: (1) the right services are provided to the right students and families at the right time; and (2) how you will seamlessly 2. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 69  3. 4. coordinate services with instructional programming happening throughout and outside of the school day. Indicate how you will implement this work, and describe other programming you anticipate to be in place to strengthen this initiative. Community Schools are expected to emerge as Partnership Schools, which are places where parents and families feel welcome, actively participate in the conversation and decision-making around the renewal of their schools, and have many opportunities to advocate for their children. Monthly meetings and Community School Forums engaging families and community stakeholders will be a critical part of this family engagement strategy. Describe how you will implement this aspect of the work. Community School Principals are expected to meet on a weekly basis with their Community School Director, select Assistant Principals, key staff, and other CBOs, to analyze trends in data and case manage individual students. Data tools – including the New Visions Data Sorter - and training will be available for schools to use. Indicate how you will implement this aspect of the work. School leadership in conjunction with our C.B.O., Southern Queens, Parks Association, will oversee the Ameri-Corp personnel who will mentor and conference with students who are chronically absent/late on a weekly basis. During weekly attendance meetings held with pupil personnel secretary, guidance counselor, assistant principal, Ameri-Corp counselor, and the C.B.O. Director, the effectiveness of the teams efforts will be discussed and adjusted as needed. Southern Queens, Parks Association, will provide services set forth in the E.L.T. section below. In addition, the C.B.O. , and the Community School Director are on site daily in order to monitor program effectiveness and provide individual student and family support when needed. All ELT) participants will have attendance taken and tracked to ensure that they are participating in the program consistently. Parental outreach will be implemented daily to monitor attendance. Understanding that the community school approach is not ‘one size fits all’ and that schools are dynamic and fluid spaces, our vision takes into account the need to be engaged in an initial planning process as well as to also build into our practice opportunities for on-going assessment wherein parents, teachers, school leaders, and community stakeholders have the opportunity to: ● Meet and greet once a year to identify school/community strengths and needs. ● Agree on strategies to assess those needs and measure progress ● Solve problems and/or challenges ● Create a welcoming, positive environment where youth and their families can enjoy learning together. SQPA in partnership with the SLT, will set up protocols for ongoing communication, continue to build broad parent and community engagement , identifying mental health services enhancements and ELT opportunities, as well as finalizing the initial Community School Plan. SQPA Community School Director with SLT: ● will identify an assistant to School Community Director that can assist in outreaching tutors and additional school support to enhance academics, assist in tracking student assessments and progress, assists in data collection and research of new resources. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 70  ● will be responsible for building a strong Community School Team (CST) as a subcommittee of the SLT. ● will organize monthly meetings and quarterly meetings to review the status of implementation, address current issues, and identify next steps for improvement. SQPA, along with the Principal of MS 8 and SLT, will inventory organizations with available services that can rendered or co-located at the school; identify ways to work with diverse groups for the benefit of students. Part 3 – Community School Partnerships Oversight Part 3a. Key Staff and Partners 1. Name and describe the scope of involvement of all community partners working in the school (include partners supporting ELT, counseling, enrichment, etc.) 2. Name the members of your Community School Team and how meetings will be organized and structured to engage all stakeholders and be focused on results. 3. Explain data strategies including the use of the data sorter, and steps that the school will take to ensure that the appropriate interventions are provided to the right students Attendance Committee will meet once a week on Thursdays to discuss 407 Reports, students with 5 or more absences, Cumulative Absence Report and Perfect Attendance Incentive Program (PAWS). The Community School program will be implemented by the SQPA Beacon/Community School Director and the Community School Team. The team will include the Principal and Assistant Principals of MS 8, selected members of SLT, selected teachers or a master teacher, PTA president or designee, parent coordinator, student representation, community leaders and other partners of SQPA Advisory, and SQPA current supervisory team to work together to achieve the goals of the community school approach. Overseeing the program With the support of MS 8 Principal and the SLT, the SQPA Community School Director will oversee the Community School Program, and its goals and implementation plans. Key personnel responsible including school-based staff and any community partners. We have identified the following entities to help with the implementation and overseeing of the Community School program and as we continue planning, others will be added: ● Community School Director (CSD) will oversee program, implementation and logistics, including additional ELT programming, additional Adult educational programming, staff development resources for school and ELT staff. ● Deputy or assistant to CSD will assist in overseeing and coordinating college tutors in all ELT and Math classes, assistance in lunch period, possible additional personal as deans/ guidance counselors or safe room classroom teacher, Americorp members etc. This person can or may also act as an additional dean. ● Principal or Designee will be responsible for academic curriculum. ● Deputy Director, Beacon, (current) will oversee the day to day operations of after school program and adult programming during the evening and Saturday. Also in conjunction with the AP will oversee the implementation of existing and new ELT programming. ● Parent coordinator will assist with parental involvement and engagement. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 71  ● Recreational Coordinator (current) will coordinate and assist in implementation of all recreational activities during afternoon, lunch, evening and weekend. ● Performance Arts Coordinator (current) will be coordinating and assist in implementation of arts program and outreach for other resources. ● Beacon Preventive Director in conjunction with assigned school personal will assist in overseeing the Mental Health department. Joint implementation of ELT program with the CBO We will continue partnering with MS 8 Success Academy in providing academic support and test prep during afterschool program as part of the ELT programming. Plus, we will be expanding the ELT programs to include, but not limited, the following activities: ● STEM ( science, technology, environmental/engineering and math) and STEAM (science, technology, engineering, art, and math) ● Robotics ● Art courses ● Martial Arts ● Academic and recreational support during lunch hours ● Instructional support in ELA and Math, ● Academic and Vocational Curriculum ● Adult programming and continuing educational as well as workshops. Evaluation of program to assess its impact on student achievement We will be evaluating programming and progress on a regular basis through several mechanisms such as: ● Weekly observations ● Homework monitoring form that assesses the number of students who completed homework versus uncompleted homework ● Pre and Post Assessments in ELA and Math conducted by a contracted consultant or external evaluator. ● Keeping track of school attendance, ELT classes, adult-programming, and programming offered by subcontractors. Review of milestones defined in the RSCEP will be the evaluation tool as well as the components of the capacity framework will be the guide for evaluation, as identified in the needs assessment. . Part 3b. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the Community School program. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 72  The community school program will need various type of resources such as, but not limited to: ● Instructional resources such as student supplies, curriculum for ELT and adult programming, professional development resources, test prep, technology software and other. ● Human resources such as hiring additional school and ELT staff such as tutors, assistant program coordinator, instructors, deans or guidance counselors, evaluator. ● Incentives for students and parental involvement. ● ELT programming such as Arts programming, Martial arts, Robotics and STEAM or STEM material Schedule adjustments in ELT implementation and Extended time alignment Part 3c. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. September 2018 - June 2019 Monthly generated ATS report to indicate the percentage of attendance. May and June ● Planning Sessions with School Leadership Team (SLT), Principal and CBO Community School Director (CSD) ● Conducting Surveys to assess and determine needs of the school with teachers, students and parents ● Contracts and budget development July and August ● Strategic Planning Sessions and Staffing Planning ● Outreach and building the subcommittee, Community School Team (CST) ● Staff development school staff and CBO staff September ● Staff development school staff and CBO Staff ● Meet and Greet all stakeholders, partners among school community, CST and CBO ● Introduction of all ELT programming to student community and adult ● Assemblies with school staff and CBO staff, students and parents ● Pre assessments introduced day class, ELT and Adult programming. October- April 2018-19 CEP-RISE 73  ● Conduct parental outreach and events ● Implementation of ELT classes ● Check and set benchmarks indicators ● Monitor all components monthly ● Analysis of first quarter and highlight any indicators. ● Check and set next benchmark May- June ● Review progress ● Post exams distribution ● Analyze data ● Review goals and outcomes of current year ● Set goals and outcomes for 2 nd year of Community School Part 3d. Mental Health Work Plan Separate from this R-CEP, schools will complete a Mental Health Work Plan that will become an addendum to this document. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 74  Section 8: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Students scoring at mid-level 2.5 or below proficiency on ELA state exams. Mathematics Students scoring at mid-level 2.5 or below proficiency on Math state exams Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Repeated readings, "read alouds", "on demand" writing assignments, reading leveled text and answering teacher madestandards based assessment questions, completing leveled reading assignments using I-Ready, reading lexiled leveled texts using the online reading program, myOn, completing activities from MaxScholar, the online phonics programfor ENL's and SWD's., Success will be measured byresults onELAskill based assessments. Mental math activities, remediationtasks using math manipulatives, Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) During the school day, after school, and Saturday Small group and one-one direct instructionwith students grouped according to instructional data. Small group and one-one direct instructionwith students grouped according to instructional data. During the school day, after school, and Saturday 2018-19 CEP-RISE 75 complete remediation and enrichment activities  Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Students scoring below grade level on ELA and/or Math state exams. Lexile Levels below that which isrecommended for student in grades 6-8. Students scoring below 65% on Science Unit Tests. Students scoring below grade level on ELA and/or Math state exams. Students with Lexile Levels below that which isrecommended for student in grades 6-8. Students scoring below 65% on Social Studies Unit Tests. Careful review of student state assessment data targeting students who areperforming below standards, specifically students scoring between performance levels 2.5and2.9.Referrals will bemadefrom using I-Ready, and Khanacademy.org; online resources. Success will be measured by results on Math skills based assessments. Cooperative learning strategies, mini labs and investigations,and reading in the content area will be used. Success will be measured by results on theScience skills based assessments. After school and Saturday Small group and one-one direct instructionwith students grouped according to instructional data. Reading in the content area, teacher models the RAFT strategy (Re-state- Answer the question Small group and one-one direct instructionwith students grouped according to instructional data. After school and Saturday For example -Tie it up ) for writing. Teachers implement the "I do", "You do", We do" strategy. Success will be measured by resultson theSocial Studiesskills basedassessments. General counseling, goal setting, mediation, time management, anger management, conflict resolution, work study, teacher mentors, and peer mentoring. This will be measured by improvement on student conduct sheets and mastery During the school day and after school Small group and one-one direct instructionwith students grouped according to IEP data and or individual student goals. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 76  teachers and/or parents. ofskills on student goals sheets. . 2018-19 CEP-RISE 77  Section 9: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 40 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Reach out to parents and invite them to work in the parent room, actively involve and engage parents into their child's class. Request their ideas and partner them with a class and teacher they could adopt to work with throughout the year. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). 40 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 78  Purchase resources such as uniforms, school supplies or books for the STH population. 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. NA 2018-19 CEP-RISE 79  Section 10: Title I Program Information Directions:  All schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Recruitment: ● Prospective candidates applying to become part of the staff are required to give demonstration lessons as part of their interview process. Additionally, they have a face-to-face interview to share their experiences and philosophies on student learning. They must also submit all documentation as required by the Department of Education and our district human relations liaison. ● MS 8 will continue to collaborate with York College Teacher Education Program to facilitate their requests for student teaching experiences and as a possible source of recruiting teachers for our school. Strategies for Retention and Support: ● Growing and developing in our professional learning communities is one of our strategies for retaining and supporting teachers. It is evident from our four (4) vertical collaborative inquiry teams that meet during period nine on Tuesdays to analyze student work or examine data to inform instruction for both our general education students and our sub groups. Another one is our horizontal common planning teams by both grade and content areas where teachers collaborate in designing coherent instruction and displaying these unit maps in every classroom and online through Rubicon Atlas. Unit plans are mapped out by teacher teams, adjusted, and scaffolded in a format that sequences the flow of the lesson in a coherent manner. ● Teachers, administrators, and coaches will continue with peer collaboration, modeling, demonstration lessons, and inter-visitations so that the general education, special education, and ESL teachers can observe the instructional practices of their colleagues. ● Deepening the understanding of the instructional focus on reading comprehension, problem solving, and critical thinking. Teachers will be supported in their learning through our three semesters of professional learning cycles (Sep-Dec, Jan-March, April-June). Each semester will have four-week rotational cycles, and within each cycle on Mondays, teachers will choose a topic and attend that session in cycles of four sessions to deepen their understanding of that particular topic. Teachers have been attending the sessions on a rotational basis since September 15 th , 2014 including: Strategies for Supporting English Language Learners, Questioning and Discussion 2018-19 CEP-RISE 80  Techniques, and Close Reading Strategies. They will continue to reflect on their practices and the expectations of the to identify the gaps and make improvements. ● Differentiated professional learning for mentoring targeted staff members with Individual Improvement Plans to address their specific needs; intervisitations for some; external professional learning for others; and the videotaping, self-assessment, and self-reflection of the professional practice of 13 individuals using the Five Core Propositions of National Board for Professional Teaching Standards (NBPTS): 1) Teachers are committed to students and their learning. 2) Teachers know the subjects they teach and how to teach those subjects to students. 3) Teachers are responsible for managing and monitoring student learning. 4) Teachers think systematically about their practice and learn from experience. 5) Teachers are members of learning communities A report (2008) by the National Research Council (NRC) stated that NBPTS has had a positive impact on student achievement, teacher retention, and professional development. ● As a way of retaining teachers and continuing to support them, MS 8 encourages teacher leaders to facilitate professional learning cycles with an emphasis on implementing school-wide initiatives and the instructional focus on reading comprehension, critical thinking and problem solving. These leaders have taken ownership of the following areas: a) Facilitated professional learning workshops for staff members b) Lead or co-lead common planning teams c) Lead or co-lead inquiry teams 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the strategies and activities for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, staff, and paraprofessionals that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). The expectation of the Common Core Learning Standards is that students will demonstrate mastery of their learning in multiple ways. One instructional approach that will be used to enable all students to meet the CCLS is the introduction of the UDL Framework to support the UBD curriculum mapping template for addressing students with exceptional needs (e.g. ENLs, SWDs and other high-need student subgroups). Together both UBD and the UDL frameworks—will be an integral part of our professional development to support teacher pedagogy in allowing students multiple ways of accessing information and demonstrating evidence of their understanding of a unit or assignment to differentiate learning. Using this framework, teachers will be able to give students choices in expressing themselves through multiple ways: poems, cartoons, photographs, journal entries etc… 2018-19 CEP-RISE 81  · We will use the following resources as a guide for high quality professional learning to enable all students to meet the CCLS : and New York State Teaching Standards . · Align the instructional focus on critical thinking with the continued emphasis on 3b (questioning techniques) of the Danielson Framework, questions from Webb’s Depth of Knowledge (DOK) wheel the Questioning Quadrant, and Socratic question stems to develop lessons and activities. · Use of protocols and rubrics for examining student work and cross referencing against the expectations of the CCLS. · Formal and informal cycles of observations will be conducted by school leaders using logs to monitor and track feedback and progress made from September to June · Instructional walkthroughs from our network support group and external consultants to document progress and offer feedback Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/information, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments 2018-19 CEP-RISE 82  Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. NA 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds enables, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (R-CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Title I Part A (Basic) Federal Title I School Improvement 1003(a) Federal 187,131 Parent Involvement 1, 890 _ 54,141 Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funds Federal Parent Involvement: Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Federal Federal Federal Tax Levy (FSF) Local 14,382 _ 12,366 _ 2,673,898 X _ X _ X _ X Column B Section Reference(s) 25, 34, 40, 42, 44, 50, 51, 58, 60, 62, 68, 69 _ 23, 37, 42, 44, 46, 50, 51, 61, 68, 69 _ 62, 68 _ 25, 34, 44, 51, 58, 62, 68 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools 2018-19 CEP-RISE 83  may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I School Improvement 1003(a): To support implementation of school improvement activities identified through the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) reviews or a school review with district oversight and included in the DCIP/R-CEP.  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: To support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs.  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities 2018-19 CEP-RISE 84  funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan.  Title I Priority and Focus School Parent Engagement Set-aside: Additional set-aside is to enable greater and  more meaningful parent participation in the education of their children. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process, including Title I 1003(g) SIG funds: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 85  Section 11: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current R-CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Middle School 8, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the No Child Left Behind (NCLB) Act, is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between school and families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Middle School 8 will support parents and families of Title I students by:  providing materials and training twice per month to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement levels in literacy and math, and use of technology  providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; early in the school year parents/guardians will be asked to indicate the related skills or topics they would like to learn more about; Parent Coordinator or CBO/Beacon Program generated parent workshops will be offered on these topics. fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; a specific Parent Coordinator generated parent workshop will be offered to providing assistance to parents in understanding city, state, and federal standards and assessments;   2018-19 CEP-RISE 86  sharing information about school and parent-related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; this and all school/classroom information will be disseminated via SKEDULA;  providing professional development opportunities for school staff---with the assistance of parents--- to improve outreach, communication skills, (specifically on SKEDULA) and cultural competency to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and Students With Disabilities. The school community will conduct a semi-annual (2x/year) evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. Effectiveness of the school-wide parent/guardian outreach will also be gauged by interviewing students about the extent of their parents’ at-home input and support of school initiatives. This data will be maintained and analyzed by all school “stakeholders.” In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will:  actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact;  engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills;  ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and  strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills;  maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office; conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home;   provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., NCLB/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report;  host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before October 1st of each school year to advise parents about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118, and other applicable sections under the No Child Left Behind Act; 2018-19 CEP-RISE 87    schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening to share information about the school’s educational program, and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; all critical school documents will be translated into parents’ native languages; interpretation/translations will be provided during meetings and events as needed; conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event and conference where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that survey and address their student academic skill needs. Suggestions will be made as to what parents can do to help; this Parent Fair will be divided into two parts, the initial event will be included in the Meet and Greet meeting held at the beginning of the school year. The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by:  holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference;  hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; themes/skills will be curriculum based and will also include technological orientation as well as practice using SKEDULA  encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent- Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; supporting or a variety of Family Outreach events in partnership with the CBO/Beacon Program; monthly family academically oriented outreach events are being planned by the Beacon Program and will be coordinated to complement corresponding MS-08 generated events for parents and guardians.  establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents;  encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers;  providing written quarterly progress reports, mailed to keep parents and weekly telephone calls to inform parents of their children’s progress;  updating, revising and distributing our school calendar and school newsletter; revising our school website to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress;  providing school mailings, and our schoolmessenger telephone for regular written communication between teachers and the home in a format, and to an extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students   arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; respecting the rights of limited English-proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services to ensure participation in the child’s education;  providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings, and other activities to parents of  participating children in a format--- and to an extent practicable in a language---that parents can understand; involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate, and improve the existing Title I Programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact;  providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information;  ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year Provide general support to parents by: 2018-19 CEP-RISE 88     creating a safe, supportive, and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration, and partnering will all members of the school community; supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents;   ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as  described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the No Child Left Behind Title I requirement for Elementary Secondary Education Act (ESEA) and Title I Programs; Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and Students With Disabilities. The school community will conduct a semi-annual (2x/year) evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. Effectiveness of the school-wide parent/guardian outreach will also be gauged by interviewing students about the extent of their parents’ at-home input and support of school initiatives. This data will be maintained and analyzed by all school “stakeholders.” Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy , parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ●actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact ; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact ; Support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; Maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and 2018-19 CEP-RISE 89  inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office; Conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; Provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; Host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before October 1 st of each school year to advise parents about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118, and other applicable sections under the Elementary and Secondary School Act ; Schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening to share information about the school’s educational program, and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● all critical school documents will be translated into parents’ native languages; interpretation/translations will be provided during meetings and events as needed; Conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event and conference where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that survey and address their student academic skill needs. Suggestions will be made as to what parents can do to help; this Parent Fair will be divided into two parts, the initial event will be included in the Meet and Greet meeting held at the beginning of the school year. The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; Hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; themes/skills will be curriculum based and will also include technological orientation as well as practice using PupilPath. Encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; Supporting or a variety of Family Outreach events in partnership with the CBO/Beacon Program; monthly family academically oriented outreach events are being planned by the Beacon Program and will be coordinated to complement corresponding MS-08 generated events for parents and guardians. Establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; Encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; 2018-19 CEP-RISE 90  Providing written quarterly progress reports, mailed to keep parents and weekly telephone calls to inform parents of their children’s progress; Updating, revising and distributing our school calendar and school newsletter; revising our school website to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; Providing school mailings, and our school messenger telephone for regular written communication between teachers and the home in a format, and to an extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) .Middle School 8, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Elementary and Secondary School (ESSA) Act, is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents and the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement. It also shows the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve proficiency on state assessments. Provide high-quality curriculum and instruction for participating children consistent with state standards and assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial , ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the New York State P-12 Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high-quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Elementary and Secondary School (ESSA) Act; Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; 2018-19 CEP-RISE 91  ● respecting the rights of Limited English-Proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings, and other activities to parents of participating children in a format--- and to an extent practicable in a language---that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate, and improve the existing Title I Programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive, and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration, and partnering will all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy ; 2018-19 CEP-RISE 92  ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Elementary and Secondary School Act Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I Programs; Parent/Guardian Responsibilities: II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks; when necessary, ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extra-curricular time such as, extended-day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms, and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training to be offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities 2018-19 CEP-RISE 93  ● attend school regularly and arrive on time ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions ● show respect for myself, other people, and property ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully ● always try my best to learn 2018-19 CEP-RISE 94  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP-RISE 95  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: The Title III supplemental instructional program will be conducted by one ENL (TESOL K-12 certified) teacher and one certified Math or ELA teacher for three hours (9:30am to 12:30pm) on the following Saturday dates: October 6th 2018, October 13th, October 20th, November 3rd, November 10th, November 17th, December 1st, December 8th, December 15th, January 5th 2019, January 12th, January 19th, February 2nd, February 9th, March 2nd, and March 9th. All English language Learners (ELLs) and Multi-Lingual Learners (MLLs) from grades six through eight are invited to attend. Even though the program is open to all ELLs, enrollment is voluntary. Permission slips are sent home in English, Spanish, Hindi, Bengali, Arabic, French, Urdu and Punjabi. Signed permission slips from a parent or legal guardian is mandatory for participation. Attendance will be taken every session to maintain legal record for the school. A light and healthy snack will be provided for all participating ELLs/MLLs by the school cafeteria. Once registered, it is mandated to attend all the sessions throughout the program. In case of absences, a medical note or other type of formal note from a parent or legal guardian must be submitted to the teacher or supervisor prior to the date of such absence occurs. The materials for the program include News ELA, Scholastic Action Magazine, and other accompanying digital resources. These materials are focused on developing both social and academic language skills for diverse ELLs/MLLs. The digital resources are ELL-friendly and on-target with learning objectives. All four (4) modalities are incorporated into activities, and the activities have a scaffold to support ELLs with different needs. Throughout the program, each teacher will also integrate other available resources as needed. The assessment tool that our school uses to determine eligibility for ENL services is the NYSITELL and NYSESLAT data. Also, various reports from ATS are used to acquire necessary information about the ELL population in our school. Based on ATS reports printed on September 21st 2018, the NYSESLAT data indicates that we have forty-seven (47) current ELLs. The RLAT report, from ATS, shows a total of eight (8) former ELLs, having passed the NYSESLAT, that require ninety (90) minutes of ENL services each week. An additional three (3) scholars have been registered during the week of September 12th and 25th 2018, with a home language other than English, and will likely show as eligible for ENL services based on the informal assessment carried out by our ELL coordinator. The NYSITELL data will show more formal results, once answer documents are scanned into ATS within the ten (10) day testing window. Based on RLER reports printed from ATS September 21st 2018, there are forty-seven (47) current and eight (8) former ELLs enrolled at The New Preparatory Middle School 28Q008. This includes nineteen (19) current along with one (1) former ELL(s) in sixth grade, nine (9) current along with three (3) former ELLs in seventh grade, and nineteen (19) current along with four (4) former ELLs in eighth grade. The data reveals that the majority of current as well as former ELLs are at an Expanding level of English proficiency. There are two (2) or four percent (4%) at an Entering Level, nine (9) or sixteen percent (16%) Emerging, sixteen (16) or twenty-nine percent (29%) Transitioning, twenty (20) or thirty-six percent (36%) Expanding, and eight (8) or fifteen percent (15%) Commanding. We have five (5) new admits of which three (3) scored Entering, one (1) scored Emerging, and one (1) scored Transitioning. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 96  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information This trend is not consistent throughout grades six through eight. The level majority for sixth grade is Expanding. From the twenty (20) current as well as former ELLs in sixth grade, zero (0) or zero percent (0%) are Entering, four (4) or twenty percent (20%) are Emerging, three (3) or fifteen percent (15%) are Transitioning, twelve (12) or sixty percent (60%) are Expanding, and one (1) or five percent (5%) are Commanding. The level majority for seventh grade is distributed evenly between Transitioning, Expanding, and Commanding. From the twelve (12) current as well as former ELLs in seventh grade, one (1) is or eight percent (8%) are Entering, two (2) or seventeen percent (17%) are Emerging, three (3) or twenty-five percent (25%) are Transitioning, three (3) or twenty-five percent (25%) are Expanding, and three (3) or twenty-five percent (25%)are Commanding. The level majority for eighth grade is Transitioning. From the twenty-three (23) ELLs in eighth grade, one (1) is or four percent (4%) are Entering, three (3) or thirteen percent (13%) are Emerging, ten (10) or forty-four percent (44%) are Transitioning, five (5) or twenty-two percent (22%) are Expanding, and four (4) or seventeen percent (17%) are Commanding. Furthermore, the forty-seven (47) current ELLs at 28Q008 are from various cultural backgrounds. However, Spanish seems to be the majority language amongst the population our our ELLs. The languages include four (4) or nine percent (9%) Arabic, nine (9) or nineteen percent (19%) Bengali, two (2) or four percent (4%) French-Haitian Creole, two (2) or four percent (4%) French, one (1) or two percent (2%) Fulani, one (1) or two percent (2%) Hindi, twenty-six (26) or fifty-five percent (55%) Spanish, one (1) or two percent (2%) Urdu, and one (1) or two percent (2%) Yoruba. The cultural backgrounds also vary amongst the eight (8) former ELLs at 28Q008. The languages include one (1) or thirteen percent (13%) Bengali, two (2) or twenty-five percent (25%) French-Haitian Creole, one (1) or thirteen percent (13%) Punjabi, three (3) or thirty-eight percent (38%) Spanish, and one (1) or thirteen percent (13%) Urdu. The home languages of the two newly registered scholars include one (1) Haitian Creole, and one (1) Spanish. Although the language majority of our ELL population is Spanish, 28Q008 is a school of multiculturalism. Looking at the data, we notice that there has been a shift amongst the incoming ELL demographic students coming into this building. Our instructional focus will be one of concentrating on moving Transitioning and Expanding students through the use an integrated model. This will be implemented by the ELL specialist in collaboration with each content-area teacher to support academic language development and skill-based strategies required to meet CCSS. To continue support of the Entering and Emerging ELL students, the ELL specialist will carry out the standalone model. This will be implemented in a small group setting with one such program as the National Geographic (NG) Inside Level Fundamentals, which supports the development of phonemic awareness and conversational English skills. This ENL specific curriculum caters to individual needs and provides pre as well as post assessments, digital resources for both teacher and student, progress monitoring assessments, social and academic vocabulary enrichment, foundational language and skill building (phonics and decoding, spelling, word recognition, grammar and sentence structure, vocabulary), content and language objectives, project-based learning, shades of meaning, and is aligned with CCSS and the thematic approach of the NYSESLAT. The participating ELLs will be divided into two groups based on their academic needs and English proficiency. Entering and Emerging ELLs will receive instruction focused on academic vocabulary development across the content areas, participating in total physical response activities to support students along the stages of language acquisition. For instructional purposes, students are partnered according to their native languages to support the use of the primary language in learning English. Depending on the availability, bilingual dictionaries and 2018-19 CEP-RISE 97  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information glossaries will be provided during the program and throughout the year. For the ELLs that speak Latin based languages, the teachers will implement instruction that points out overlapping cognates and false cognates in clarifying vocabulary meaning. Other group activities for diverse ELLs create an educationally sound and safe environment for students to develop and reinforce basic interpersonal communication skills through social interactions. Transitioning, Expanding, and Commanding ELLs will receive instruction focused on enhancing their academic reading and writing skills, knowledge of domain-specific math vocabulary, and ability to understand relevant math formula hinting terminology. Since the ELLs collaboratively learn with various non-ELLs in the classroom during school hours, it is imperative to support ELLs in developing communication skills and academic Reading as well as Writing excellence. Throughout the program, ELLs will be introduced to various social issues and current events. This instructional focus will implement critical thinking skills, argumentative Reading and Writing skills, and productive discussion skills. This will also support the ELLs who will take the New York State English Language Arts Assessment. More importantly, the dynamic in having one ENL teacher with one Math teacher will support the fact that all ELLs are required to take the Math State Exam since this content-area is considered to be universal. Additionally, these ELLs will be heterogeneously grouped to facilitate cross-cultural knowledge and understanding along with developing all four (4) modalities of the English language aligned with the New York State English as a Second Language Achievement Test (NYSESLAT). Students will receive instruction in test-taking strategies integrated with TESOL Reading and Writing strategies such as mind mirrors and double-entry journals. All participating ELLs will continue to develop their academic language skills along with social communication skills, which can be applied across content-areas as they develop these skills. This supplementary program is designed to help students meet grade level performance standards while providing differentiated instruction that meets the needs of all ELLs. The Title III Saturday Program promotes English acquisition and provides ELLs the necessary scaffold to close the academic gap, particularly in the content areas. The instruction will prepare students for the NYSESLAT and provides the necessary language building blocks to academic success. Escalate English (a Houghton Mifflin Harcourt program) along with Envision Math 2.0 Common Core (a Pearson Education program) facilitates integrated language and content-area instruction for struggling readers with low level lexile and quantile measures as well as newcomer ELLs who are learning English for the first time. These programs provide support for our ELLs with phonics, reading, and academic vocabulary. It includes a blend of multi-cultural topics and conceptual practice with the intention of building reading comprehension and math relevant academic language support. It is designed to help our ELLs develop proficiency in English as well as improve language competencies in all academic content-areas. Students are actively engaged in learning as well as practicing prefixes, suffixes, root words, spelling rules, and emphasizes conceptual understanding. The problem-based learning facilitates productive struggle strengthening students’ ability to think mathematically. This provides focus on coherence and rigor along with development of universal skill sets in English as well as parallel comprehension across the curriculum of all core content areas. I-Ready is another digital resource used to identify skill and concept limitation categories of ELLs in order to more efficiently determine instructional focus groups. This facilitates the improvement of math skills for students in addition to reading comprehension. It is most appropriate to utilize this program for the Transitioning and Expanding students. Each program is used to meet the needs of all our ELLs. To reinforce the learning targets of these cutting edge enrichment software programs, our ELLs utilize workbooks and complex texts with native English speaking general education students. Teachers have access to credible reports throughout each program. The reports reveal performance progressions for the purpose of data analysis, student-focused lesson planning, and developing the most efficient scaffolds for differentiation facilitated during instruction. Additional review of student progress is imperative 2018-19 CEP-RISE 98  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information by monitoring portfolios, analyzing data from both formative and summative assessments that measure performance in listening, speaking, reading, and writing. The Bilingual Common Core Initiative (Bilingual Progressions) coupled with the Common Core State Standards (CCSS) will be embedded in the instruction for ELLs. Subsequently, materials and lessons that teach phonics, sight word recognition, vocabulary development, and decoding will be implemented during the Title III Saturday program. Lessons will accommodate individual needs of students across all levels of English proficiency (Entering, Emerging, Transitioning, and Expanding). The strategies and activities outlined in each lesson are aligned with the CCSS and language proficiency standards. A collaborative efforts for lessons developed include administrators, teachers, and paraprofessionals. Additionally, eighth graders will engage in project-based science modules that incorporate visual and textual supports specifically designed for ELLs to prepare for the Science Performance State Exam. Additional supplemental instructional tools include Making Connections by Teacher Create Materials, Finish Line by Continental Press, and Inside by National Geographic. Technology for ELLs include ChromeBook Laptops and SmartBoards. Differentiated instructional tools include News ELA as well as grade appropriate content reading. ELLs receive both integrated and standalone services based on English proficiency levels. Integrated services are collaboratively provided by one TESOL K-12 licensed ENL Teacher and one ELA or other content-area teacher. The standalone services are provided by one TESOL K-12 licensed ENL Teacher (Entering and Emerging ELLs only due). Due to a limited amount of minutes available in the program of one full-time ENL Teacher, ELLs from classes 631 - 691 - 731 - 831 - and 891 will be pulled from their mainstream class for integrated ENL/ELA services with an equivalent grade level of classes 601 - 701 - or 801. Entering and Emerging ELLs receive 180 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA services and 180 minutes of standalone ENL services with a total of 360 minutes. The majority of Transitioning ELLs receive 180 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA services with a total of 180 minutes. Two of our Transitioning ELLs receive 90 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA services and 90 minutes of standalone ENL services with a total of 180 minutes. All Expanding ELLs receive 180 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA services with a total of 180 minutes. All commanding former ELLs receive 90 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA services with a total of 90 minutes. The Title III Saturday Program will be conducted by one ENL (TESOL K-12 certified) teacher and one certified Math or ELA teacher for three hours (9:30am to 12:30pm) on the following Saturday dates: October 6th 2018, October 13th, October 20th, November 3rd, November 10th, November 17th, December 1st, December 8th, December 15th, January 5th 2019, January 12th, January 19th, February 2nd, February 9th, March 2nd, and March 9th. Depending on data results collected for student focused instructional efforts, some reading categories that may be addressed during the Title III Saturday Program include: phonics and decoding, spelling, word recognition, grammar and sentence structure, vocabulary development and reinforcement, sequencing, main ideas, context clues, inferences, reading closely using "close" reading strategies, theme-based reading comprehension across all content-areas, multiple meaning words, synonyms, antonyms, word roots, prefixes, suffixes, shades of meaning, multi-syllabic words, open and closed syllabic words, vowel sounds, citing textual evidence, determining authors purpose, identifying fact versus opinion, evaluating arguments, interpreting figurative language, identifying mood, and analyzing story elements. Depending on data results collected for student focused instructional efforts, some mathematical categories that may be addressed during the Title III Saturday Program include: operations, number fractions, algebraic thinking, fluency, essential vocabulary, geometry, measurement, data analysis, problem-solving ratios, factor patterns, surface area formulas, area ratios, the number system, ratios and proportional relationships, expressions and equations, statistics and probability, scale models, volume formulas, and non-linear functions. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 99  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information A portion of these funds will be used to purchase pastel colored computer paper. This is an essential tool that will be used for both students and parents of the entire ELL population at 28Q008. The benefits include printing specific visual resources and scaffolds for handouts as well as at home reinforcements, content-area bilingual glossaries, and flyers as well as notification letters for Limited English Proficiency (LEP) parents. This will be an asset for the ELL community because it will provide more enriching direct instruction, bring more awareness to LEP parents during ELL parent meeting workshops and through periodic letters sent home throughout the school year, enhance collaborative efforts of ENL and content-area teachers to accommodate ELL students, and increase the ability of ELL student performance and parent participation in school-based activities. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: A reflection of pedagogy and student inquiry will be embedded in planning targeted Professional Learning (PL) sessions for 28Q008 staff members. The training sessions will assist all pedagogues to maximize services for the cognitive and academic language development for ELLs amongst various English Proficiency Levels (EPL). Administration will support content and ENL teachers with curriculum development, improved strategies, data collection, and interpretation. The ELLs team, along with the supervisor, will turnkey supplemental PL sessions for the staff throughout the year. Our ENL teacher is New York State K-12 TESOL certified and has begun the roll out of ELL focused PL sessions for staff in September 2018 as part of The New Preparatory Middle School 8 PL plan. Personnel at 28Q008 will continue to take advantage of designated 45 minute inquiry sessions every Friday to utilize data and promote academic language across all content areas. This will prepare our ELLs for all New York State Assessments and throughout the academic school year. Monday After School PL sessions will take place periodically throughout the school year between 2:20pm and 3:40pm. At least 24 sessions will focus on ELL-specific skills and strategies to use for more efficient differentiated instructional purposes. Each Monday session will consist of at least one hour (60 minutes) of ELL focused professional development. The ENL Teacher/Coordinator will attend at least one Queens South Field Support Center (FSC) ELL Team PL sessions over the summer and will be available to turnkey such information based on the PL scheduling created by the PL coordinator at 28Q008. Topics will include, but are not limited to: access to SmartBoard and Skedula (in-school parent outreach tool), implementation of technology to develop all four modalities of language (specifically listening and speaking), navigating SESIS, assessment and tracking student progress through I-Ready, and interdisciplinary planning and facilitation of CCSS to further develop academic vocabulary in all content areas. ELL personnel will continue to teach and learn instructional strategies from PL sessions provided by qualified ENL specialists. ELL personnel will actively engage in PL sessions about how to use and interpret data from various state and independent digital assessments such as I-Ready, MOSL, New York State Math, New York State ELA, NYSESLAT, and Periodic Assessments. The know-how of navigating exam history assessment reports and analysis will be the driving force behind instructional strategies and decisions for ELLs. The training will 2018-19 CEP-RISE 100  Part C: Professional Development include practical application of data to assist ELLs equal participating in literacy, mathematics, and other core subject initiatives. The focus on data will enable the school to identify and address ELLs who are lacking the fundamental language and skills required to succeed in reading and mathematics along with CCSS. Likewise, these basic skills predict and influence ELLs success in other core subjects such as Social Studies and Science. ELL personnel will be guided through the unique challenges ELLs encounter with academic vocabulary and text dependent questions. Teachers will gain insight for practical scaffolds and research-based strategies to foster acquisition of academic English language skills that can be used across all content domains. Staff collaborations will provide inclusive differentiated curriculum planning, utilizing research-based materials. Our ENL teacher and selected core subject teachers of ELLs will attend FSC and/or OELL sponsored PL sessions to enhance data driven instruction and best practices for ELLs. Potential topics for PL sessions include: vocabulary development (tier word progressions), accessing background knowledge, sentence frames, complex texts for ELLs, ELL-specific scaffolds, rigorous questioning techniques, making real-world connections across all content-areas, ELL-specific learning strategies (I do, you do, we do), facilitating instruction that focuses on all four modalities, visible thinking skills (non-linguistic representation using charts or graphs), deepening text analysis through student talk and CCSS, reviewing NYSESLAT data to inform instruction, analysing test questions, and using visual clues to support language development. Agenda's and attendance sheets will be maintained by the school Principal and Assistant Principal. The following data and compliance records will be maintained by the ELL coordinator: NYSITELL scanned ATS results, RLAT/RLER/ITEL reports printed monthly, completed Home Language Identification Surveys, date of ELPC input into ATS after completion of the Parent Orientation Video with parents/guardians of newly registered ELLs, completed Parent and Program Agreement Surveys, used as well as unused NYSITELL/Spanish-Lab test material along with directions for administration, NYSESLAT/NYSITELL documents scanned into ATS, NYSESLAT/NYSITELL DFS confirmation pages, NYSESLAT LTDS reports, NYSESLAT/NYSITELL shipment notifications of test materials, signed as well as dated NYSESLAT test material security forms, QADM newly enrolled ATS reports of potential ELLs (depending on printer functionality during initial registration input carried out by school secretary), completed SIFE oral interview questionnaires, copies of signed ENL Notification letters mailed home, ELL parent meeting flyers along with signed permission slips as well as parent sign-in sheets, and copies of state-approved bilingual glossaries for each content-area in each language listed on the RLER reports. ENL data and compliance records are kept in a securely locked metal file cabinet located inside the small office of room 214. The original copy of the following documents will be given to the school secretary for purposes of including with students' cumulative folders: signed completion of both the Home Language Identification Surveys as well as the Parent and Program Agreement Surveys. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered 2018-19 CEP-RISE 101  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities  how parents will be notified of these activities Begin description here: Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. ● rationale ● schedule and duration ● topics to be covered ● name of provider ● how parents will be notified of these activities The needs of LEP Parents are surveyed during the orientation meeting at the beginning of the academic school year and periodically throughout the remaining portion of the school year. An invitation is extended to all LEP parents to take a decision making role in the education of their child from selecting a language program model to students' participating in after school programs. Workshops are planned specifically for the needs of LEP parents, addressing common questions and concerns regarding services entitlement, understanding state assessments, student data analysis, promotional requirements, and available resources to utilize at home. Interpretation services are provided on-site and over the phone to encourage and facilitate parent participation in the school community. Additionally, informational flyers regarding school functions such as curriculum night and parent-teacher conferences are sent out in multiple languages. The Parent Coordinator, Nicole Martinez, is available to provide information regarding additional services in and outside the school, such as adult ENL courses as per parents' request. Lastly, parents receive emails of school related information. All efforts are in hopes to communicate that school personnel are available to address parents' needs and to create a safe and engaging environment for the participation of all parents, specifically LEP parents. There will be three ELL Parent Workshops, that consist of two-hours each. The following topics and months are subject to change based on LEP parents needs. The first ELL Parent Workshop will take place in September to inform LEP parents about: ENL program placement and instructional focus overview, important dates (ELA, Math, NYSESLAT, school-based activities, parent-teacher conferences), State Exam requirements and accommodations for ELLs, NYSESLAT levels and format, PupilPath (keeping track of student progress), Title III After School Program for ELLs, and answers to any questions of concern. The second ELL Parent Workshop will take place in January to inform LEP parents about: reminder about important dates (ELA, MATH, NYSESLAT, school-based activities, parent-teacher conferences), language and critical thinking skills to reinforce in students' home language, NYSESLAT example questions, promotion requirements, helpful websites to utilize at home, and answers to any questions of concern. The final third ELL Parent Workshop will take place in April to inform LEP parents about: important dates, promotion standards for English Language Learners, summer learning opportunities, helpful websites and/or language development phone applications, and questions to any questions of concern. The three ELL Parent Workshops are administered by our TESOL K-12 licensed ENL Teacher and one administrative supervisor. The meetings will be help after school between 16:00 and 18:00. This will provide the opportunity for all LEP parents to attend based on their schedule of availability. Also, it will not interfere with mandated minutes of ELL-specific direct 2018-19 CEP-RISE 102  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities instructional services. Flyers for each ELL Parent Meeting are created with specific agendas; curriculum, learning standards, expectations, state assessments (NYSESLAT, ELA, Math, Science Performance and Writing Exam), important dates, testing exemptions and accommodations, LEP parent rights, helpful websites, valuable tips for parents, school-based meetings and activities, LEP parent educational workshops, LEP parent support services, ELL-specific skills and strategies, and promotion criteria. Flyers are sent out for translation in Spanish, Bengali, Arabic, Punjabi, Urdu, and Hindi as these languages have been identified as the most common amongst our ELL population. Other languages are requested for translation through Translation and Interpretation Unit and provided based on availability. The flyers are printed on pastel colored computer paper, given to ELLs enrolled at 28Q008, and mailed home. LEP parents are provided with both the English and translated versions of each flyer. These flyers include permission slips that require both student as well as parent signatures, preferred option for on-site interpretation services, and specified home language. Completed permission slips must be returned to the ENL Teacher as soon as possible for review of languages requiring translation in order to issue requests for on-site-interpretation services through "The Big Word" New York City (NYC) Department of Education (DOE) contracted vendor. Attendance sign-in sheets are created and remain at the front entrance so that parents may sign-in immediately before entering the workshop. Attendance sheets include categories such as: parent name, student name, student class, parent email, parent phone number, parent concerns, and parent feedback. All handouts are given at the start of each meeting while include the agenda, forms, brochures, contact information, and helpful resources. Interpreters are seated with parents for consecutive translation purposes and grouped based on home languages as well as availability. All LEP parents are surveyed before the meeting to request necessary interpretation services. Food and beverage is provided for LEP parents to feel welcome as participating members of the school community and stay focused on the important information shared during the workshop. Students are welcome to accompany their parents during the meeting. A PowerPoint presentation is created and displayed onto the SmartBoard for the entire group to provide a visual representation of important discussion topics and ensure more efficient on-site interpretation services. LEP parents are provided with ample time to ask any additional questions of concern. A copy of all workshop records are made and kept in a securely locked filing location. This includes a meeting agenda, completed attendance sign-in sheet, and any other relevant handouts. Copies of these records were kept in room 303 during the 2017-2018 school year. However, this is subject to change based on room availability declared as TBD on the tentative teacher schedule of the ENL teacher for the 2018-2019 school year. All original copies of these records are submitted to the main office for primary record keeping by principal Ms. Louissaint. Parent involvement in the ELL program is key to student success. To support students, parents will be invited by the parent coordinator, to participate in workshops and activities to encourage English language acquisition. Outreach to families will be accomplished using the school messenger mass telephone service, individual telephone calls by staff members on Tuesday's, distribution of the school calendar, notices mailed and backpacked to homes, PTA meetings, SLT meetings, parent coordinator outreach, and messages through Skedula or our school website. When parents visit the school, they will be greeted in the parent room by the parent coordinator, who can interpret for our Spanish speaking parents. Our parent coordinator will contact translation services, offered by the NYC DOE translation and interpretation unit, for parents who speak languages other than English or Spanish. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 103  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Parent workshops will focus on how parents can provide support at home. They will be exposed to the format of the NYSESLAT exam, state exams and the new ELLs initiatives. Workshops will be conducted on site by a TESOL K-12 certified ENL Teacher and consultant. Parent Workshop Schedule:Introduction to Skedula (November 14, 2018 @ 4:30pm)English Language speaking website "Starfall" (November 21, 2018 @ 9:00am)Promotional Requirements, ENL Success Academy (January 10, 2019 @ 9:00am & 5:00pm)NYSESLAT SKILLS & CCSS (February 21, 2019 @ 4:30pm)ELA and MATH State Exams (March 20, 2019 @ 4:30pm)Grade 8 Science Test: Written & Performance (April 20, 2019 @ 4:30pm)New York City High School Application Process (May 17, 2019 @ 6:30pm) We will continue to encourage our ELL students to borrow library books to share with their families as well as the translated feature of the "My On" digital software program. Halfway through the school year, we will host multicultural evenings and afternoons (TBD) to share ethnic food, enjoy the music and dancing of the many cultures represented at our school and to showcase and recognize improved speaking, writing and reading skills. To encourage excellent program attendance and expose our students, especially our newcomers, to a hands on history experience of different boroughs, we will sponsor three (3) trips. Parents are invited and encouraged to attend. 1. The NY Historical Museum in Manhattan (west side) * The effect of the Erie Canal on NYC 2. The Museum of NYC in Manhattan (east side) * The History of Manhattan through artifacts 3. The Brooklyn Historical Society Museum at the Brooklyn Navy Yard * Fifth annual culminating trip * Exciting views of Manhattan Plus * These are the People of Your Navy Yard Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) $9,892.80  Per session  Per diem Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. DIRECT INSTRUCTION The total amount for direct instruction per session is $7,419.60 to fulfill a required 60% of the budget. One certified ENL teacher and one Math or ELA certified teacher will provide direct instruction to the ELL/MLL population for a total of sixteen Saturday's starting in October and ending in March. The program will take place between 9:30am and 12:30pm on specified Saturdays detailed in the PART B section of this application. One supervisor will be on site to monitor this Title III Saturday Academy. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 104  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. (2Teachers) X (16Saturdays) X (3hrs.) = 96hrs. @ $50.13 = $4,812.48 (1Supervisor) X (16Saturdays) X (3hrs.) = 48hrs. @ 52.44 = $2,517.12 The total per session amount comes to $7,329.60 with a balance of $90.00 that can be added to the OTPS category for supplies since this difference doesn't provide enough money to cover per session rates. PARENTAL ENGAGEMENT ACTIVITIES The total amount for parent involvement per session is $1,236.60 to fulfill a required 10% of the budget. One certified ENL teacher will administer the required three meetings for ELL parents. Each meeting will take place for two hours and all important topics of discussion are detailed in the PART D section of this application. One supervisor will be on site to monitor these Title III parent engagement activities. (1Teacher) X (3Meetings) X (2hrs.) = 6hrs. @ $50.13 = $300.78 (1Supervisor) X (3Meetings) X (2hrs.) = 6hrs. @ $52.44 = $314.64 The total per session amount comes to $615.42 with a balance of $621.18 that can be added to OTPS for refreshments along with materials and supplies needed for printing as well as mailing translated flyers or letters home to ELL parents about parent workshops. PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT The total amount for professional development per session is $1,236.60 to fulfill a required 10% of the budget. One certified ENL teacher, or any certified teacher having attended an ELL-specific professional learning conference to turnkey highlighted relevant information, will administer professional development to a 2018-19 CEP-RISE 105  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. committee of JHS 008 staff members. The committee will be chosen by the professional development coordinator. A total of 24 meetings will take place on Monday's during the time allotted for professional development activities within the NYC DOE UFT contract (2:30 to 3:30pm). (1Teacher) X (24Meetings) X (1hr.) = 24hrs. @ $50.13 = $1,203.12 The total per session amount comes to $1,203.12 with a balance of $33.48 that can be added to OTPS category for supplies since this difference doesn't provide enough money to cover per session rates. TOTAL PER SESSION BUDGET The total amount for per session in these three categories is $9,148.48 with a balance of $744.66 that can be added to OTPS for the reasons specified in the explanation of each category per session expenditures. $0.00 OTPS Budget The allowable amount for OTPS expenditures is 20% of the total budget. GALAXY T3 LEP Supplies - General The $2,797.86 expenditures will be utilized for the Title III Saturday Program materials. An approximate $339.52 expenditures will be utilized for materials or supplies necessary to provide refreshments along with printing as well as mailing translated flyers or letters home to LEP parents about parent workshops. Purchased services  High quality staff $0.00 $2,797.86 and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 106  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. An approximate $717.33 will be spent on building a grade appropriate ELL-specific classroom library with books in multiple languages, that aligns with common core curriculum and coordinates with the population of the school community, through the Title Wave Follett vendor, to encourage continued development of students' native language as a crucial element for more effective transfer and progression of English language development. A list of the forty-seven (47) books to be included in this price quote are as follows: 1. Wonder by Palacio, R. J. (English)= $14.99 2. Dennis Chavez: the first Hispanic US Senator by Coy, Cissie (Spanish)= $6.37 3. El ladron del rayo (Percy Jackson & The Olympians, Book 1) by Riordan, Rick (Spanish)= $7.01 4. La leccion de August (Wonder) by Palacio, R. J. (Spanish)= $8.93 5. Trenes de alta velocidad: por dentro y por fuerta (Technology: Blueprints of the Future) by Biello, David (Spanish)= $23.44 6. George Armstrong Custer: general de la caballeria estadounidense (Primary Sources of Famous People American History) by Link, Theodore (Spanish)= $20.59 7. Wild Bill Hickok: leyenda del oeste americano (Primary Sources Of Famous People American History) by Phillips, Larissa (Spanish)= $20.59 8. Super jumbo jets: por dentro y por fuera (Technology: Blueprints of the Future) by Cefrey, Holly (Spanish)= $23.44 9. Super telescopios: por dentro y por fuera (Technology: Blueprints of the Future) by Villard, Ray (Spanish)= $23.44 10. El ultimo heroe del Olimpo (Percy Jackson and the Olympians, Book 5) by Riordan, Rick (Spanish)= $7.01 11. La maldicion del titan (Percy Jackson and the Olympians, Book 3) by Riordan, Rick (Spanish)=$7.01 2018-19 CEP-RISE 107  Budgeted Amount Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. 12. La batalla del laberinto (Percy Jackson and the Olympians, Book 4) by Riordan, Rick (Spanish)= $7.01 13. El mar de los mostruos (Percy Jackson and the Olympians, Book 2) by Riordan, Rick (Spanish)= $7.01 14. Cool Salsa: bilingual poems on growing up Latino in the United States (Spanish)= $7.03 15. Me llamo Bud, no Buddy by Curtis, Christopher Paul (Spanish)= $8.31 16. Mudhakarat talib. al-Haqiqah al-murrah (Diary Of A wimpy Kid, Book 5) by Kinney, Jeff (Arabic)= $9.10 17. Yawmiyat gharikh hayfali (Diary of A wimpy Kid, Book 1) by Kinney, Jeff (Arabic)= $8.27 18. Mudhakarat talib. Qawanin al-akh al-akbar (Diary Of A wimpy Kid, Book 2) by Kinney, Jeff (Arabic)= $10.37 19. Junun al-manzil (Diary Of A wimpy Kid, Book 6) by Kinney, Jeff (Arabic)= $12.83 20. al-Qashshah al-akhirah (Diary Of A wimpy Kid) by Kinney, Jeff (Arabic)= $12.83 21. Ayyam al-kilab (Diary Of A wimpy Kid, Book 4) by Kinney, Jeff (Arabic)= $12.83 22. Le dernier Olympien (Percy Jackson and the Olympians, Book 5) by Riordan, Rick (French)= $16.10 23. La bataille du Labyrinthe (Percy Jackson and the Olympians, Book 4) by Riordan, Rick (French)= $16.10 24. Le sort du Titan (Percy Jackson and the Olympians, Book 3) by Riordan, Rick (French)= $43.65 25. Ellie's secret diary = Ayli Ki khufiah da'iri by Barkow, Henriette (Urdu)= $16.10 26. Le voleur de foudre (Percy Jackson and the Olympians, Book 1) by Riordan, Rick (French)= $16.10 27. Annie Oakley: tiradora del lejano Oeste (Primary Sources Of Famous People American History) by Porterfield, Jason (Spanish)= $20.59 28. Nathan Hale: heroe de la Guerra de Independencia (Primary Sources Of Famous 2018-19 CEP-RISE 108  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. People American History) by Liberston, Jody (Spanish)= $20.59 29. Cynthis Ann Parker: cautiva de los comanches (Primary Sources Of Famous People American History) by Egan, Tracie (Spanish)= $20.59 30. El Marques de Lafayette: heroe frances de la Guerra de Independencia (Primary Sources Of Famous People American History) by Collins, Kathleen (Spanish)= $20.59 31. Phillis Whetley: peta afroamericana (Primary Sources Of Famous People American History) by Moriarty, J. T. (Spanish)= $20.59 32. Wyatt Earp: sheriff del lejano oeste (Primary Sources Of Famous People American History) by Alagna, Magsalena (Spanish)= $20.59 33. Jesse James: legendario bandido del oeste americano (Primary Sources Of Famous People American History) by Collins, Kathleen (Spanish)= $20.59 34. John Sutter: pionero de California (Primary Sources Of Famous People American History) by Hayhurst, Chris (Spanish)= $20.59 35. Pandora's box by Barkow, Henriette (Bengali)= $16.10 36. Martin Luther King Jr. by Conklin, Wendy (Spanish)= $5.75 37. Forces and motion (Lightbox Interactive Book, multi-user access, includes print copy, 2 item set) by Evans Ogden, Lesley J. (Arabic)= $50.00 38. Kahani cara tattam di by Salwi, Dilip M. (Panjabi)= $4.4539. 40 Mujeres Famosas Grade 5 (lopeners Spanish)= $11.37 40. Natali: woman by Noel, Lochard (Haitian French Creole)= $13.78 41. Beowulf by Barkow, Henriette (Panjabi)= $16.10 42. Bilingual visual dictionary: English-Bengali, Bengali-English (CD-Rom, Bengali)= $16.96 43. Obama? Obama! : la trajectoire de'un citoyen by Heurtelou, Maude (French)= $9.50 44. Oliver Twist by Iniguez Barrena, Ma. Lourdes (Spanish)= $10.87 2018-19 CEP-RISE 109 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. 45. Tim tim bwa chech: n ap tire 500 kont ayisyen by Tardieu, Gerard-Marie (Haitian French Creole)= $9.03 46. Derechos Humanos (Human Rights, Below-Level, Global Issues - National Geographic Learning, Spanish)= $12.30 47. Recursos Energeticos (Energy Resources, Below-Level, Global Issues - National Geographic Learning, Spanish)= $12.30 An approximate $375.45 will be spent on additional resources such as Finish Line for ELLs 2.0 Grades 6-8 in preparation for the NYSESLAT and $1365.56 state approved bilingual glossaries (general word-to-word as well as word-to-word subject vocabulary). $0.00 1. N.Y. Historical Society (2 Tours) 2. Museum of the City of N.Y. (2 Tours) = $420 Brooklyn Historical Museum (Location: Brooklyn Navy Yard) = $0.00 $0.00 $12,366.00 Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel $0.00 $420 Other TOTAL $0.00 $12,366.00 2018-19 CEP-RISE 110  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 28 School Name New Prep Middle School 8 Borough select one School Number 008 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Katiana Louissaint Coach Ankhshshak Ankhmeni ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Krista-Jean Kelly (ENL) Teacher/Subject Area Ronna Jenkins (ELA) Teacher/Subject Area Maurine Adams (ELA) Related-Service Provider Jennis Brown (Speech) Superintendent Mabel Sarduy Assistant Principal Taylor Crystal Brown Coach Olamide Familusi School Counselor Kenneth Goetz, Lucille Tzivel Parent Wanda Myers Parent Coordinator Nicole Martinez Field Support Center Staff Member Pierre Galvez Other (Name and Title) N/A C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 2 1 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 360 2018-19 CEP-RISE 111 Total number of ELLs 43 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 11.94%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 2 K 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 3 0 4 0 5 0 6 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 9 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? The assessment tool that our school uses to determine eligibility for ENL services is the NYSITELL and NYSESLAT data. Also, various reports from ATS are used to acquire necessary information about the ELL population in our school. Based on ATS reports printed on September 21st 2018, the NYSESLAT data indicates that we have forty-seven (47) current ELLs. The RLAT report, from ATS, shows a total of eight (8) former ELLs, having passed the NYSESLAT, that require ninety (90) minutes of ENL services each week. An additional three (3) scholars have been registered during the week of September 12th and 25th 2018, with a home language other than English, and will likely show as eligible for ENL services based on the informal assessment carried out by our ELL coordinator. The NYSITELL data will show more formal results, once answer documents are scanned into ATS within the ten (10) day testing window. From the forty-seven (47) current ELLs, we have four percent (4%) Entering, nineteen percent (19%) Emerging, thirty-four percent (34%) Transitioning, and forty-three percent (43%) Expanding ELL students. We have five (5) new admits of which 2018-19 CEP-RISE 112  three (3) scored Entering, one (1) scored Emerging, and one (1) scored Transitioning. Looking at the data, we notice that there has been a shift amongst the incoming ELL demographic students coming into this building. Our instructional focus will be one of concentrating on moving Transitioning and Expanding students through the use an integrated model. This will be implemented by the ELL specialist in collaboration with each content-area teacher to support academic language development and skill-based strategies required to meet CCSS. To continue support of the Entering and Emerging ELL students, the ELL specialist will carry out the standalone model. This will be implemented in a small group setting with one such program as the National Geographic (NG) Inside Level Fundamentals, which supports the development of phonemic awareness and conversational English skills. This ENL specific curriculum caters to individual needs and provides pre as well as post assessments, digital resources for both teacher and student, progress monitoring assessments, social and academic vocabulary enrichment, foundational language and skill building (phonics and decoding, spelling, word recognition, grammar and sentence structure, vocabulary), content and language objectives, project-based learning, shades of meaning, and is aligned with CCSS and the thematic approach of the NYSESLAT. Additional assessments include: teacher created, Fountas, Pinnell, I-READY, IRLA and MAX SCHOLAR. The data also reveals that there are 6 Commanding ELL students. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? We notice that approximately half of our ELL students are Entering & Emerging. The other half are Transitioning & Expanding, or on the cusp of proficiency. The majority of our ELLs score at a level K-4 reading level through I-Ready assessment, a few 1 grade below reading level, and none have met their current grade level of reading. Thus, MaxScholar is a digital resource for both ELL students & all Teachers to use for building reading skills, phonics, vocabulary, & monitoring student use/progress of this on-line resource. Learning targets are determined based on the critical analysis f this formal assessment data, starting with the leveled grouping based on target skills. The instructional focus for Entering & Emerging ELLs is to build phonemic awareness and basic vocabulary words in English, develop clear and cohesive sentence writing skills, sharing learning & experience through oral presentation and NG Inside on-line teacher/student technology program. The instructional focus for Transitioning and Expanding ELLs are to build academic language in promoting reading comprehension and to integrate content learning in developing complex sentences and essay's. Item analysis revealed that long-term ELLs and special education ELLs share the same needs and intervention services as their Transitioning Expanding peers. Therefore, similar services will be provided in addition to the other mandated services and accommodations as outlined by the Individual Education Plan. Teachers have ample time during common planning & inquiry with the Teacher Center Coach to analyze data throughout the school year as well as develop the most efficient curriculum map to better meet ELL specific needs. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? Baseline test are given in the fall and spring Students that take the math and science state test in their home language who are EN or EM generally perform higher. The factor is consistent among all grades. Teachers utilize the periodic assessment data to drive instruction by focusing specific deficiencies in specific skills inclusive of reading, writing, listening and speaking. We realized from the periodic assessments that our students are most deficient in reading and writing. Teachers include students’ home language into daily lessons and curriculum to support academic and linguistic growth. The recommended 25% home language for EN and a lesser amount for EM and TR is followed by our teachers. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Learning targets, content & language objectives, are determined based on the critical analysis of summative data. This starts with the leveled grouping based on target skills. Strategic programming takes place. Scholars are assigned individually to RTI programs according to their individual needs. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 113  5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] The Middle School Quality Initiative (MSQI) recommends a model for embedding a strategic reading period for all scholars in our school. We subscribe to that model and will assess scholars using the I-Ready assessment. Data from the assessments and secondary diagnostics such as, running records and Wilson will determine the best RTI model for individual ELL scholars. For instance, our beginning ELLs may need Great Leaps, while our advanced ELLs may be programmed for a Debate class. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Data is used to effectively monitor strengths and weaknesses to better target instruction. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? During weekly common planning sessions, teachers will review findings of the data and make adjustments to their lessons, programs, etc. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Our ENL students are grouped by grade in various classes. ELLs are predominately placed into classes that also include native English speaking students: 601, 701, and 801. Students having both an IEP and eligibility for ENL services are placed into classes based on their IEP requirements: 631, 691, 701, 731, 831, 891. These classes consist of mixed proficiency levels with both ENL and native English speaking students. These classes travel together in a group for all core subjects and specials. The TESOL certified ENL teachers collaborate with certified content-area teachers. The Entering and Emerging students receive their required minutes of standalone ENL services with low English proficiency leveled ENL peers from their mainstream class and/or with students from a maximum of two consecutive grade levels (6 and 7 or 7 and 8). b. TBE program. If applicable. NA c. DL program. If applicable. NA 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? The ENL teachers along with an Assistant Principal use the RLAT to determine the number of ELL students, their instructional levels and and their required instructional minutes (based on proficiency levels). Since we have 45 minute classes and the students have already been placed in predetermined classes (see above #1.), they can then create comprehensive teacher programs, a student list (for cross reference) indicating day and period for each ENL class for each student as well as individual programs for each student. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 114  3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Content area is delivered within classrooms beginning with a language objective. Vocabulary development will be taught using the call and response protocols. Scholars will use the Frayer model to capture syntax and develop word meanings by completing specified graphic organizers. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Through Various formal and informal assessments by the classroom and ENL provider. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Our SIFE students are supported by providing them with foundational learning skills such as phonemic awareness, alphabet sound symbol relationships, and sentence and paragraph structure through scaffolds, illustrations and graphic organizers. The Newcomer students utilize home language to foster vocabulary and academic development growth through scaffolds and strategies. Learning through a cooperative learning environment. A student's native language will most likely have a strong influence on the way that student learns English. Understanding how this language is similar to or different from English will help you focus on troublesome areas. This influence can provide extra support, such as the case of English and Spanish Cognates (education and educación). The influence also may lead to some ongoing errors in English, which will become evident with time and repeated use by students who have the same native language. Developing students will also utilize various scaffolds and strategies to support language development through a cooperative and individualized setting. These students will be encouraged through the use of complex texts to support language acquisition. We recognize our long-term ELLS needs additional support services and enrichment programs. These programs are geared towards academic growth using data to focus on areas strengths and weaknesses. Our school designates at least 5 students per class to work with 1 on 1 as an intervention support these students are known as our focus five. Our former ELLS require support and attention to their unique needs. In addition to language acquisition, English-Language learners are asked to merge their cultures, backgrounds, and experiences with those of their new environment in order to achieve academic success. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Teachers use small group instruction with visual aides. Students also utilize the IREADY LAB and Max Scholar especially designed for our ELL-SWD population and continuing to the Writing Program for ELLs. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? All ELLs and SWDs engage in flexible scheduling for PE, and AIE. Spec. Ed. and ENL teachers differentiate the core curriculum for our IEP students so that they can achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency. Teachers employ the following strategies and best practices: vocabulary development through visualization, use of technology, pre and post unit tests to drive instruction, rotational model, embedded assessment through exit tickets, 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. The Targeted ESL programs include , after school, Saturday Success academy, tutors in all core subjects, focus five and AIS. The ESL Subgroups are targeted by gender, SIFE, Low economic, and Hispanic. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 115  9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? New programs Which will be implemented includes IRLA and Great leaps, a reading assessment program 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? NA 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLS are included and have access to all school programs. Some of these programs include our Gifted and Talented classes, Regents exams, Project Boost, GEMS, CHAMPS, Young Men's Initiative, AIE and clubs geared towards their interest. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Max-scholar, Read 180, Achieve 3000, My On, Writing for ELLS, Reading in the Content Area, CMP3 and Mathletics. Our ELLS have access to computers or Ipads in ENL and content area classes. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? In our ENL program it is supported to encourage students to see connections between their languages and, thus, to better understand how languages are structured and organized, talk to ELLs about their home language 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. The school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLS’ ages and grades by customizing individualized push in and pullout programs to meet the New York State academic policy mandates for ELLs. The ELLs instructors plan collaboratively two times per week with co-teachers and administrators to ensure rigorous instruction. They align their instructional practices to the Blueprint for English Language Learners Success. The school strategically selects research-based resources to anchor the instruction. Various modalities and assessment tools are used to track students’ achievement and ensure that all ELL students are performing at their level. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Scholar in ELLs classes who express interest will be invited to join the York Early College Academy school in their math regents classes so that they may gain access to an accelerated curriculum. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). During the summer our present and entering ELLs are invited to participate in a special program: Practice Makes Perfect. During August Parent Orientation, ELL parents are recognized and invited to participate in our LAP meetings and on SLT. Our after school ELL program promotes speaking, reading, writing and listening as well as providing Math and ELA test prep. Each year our Foreign Language and ENL Teachers coordinate a Multicultural Night during which the ethnic music, dance, dress, culture and foods of of our students are celebrated and enjoyed. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Spanish and Korean are electives offered to the ELLS. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? 2018-19 CEP-RISE 116 d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? NA Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? All teachers of ELLs participate in a double block of common planning with their grade level teachers. All teachers will receive training in the new ELL policy and PD to develop specific strategies to support their students as they access their new language. Our teacher center administrator will offer PD based n the needs of the staff and students. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. All teachers engage in specific professional learning for ELLs during a four week cycle. The ENL instructors will receive the same instruction and will increase their PL hours by attending BFSC workshops, online courses and PL from other outside sources. Agendas and sign in sheets will be kept in our schools' teacher center. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Weekly parent engagement meetings with ELL parents are scheduled between the the two ENL providers and the teachers of ENL classrooms. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. At the start of school, hold a know your school night to have parents complete forms. Translators should be available. This is a good opportunity to share information on school supplies and other expectations, and enlist parents and guardians as school/classroom volunteers. When dealing with family members with little or no English proficiency, providing forms and notes in their native language is very helpful. When translating, caution should be taken to ensure the correct phrases are used. In this regard, reliance on Internet-based translation sites or computer software programs should be avoided. When using district translators, accuracy, due to dialect, is sometimes an issue. Some translators do a great job of oral translations but their translation of written material may not be proficient. Arrange for parent teacher conferences at times that are convenient for parents. Some parents of ELL students may work evening shifts. Make sure to send home conference notices in the home language and tell parents translators will be on-hand. Schedule the parent teacher conferences so parents can make one trip to the school covering all their children's conferences. Parent nights are a useful way to engage family members in school activities. When organizing such events, it is helpful to keep the following in mind. o Involve ELL students as part of the program to encourage family member attendance. o Be sure to send home bilingual notes announcing parent nights. In addition, personal contact with the families is also beneficial. This might be a role home-school liaison staff members could fulfill, if available. o Individually greet and say goodbye to attending families. o Celebrate the achievements of outstanding ELL students. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 117  o Survey those attending, asking for input on student programming, adult programming, and satisfaction with the current programming efforts. • To build rapport between the parents and teachers, parents could be asked if they would be willing to give the teachers lessons on ethnic dancing or music or cooking popular ethnic recipes. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. We engage in culture of the month so that all ELLs Scholars and their cultures are highlighted. The culture of the month is infused in the lesson. Scholars in the ESL classes receive the benefit of a separate language objective and learning target that addresses the needs of the group. Most importantly, ESL scholars work alongside general education scholars and a class tutor provides additional support for the scholars. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 118 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Angela Green, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 119  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: New Prep MS 8 School DBN: 28q008 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Dr. A Green Title Principal Ms. K. Louissaint Assistant Principal Ms. N. Martinez Parent Coordinator Ms. A Richards Jean ENL/Bilingual Teacher Ms. Wanda Myers Parent Ms. M. Adams, ELA Teacher/Subject Area Ms. A. Richads Jean Teacher/Subject Area Ms. O. Familusi Mr. Akhmeni Coach Coach Ms. Tzivelekis School Counselor Ms.Sarduy NA NA NA NA Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Mr. Galvez Other NA Other NA Other NA Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 10/01/17 10/01/17 10/01/17 10/01/17 10/01/17 10/01/17 10/01/17 10/01/17 10/01/17 10/01/17 10/01/17 NA NA NA NA 2018-19 CEP-RISE 120 2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools School Name: The New Preparatory Middle School Superintendent: Mabel Sarduy DBN: 28Q008 The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Krista-Jean Kelly Teacher YES Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Upon arrival into our building, the HLIS (Home Language Identification Survey) is given to the parents in the home language spoken. Also each year parents complete the Emergency Contact Card which is on file in main office along with previous year's card. The LAC and LAP team review these documents as well as the ATS RAPL report on an ongoing basis to identify the preferred written and oral language of our parents. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 121  Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Major Findings: Roughly 11.8% of parents speak Spanish as their first language, and prefer notices sent home in both English and Spanish. Furthermore, 1.9 % of parents speak Bengali and prefer notices to be sent home in both English and Bengali. Less than 3% of parents require translation into Punjabi (.82%), Hatian-Creole (.54%), Falani, French , or Dutch (each at .27%). These findings are reported and updated to the school community at PTA meetings throughout the year.. The languages include one (1) Afrikaans, six (6) Arabic, thirty-four (34) Bengali, four (4) French, one (1) Fulani, three (3) Haitian Creole, two (2) Hindi, five hundred thirteen (513) English, one (1) Punjabi, seventy-nine (79) Spanish, three (3) Urdu, and one (1) Yoruba. The languages include zero point fifteen percent (0.15%) Afrikaans, zero point ninety-three percent (0.93%) Arabic, five point twenty-five percent (5.25%) Bengali, zero point sixty-two percent (0.62%) French, zero point fifteen percent (0.15%) Fulani, zero point forty-six percent (0.46%) Haitian Creole, zero point thirty-one percent (0.31%) Hindi, seventy-nine point seventeen percent (79.17%) English, zero point fifteen percent (0.15%) Punjabi, The languages include one (1) Afrikaans, six (6) Arabic, thirty-four (34) Bengali, four (4) French, one (1) Fulani, three (3) Haitian Creole, two (2) Hindi, five hundred eleven (511) English, one (1) Punjabi, eighty-one (81) Spanish, three (3) Urdu, and one (1) Yoruba. The languages include zero point fifteen percent (0.15%) Afrikaans, zero point ninety-three percent (0.93%) Arabic, five point twenty-five percent (5.25%) Bengali, zero point sixty-two percent (0.62%) French, zero point fifteen percent (0.15%) Fulani, zero point forty-six percent (0.46%) Haitian Creole, zero point thirty-one percent (0.31%) Hindi, seventy-eight point eighty-six percent (78.86%) English, zero point fifteen percent (0.15%) Punjabi, twelve point five percent (12.5%) Spanish, zero point forty-six percent (0.46%) Urdu, and zero point fifteen percent (0.15%) Yoruba. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 122  twelve point nineteen percent (12.19%) Spanish, zero point forty-six percent (0.46%) Urdu, and zero point fifteen percent (0.15%) Yoruba. 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Include Families procedures to ensure timely Notices sent home to parents are distributed as double-sided handouts, with English on one side, and the home language on the other. According to what language the parent requested on the HLIS, translations in other languages are provided to classroom teachers, to distribute to students. For letters that are not translated on the DOE website, the language translation and interpretation unit has proven to be very useful. Furthermore, translation of documents are occasionally done by in-house school staff. However, for notices that cannot be translated in a timely fashion, a Foreign Language Notice cover sheet with “This notice is very important. It will affect the education of your child. Please have it translated”, written in our schools languages is attached to the letter upon distribution. provision of translated documents to parents. Non-cover languages will be addressed through over-the-phone interpretation services. Additionally, written documents will be sent to the translations@schools.nyc.gov email with a formal requests for translations in preferred languages of each ELL parent (mentioned on page 2 of each Home Language survey along with the RCPL report). For in-person and on-site translation needs, we will 2018-19 CEP-RISE 123 utilize "The Big World" vendor. All requests for in-person/on-site as well as written document translations will be submitted within the specified time allocated on each form in order to ensure a sufficient window of time for receiving all the necessary resources. Student Handbook- August Parent Orientation, September Open School, upon admission of new admit, available throughout the year in PTA office. School Calendar with NTY State testing dates-, August Parent Orientation, September Open School, upon admission of new admit, available in PTA office and updated throughout the year. Newsletters- monthly and available in PTA office Parent -Teacher Conference Announcements-prior to each conference and available in PTA office After School Program Information - Prior to beginning of each session and available in main office General Overview of Curriculum - September Open School Notification Letters- as needed throughout the school year 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? Parent Orientation- August 29, 2018 Family Night - September 20, 2018 Parent -Teacher Conferences- November 27, 2018 IEP meetings-scheduled throughout school year Parent Engagement workshops/conferences-Tuesdays throughout the school year Attendance Teacher -Parent phone calls and conferences Guidance Counselor-Parent phone calls and conferences Dean-Parent phone calls and conferences PTA meetings - 3 rd Tuesday each month SLT meetings - 3 rd Tuesday each month Non-cover languages will be addressed through over-the-phone interpretation services. Additionally, written documents will be sent to the translations@schools.nyc.gov email with a formal requests for translations in preferred languages of each ELL parent (mentioned on page 2 of each Home Language survey along with the RCPL report). For in-person and on-site translation needs, we will utilize "The Big World" vendor. Face to face parent conferences and phone calls to parents 2018-19 CEP-RISE 124  3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. School messenger phone blast. Non-cover languages will be addressed through over-the-phone interpretation services. Additionally, written documents will be sent to the translations@schools.nyc.gov email with a formal requests for translations in preferred languages of each ELL parent (mentioned on page 2 of each Home Language survey along with the RCPL report). For in-person and on-site translation needs, we will utilize "The Big World" vendor. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Provide professional learning sessions Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) MS8Q will fulfill Section VII of the Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 concerning parental notification requirements for translation and interpretation services by providing parents with information about their right to translation services. The Welcome poster and notice of the translation policy will also be posted, in all nine major languages for which interpretation is provided by the DOE, in the main lobby. A copy of the Language ID Guide and the Language Palm Card will be at both the security desk and main office. Parents in need of translation services will be sent to the main office, where a final language determination will be made. All parents in need of translation and/or interpretation services will be given a copy of the Parents' Bill of Rights and the Parents' Guide to Language Access in their preferred language. These documents will be available at all school conferences and meetings as well as in the Parent Coordinator's office. Important signage will be posted in English and Spanish and throughout the school as well. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? The LAC, Parent Coordinator and LAP team are responsible for creating parent surveys to gather feedback from parents on the quality and availability of translation services. Parents will be asked to complete these surveys at 2018-19 CEP-RISE 125  various times throughout the year: Parent-Teacher Conferences, PTA meetings, admission, IEP meetings, SLT meetings, Multicultural Night, High School Night and other meetings.This information will be reviewed and used by school leadership to update our future procedures . 2018-19 CEP-RISE 126 
