 24Q296 School Name: PAN AMERICAN INTERNATIONAL HIGH SCHOOL Principal: GEORGE BADIA 2018-19 CEP-RISE 1  Rise School Comprehensive Educational Plan (R-CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: Executive Summary and Organizing Principles Section 3: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 4: Rise School Narrative Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) Section 7: Community School Partnerships Section 8: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 9: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 10: Title I Program Information Section 11: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP-RISE 2  Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Pan American International High School 342400011296 High School 9-12 School Number (DBN): 24Q296 45-10 94 th Street, Elmhurst, NY 11373 718-271-3602 718-271-4041 Phone Number: Fax: George Badia gbadia@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Community School CBO: Principal: Community School Director: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): Email Address: Monica Causu George Badia Gregory Camarda Jacqueline Torres Guido Gonzalez Ana Consuelo Karla Ramirez Carolyn Bourdier District Information Geographical District: 24 Elaine Lindsey Superintendent: 30-48 Linden Place, Flushing NY, 11354 Superintendent’s Office Address: Elindse@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-281-7696 Phone Number: 718-391-8320 Fax: North Queens FSC: Field Support Center (FSC) Executive Director: Lawrence Prendergast 2018-19 CEP-RISE 3  Executive Director’s Office Address: 28-11 Queens Plaza North, Long Island City, NY 11101 lpender@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 917-225-2020 Phone Number: 718-391-8320 Fax: 2018-19 CEP-RISE 4  Section 2: Executive Summary and Organizing Principles The Objective To guide, support and accelerate the early progress demonstrated by the schools graduating out of the Renewal program, as Rising Schools of Excellence (Rise), with a compelling theory of action, clear strategy for sustainment, targeted individualized supports, continued accountability, gradual release of responsibility, such that they independently accelerate their growth trajectory. Background Rise Schools have demonstrated: ● ● they have the will and conditions in place to accelerate student growth and meet school improvement benchmarks. they have the capacity to lead/implement a school improvement strategy. Rise Schools have seen some gains1 across multiple measures including graduation rates, college readiness, state test scores and attendance. As a result, these schools will fully transition out of the Renewal Schools program at the end of the 2017-2018 SY and continue under the guidance of the Office of Field Support, in partnership with the Office of School Support and Supervision. 1All Rise Schools met at least 67% of their benchmarks, are not on the State’s Priority list, and have demonstrated a sustainable school improvement structure that will allow them to build on their progress. Six Rise Keys for Continued Improvement 1. Strengthen the Instructional Core 2. Strengthen Instructional Leadership Capacity 3. 4. Apply a tiered approach to student intervention 5. Promote a positive, inclusive school environment for students, staff, parents and Improve Data Driven Practices community partners Increase monitoring and accountability 6. Theory of Action If the NYC Department of Education provides customized supports to Rise schools and principals designed around the “Six Rise School Keys for continued improvement” then, Rise principals and their teams will have the tools and resources to accelerate outcomes for ALL students and increase students’ access to an excellent and equitable education. Structure of the Rise School Comprehensive Educational Plan (R-CEP) The Rise School Comprehensive Educational Plan (R-CEP) will serve as the organizing and overarching document for each Rise school and will be directly aligned and developed around the elements of the Framework for Great Schools, New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, and Strong Schools, Strong Communities, including the following: ● Rise Benchmarks: please refer to the 2018-19 Rise benchmarks provided to your school. ● Establishing an overarching summative vision aligned with elements of the Framework for Great Schools and documenting key areas of celebration and Rise through analysis of assessments and by envisioning what the desired outcome for each school will be at the end of the School Rise process. ● Setting mid-year point benchmarks that create the path for improvement by focusing on desired outcomes and goals. In this way, the plan will be mapped to the overarching summative vision. In addition to the five discrete goals formed around the elements of the Framework for Great Schools, each school will create an action plan. ● Transformation into a community school in order to increase student and family access to physical and mental health services and other social-emotional supports made available in or near the school. ● Expanded learning opportunities for all students, including additional instruction provided during afterschool and/or summer programming provided in collaboration with community partners. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 5  ● Intensive professional development for all staff to ensure effective implementation of curriculum and instruction aligned to the Next Generation Learning Standards (NGLS) and to support staff in effectively responding to the differentiated academic and social-emotional needs of all students. ● Additional, focused strategies to increase parent and family engagement. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Information on the Framework for Great Schools and the DTSDE Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department has established programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students supports to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and the R-CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Rise School Comprehensive Educational Plan (R-CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint for continuous improvement that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to increase student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five (5) goals and action plans that align with the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 6  The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. Accountability Tools and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is informed by the New York State Education Department’s (NYSED) Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) Tenets, the American Institute of Research (AIR) Needs Assessment, the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYSED’s Six DTSDE Tenets To strengthen the existing system, the NYSED has developed a tool that captures the best practices from each of the current tools – they call it a Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness. This new tool encompasses multiple instruments such as interviews, classroom observations and surveys. The protocol will begin with a clear and cogent statement of the optimal conditions of an effective school and the instruments comprising the protocol will measure how close or far away a particular school is to the optimal conditions identified. Once reviewed, the school and district will create a strategic plan to address the areas in need of improvement. All Priority and Focus Schools and Focus 2018-19 CEP-RISE 7  Districts must use the new tool; and districts that are required to submit District Comprehensive Improvement Plans and Comprehensive Education Plans also will use the tool. The DTSDE protocol includes a rubric, which identifies clear and coherent expectations of the optimal conditions of an effective school and school district across the following six tenets:  Tenet 1: District Leadership and Capacity  Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions  Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support  Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions  Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health, and  Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 2017-18 Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Structures for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:  a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; 2018-19 CEP-RISE 8 a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC)  It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the R-CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the R-CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. Next Steps for R-CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists in every Rise school and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the American Institute of Research (AIR) needs assessment, the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: In Part 1A of the Section 5: Needs Assessment indicate the Rise Key and the corresponding statement of Practice (SOP) from the DTSDE Tenets that will be addressed in the action plan. Schools that received an Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) School Review should use the recommendations from the review to select their SOPs. Schools that did not undergo an IIT review should select SOPs informed by the major findings/recommendations from your most recent Quality Review (QR) or Central-led Review (CLR), and other qualitative and quantitative data.  Step 4: Discuss and respond to the guiding questions under each Framework element.  Step 5: Revisit your school’s current goals, and strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you have identified, and will let your school community know when you have reached your goal.  Step 6: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 7: Update your school’s AIS section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 8: Complete the Expanded Learning Time (ELT) and the Community School sections.  Step 9: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether strategies and activities outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust practices along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Rise Program Priorities Our Rise Theory of Action (page 4) is drawn from research1 on turnaround schools, the DOE Framework for Great Schools, DTSDE Tenets, and the Quality Review, which suggest that these key priorities have the greatest impact on student achievement. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 9  RISE Keys Priorities 1. Strengthen the Instructional Core 2. Strengthen Instructional Leadership Capacity 3. Improve Data Driven Practices 4. Apply a tiered approach to school support and intervention 5. Promote a positive, inclusive school environment for students, staff, parents and community partners 6. Increase monitoring and accountability  A clear focus aligned to students’ instructional needs, including college and career readiness  Access to common, standards-based curricula for all students, including ELLs and SWDs  Explicit and intentional embedding of culturally responsive Instruction in all content areas  Formative and summative assessments for all students in all grades that are aligned to curricula and produce clear evidence of learning  Tiered approach to teacher professional learning opportunities.  Partnership with families to increase engagement in students’ academic success  Implementation of a coherent vision for school improvement - a vision for leading learning, leading people, leading schools and leading change  Development of a system to support distributive leadership and build the capacity and sustainability of teacher leaders through continuous improvement  Developing leadership competencies, specific to turnaround efforts, including leveraging multiple stakeholders, a commitment to student learning and a sustained pursuit of measurable progress. Strategic allocation of resources to support instructional and professional learning plans and family engagement in leadership opportunities Integrative use of formative and summative assessment tools and practices to target resources and support throughout the year to achieve academic priorities    Ongoing analyses of school-wide and student-level data and adjustments to curricular resources and instructional moves  Prioritization of the use of standards and data to inform teaching and learning    Implementation of a tiered intervention system that engages teacher teams in frequent cycles of progress monitoring and adjustments to address diverse student needs School establishes coherent system, adopted by all to ensure that interventions are effective, differentiated and timely Increased use of teacher teams’ data-driven practices to accelerate student achievement  Clear strategy that establishes social norms within the school community and promotes a culture for learning with clear and high expectations for all students, in partnership with CBOs.  The sustainability of an environment where students feel safe, connected and engaged through practices that are culturally relevant and build their scholarly identity  The development of a whole school approach, in partnership with families, with   specific attention to social, physical and behavioral environments Social emotional learning practices embedded in teaching and learning as aligned to the Collaborative for Academic, Social and Emotional learning (CASEL) competencies and supported by CBOs. School leaders implement effective monitoring systems to ensure that instructional practices and interventions are monitored closely at the classroom, team, and school wide level  Establish effective teacher team practices that ensure teachers are accountable for data findings and set timely and appropriate interventions  Data analysis results in adjustments to the programs and priorities to better service   students Foster positive systems for accountability driven by reflection and action planning Support from district leaders to focus efforts toward results and problem solving actions that lead to turnaround success. 1. Darden/Curry PLE – Turnaround Leadership Competencies and Turnaround Action Shown to Influence Student Achievement 2018-19 CEP-RISE 10  Achievement Network – SY 18-19 Foundations Rubric COSEBOC Standards and Promising Practices for Schools Educating Boys of Color Harvard Graduate School of Education and Harvard Business School: Certificate in School Management and Leadership Learner-Centered Initiatives Multidimensional Principal Performance Rubric Monitoring and Accountability ● Rise schools will be monitored for implementation of the Rise Comprehensive Educational Plan (R+CEP) by Superintendents and Office of Field Support. ● Rise schools will be held accountable for making progress according to annual targets set by the Department of Education, as evidenced by their attainment of named benchmark scores for each annualized key metric. Schools not achieving annual targets by June 2019 are subject to additional oversight and consequences, to be determined at a later date. ● OFS will bring increased oversight and accountability by monitoring FSC supports to schools and ensure that these are aligned with the school’s instructional focus, student and teacher needs, and moving the school toward achieving interim goals. ● OSSS will monitor DSR oversight of all supports to Rise Schools. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 11  Section 3: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Directions: All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Rise School Comprehensive Educational Plan (R-CEP). SLT members’ signatures indicates that they have been consulted with and given the opportunity to provide feedback on the plan and the plan’s alignment with the school-based budget to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Expanded Learning Time, Community School initiative, Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. On the chart below: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the second column. 2. 3. In the first column, indicate using an “X” if the person is an SLT member. In the third column, record the position and constituent group represented such as staff, parent, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), or other contributor. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 4. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the R-CEP, not approval. 5. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Signature (Blue Ink) Check if SLT X X X X X X X X Name Position and Constituent Group George Badia Gregory Camarda Jacqueline Torres Morales Katherine Villalobos Ana Consuelo Contreras Monica Causu Karla Ramirez Caroline Bourdier Represented *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Community School Director (staff) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) 2018-19 CEP-RISE 12  Check if SLT Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Maria Aucaquizhpi Diana Bermeo Freddy Calle Max Mosley Dayana Arias Guido Gonzalez AyanaColvin Antonia Membreno X X X X X X X X Parent Parent Parent Teacher Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Assistant Principal (CSA) Teacher Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP-RISE 13  Section 4: Rise School Narrative In a brief narrative, describe the current state of the Rise school addressing the following and please use existing data, where applicable: 1. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including your school’s mission statement and a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Identify any special student populations that the school has and what their specific needs are. 2. 3. Describe your school’s approach to family engagement and progress made with establishing families as partners in furthering student achievement 4. Describe how your school is leveraging community school partnerships to support progress in elements of the Framework for Great Schools and your Rise Benchmarks and indicate where this has been a challenge. 5. Summarize the Expanded Learning Time (ELT) opportunities that have been offered to your students this year. Pan American International High School (PAIHS) is part of the Internationals Network for Public Schools. We exclusively serve students who have been in the country less than 4 years and are from Spanish-speaking countries. PAIHS has 448 students in grades 9 – 12, 86.2% them are classified as English Language Learners, 13.4% are Former English Language Learners and 100% are Latino. 100% of our students are eligible for free or reduced lunch. 15% of our students are over-aged and under-credited (School Quality Guide). The school's mission statement: The Pan American International High School is a diverse learning community of recently immigrated English Language Learners. Our primary focus is on English language development, while providing opportunities for students to enhance their Spanish language skills. Our principal partnership is with the Community Based Organization, Urban Arts Partnership (UAP), whose mission is the advance the intellectual, social, and artistic development of our students through arts-integrated education programs as a means to improve student achievement. They also help cultivate our students’ community leadership skills through service learning projects, internships, and the arts. UAP's programs complement our commitment to fostering an environment that values students’ cultures, native languages, and individual differences as we prepare them for success in college and career. We also work closely with organizations and institutions such as LaGuardia Community College, SUNY Albany, CUNY LINCT, AP for All, College Access: Research and Action (CARA), College Access for All, Center for Supportive Schools, Data Wise, TEALS, Metamorphosis, Generation Ready, Theatre Development Fund (TDF), and Repertorio Espanol. As a member school of the Internationals Network for Public Schools (INPS), the school follows a pedagogical model to support the needs of ELLs. The school is organized around five principles.  Heterogeneity and collaboration: Our students are programmed heterogeneously according to their English language proficiency and are flexibly grouped in each discipline based on various attributes such as English language ability, content mastery, etc. In addition, and 9th and 10th grade classes are combined so that recent arrivals have time to acquire the language and support each other.  Experiential learning: Instructional units, which are thematically and interdisciplinary aligned, are organized   around the completion of projects. Project-based learning gives students the opportunity to engage in authentic language tasks and take ownership of their learning. Language and content integration: To support the needs of our English Language Learner (ELL) population, all of our classes integrate language instruction in the content area courses, so that students are acquiring academic English in all of the disciplines. Units are both vertically aligned by grade level and planned on an interdisciplinary basis. Localized autonomy: PAIHS (Pan American International H.S.) teachers work in teams to plan, write, and reflect on curriculum that meets the needs of our student population. Teachers are empowered to make choices to design a curriculum that meets the needs of ELLs, promotes student engagement and academic rigor, and is relevant to the academic and cultural backgrounds of students. In addition, teachers take significant leadership roles and “wear many hats.” The leaders of each instructional team and discipline (content area) team meet weekly with other school leaders as the Coordinating Council, and this way all 2018-19 CEP-RISE 14  teachers have a voice in school policy decisions. This has promoted a culture of trust, collaboration, shared accountability, and continuous leadership.  One learning model for all: As we ask our students to work collaboratively in teams, teachers also work collaboratively in teams. All of our students participate in our Native Language Arts program as a complement to our ENL program, where students receive native language instruction in Spanish to further develop their native language literacy as well as content understandings. Across classrooms, we encourage students to utilize our bilingual classroom libraries as resources to help them develop and deepen their content knowledge. When materials are not available for students at both the appropriate age and grade level, teachers adapt materials to better meet the needs of students. Moreover, to promote biliteracy and bilingualism at a high academic level, all students take AP Spanish Language and AP Spanish Literature in 11th and 12th grade, respectively. In 2014, PAIHS received an ELL waiver from the NY State Department of Education as part of a three-year pilot. In lieu of the Social Studies and Science Regents exams, students must complete Portfolio Based Assessment Tasks (PBATs) in English, Science, Social Studies, Math, and Native Language Arts (Spanish). Students will be graded according to a rubric jointly developed with other pilot Internationals schools. This year, PAIHS will continue to engage in extensive professional development both in school and outside of school to support teachers in applying the rubric, as well as in mentoring and supporting students so that they can complete graduation-worthy work in all content areas. Family engagement is a pivotal component of our school’s continued transformation, as all of our students are recently arrived immigrants and many parents are unfamiliar with different structure and demands of the American school system. To acclimate parents and families to the new educational system, we have partnered with UAP to provide a myriad of workshops that parents have expressed interest in, ranging from how to navigate the college application process, how to navigate our grading system JumpRope, the importance of student attendance, the academic programs offered at PAIHS, and immigration-related issues. Moreover, we offer parents and families English and GED classes to help open opportunities for them and help them integrate this learning to better support their children. Thanks to the work of the Parent Coordinator, Juana Adames, and our partnership with the UAP, parent participation rates have continued to increase for events such as PA meetings, parent workshops, school-wide events and parent-teacher conferences. This is evidenced by 91% of parents/guardians responding that they are somewhat or very likely to attend a general school meeting or school event (open house, back to school night, play, dance, sports event, or science fair) and 92% of parents/guardians responding that they are somewhat or very likely to go to a regularly scheduled parent-teacher conference with their child's teacher. As a community school, PAIHS recognizes the importance of leveraging partnerships to realize our various goals. PAIHS utilizes its partnership with UAP to enrich the school's academic program through Expanded Learning Time course offerings, after school activities, socio-emotional outreach, and family engagement in alignment with the Rise benchmark of promoting a positive, inclusive school environment for students, staff, parents and community partners. To strengthen the instructional core, specifically with regards to offering a tiered approach to professional development, PAIHS has partnered with Internationals Network for Public Schools (INPS) to provide extensive teacher coaching and PD on a variety of topics, including a focus next year on language-content integration and developing discipline-specific language outcomes. In 2018-19, instructional coaches from the Internationals Network, Office of Field Support/Renewals Schools/Rise Schools Program and Achievement Network (A-Net) will be working with various department teams across the school. Math coaches from Generation Ready and Metamorphosis also come in once per week to work closely with the mathematics team. More specifically, the school has partnered with the Borough Field Support Center and Office of ELLs to deliver a PD series that will target the instructional focus for next year to improve academic discourse and presentation. We will also be delivering 2018-19 CEP-RISE 15  additional PD through the Buck Institute to strengthen backwards planning and project-based learning in all disciplines, with a focus on integrating tasks that promote academic discourse and presentation. To strengthen the Instructional Leadership Capacity, specifically focusing on the development of systems to support distributive leadership and build the capacity and sustainability of teacher leaders through continuous improvement, we will continue to have 4 Peer Collaborative Teachers (PCT) to work with specific content-area teams and with an emphasis on mentoring new or struggling teachers. In addition to our PCTs, we will support our teacher team leaders with additional training for leading protocol-driven grade and content meetings as well as dedicated time in their programs to effectively plan their meetings and interventions. Also, the school utilizes teacher leadership to improve data-driven practices through the implementation of inquiry cycles through the established team structures. Teacher teams will continue to receive training and support on the inquiry cycle using the Data Wise approach. In the past school year, Data Wise was implemented in the ELA and Math departments to target Regents scores. Next year, the ENL department will be trained in the process as well to identify student learning gaps and develop interventions to address these areas, specifically related to language needs. This will be our 2nd year as a PROSE school and will continue to follow a schedule that best meets the school’s instructional focus. One of the reasons why our school adopted PROSE was to maximize the impact of ELT in meeting students' academic and/or socio-emotional needs. For the 2018-19 school year, students will have up to 4 periods of ELT scheduled into their program at various times during the week. In the 9th and 10th grade, students will be programmed for 2 periods of Independent Reading as part of a new initiative to target literacy skills across the disciplines. In addition to the Independent Reading classes, students will have an Advisory class targeting socio-emotional learning and one College Preparation class so that students can start the college exploration process as early as possible. In the 11th and 12th grades, ELT classes will be mainly focused on academic intervention, targeting students who still need to pass the ELA or Math Regents, SAT prep classes, or academic enrichment in the arts or Career and Technical Education (CTE) . These academic enrichment courses will prepare students who are on track for Advanced Placement Art and Computer Science/Career and Technical Education Courses. Furthermore, all 11th and 12th grade students will be continued to be programmed for a block of PBAT mentoring, where students receive individualized PBAT support with a teacher-mentor to support them in the preparation and revision of the Graduation Worthy Portfolio Projects. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 16  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 24Q296 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 449 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 1 1 11 19 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 19 14 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 84.0% % Attendance Rate 87.5% % Reduced Lunch 79.1% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.2% 99.8% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 0.0% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 3.26 0% 20% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 81% 1% 84.7% 0.0% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A NO N/A N/A NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES N/A N/A YES No N/A N/A N/A 5 92.1% 2.2% 2.7% 0.0% 0.0% 0.2% 4 33% 6.5 N/A N/A 91% 0% 78.0% 0% N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A YSH NO N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A YES YES 2018-19 CEP-RISE 17  2018-19 CEP-RISE 18  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 3 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 3.2 The school leader ensures and supports the quality implementation of a systematic plan of rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of students. (aligned to Rise Keys 2 and 6) Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction (DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and address student achievement needs. (aligned to Rise Key 3) The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. (aligned to Rise Keys 1 and 4) Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. (aligned to Rise Key 1) 3.3 3.4 3.5 SOP(s) Addressed NA X NA NA Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? Curriculum and Rigor are at the core of our school’s instructional focus which is: "If teachers plan for rigorous, Common-Core aligned tasks, with scaffolds for academic language, then student work will reflect a college-level readiness in academic discourse and presentation." Based on the school’s most recent Quality Review in 2016-17, we received a score of Well Developed for component 1.1 (Curriculum). In his findings, the reviewer noted that the curriculum was clearly aligned with the Common Core Learning Standards and New York State content standards, that there was evidence of a clear integration of the instructional shifts, and that it had been aligned, revised, modified and adjusted for ELLs. In the past three years, our primary focus has been on supporting teachers in developing cohesive units that are aligned to the CCLS and best serve ELL students. Professional Development cycles and offerings have been streamlined to support teachers in backwards planning and project-based learning. Additionally, five experienced teacher leaders serve as Peer Collaborative Teachers (PCTs) to cover each major content area (Math, Science, Social Studies, ELA/ENL, and Native Language Arts) and to ensure that, along with the 2 APs and Principal, every teacher received ongoing, timely feedback on their unit plans and lesson plans. A cycle of feedback is calendared and followed in which teachers submit their unit plans including summative assessments and projects, meet with their respective teams and PCT, and use protocols to improve the quality and rigor of the presented curriculum. The teacher’s weekly program is also designed with four team meeting times per week--two horizontal grade-team, and 2 vertical content-team meetings. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 19  The ELA and Math teams use these meeting times to review and analyze Regents data, and all teams incorporate collaborative planning structures to improve curriculum. As a Rise School this past year, bi-weekly meetings with our DSR revealed that although significant time was dedicated in team meetings for teacher teams to provide feedback on curriculum, there was little to no evidence of this feedback being directly tied to student work and performance. Teachers had not engaged in cycles of inquiry that embedded analysis of student work nor was there evidence to support that such analysis had lead to an improvement in teacher practice and curriculum. The feedback provided by the DSR was that we need to create autonomous team structures that accurately and regularly monitor student progress and use the data to respond to students' needs with actionable next steps. As pertaining to Component 2.2 (Assessment), our 2016-17 Quality Review Area of Focus, the reviewer noted that there was not sufficient evidence of teacher-issued feedback and that while teachers across classrooms were checking in with students and made some adjustments to instruction, there was limited evidence of how assessment data is used to track student growth. In PPO visits conducted in 2018, the evaluator stated that “student work products and discussions reflect uneven levels of student cognitive engagement and participation. Questioning and other scaffolds were not consistently utilized to provide multiple entry points so that all learners are engaged in challenging learning tasks.” Furthermore, the evaluator recommended “that teachers are trained to utilize text-based discussion protocols, Socratic Seminars, Think-Pair-Shares, etc. to promote student-to-student discourse. By the time students reach the 11th and 12th grades, the teacher should be functioning as a facilitator who probes students to push their thinking, redirects when the discussion becomes circular, or asks strategic questions that assist students in synthesizing their ideas. The teachers’ questions should get at big ideas and be open-ended to prompt thinking.” To address these areas of need identified by the Quality Review, PPO evaluations, feedback provided by the RISE DSR and Field Support Center leads, for the 2018-19 academic year we will focus on supporting teachers with engaging in cycles of inquiry that ensure that student data and student work products are at the forefront for developing CCLS-aligned curriculum. The focus will be on training all teachers to engage in faster-paced (in comparison to DataWise) inquiry cycles that are protocol-driven and that include specific instructional strategies to be implemented, analyzed through the lens of student work and data, and revised and adjusted given feedback. Curriculum will be created, adjusted and these adjustments will justified through the explicit use of student data as evidence. Building off of the work begun with DataWise and through the continuation of the programmed and structured teacher team meeting time, teachers will create and use common assessment tasks and instructional routines that promote academic discourse and exposure to rigorous, complex texts that are authentic to the content of each discipline. We will also train content team leaders and PCTs in developing and facilitating these protocol-driven structures for inquiry and student work analysis, making them the point people for developing accountability structures for collecting, sharing and acting on the data. As part of this work, and to ensure calibration in expectations of rigor, all teachers across grade teams will engage in a cycle of inquiry specific to ELA Regents data analysis. Part 2 – Summative Vision for Rigorous Instruction What is your school’s instructional focus? What is your vision for promoting the instructional focus consistently across classrooms? This year, we will continue with our instructional focus: "If teachers plan for rigorous, Common-Core aligned tasks, with scaffolds for academic language, then student work will reflect a college-level readiness in academic discourse and presentation." Based on the feedback provided, the focus will be centered on promoting academic discourse across classrooms, using common instructional strategies and student work and data to inform the efficacy of these practices in improving rigor and increasing students’ demonstration of higher order thinking skills as aligned to the CCLS. To ensure that cycles of inquiry and the focus for student learning is consistent across classrooms, the Peer Collaborative Teachers/Instructional Coaches, APs and Principal will engage in an initial full cycle of inquiry and be 2018-19 CEP-RISE 20  trained on the protocols through an ANet consultant. The team will calibrate expectations on the components and protocols to be used, define expectations for rigor and for providing feedback to teachers around curriculum and instruction, and develop an anchor rubric for academic discourse. Across the school, teachers will be expected to use the same rubric for measuring academic discourse, utilizing Mastery Based Learning and outcomes as appropriate for the different grade level bands. Students will be exposed to this rubric through explicit instruction and through its anchoring to every day in-class activities and culminating projects. As part of the planning process, we will also analyze daily lessons to determine how teachers are actively preparing for meaningful discourse opportunities in the classroom. The expectation is that students will engage in the use of academic language and in discussion structures at different points in the lesson. PD provided to teachers will immerse them in the multiple strategies and approaches they can use to ensure success in this planning including, but not limited to, accountable talk structures and Socratic Seminars. Unit Feedback sessions, which occur a minimum of 1 time per unit for every teacher, will be focused on the Language Outcomes planned for and pre-planning for a variety of assessments to be used throughout the unit that are appropriate to meeting these outcomes. PCTs and the APs will be anchored to content teams to ensure that cycles of inquiry are planned and executed, with a minimum of 6 complete cycles for the school year. Evaluators will be anchored to specific department teams and fully participate in learning walks and unit feedback conferences with PCTs and instructional coaches. This will ensure the alignment of expectations and non-evaluative feedback provided through these sessions to the formal feedback given in evaluative observations. Every formative and evaluative observation will provide feedback specifically in Danielson components 3b and 3d and evaluators will review this data quarterly to re-tier teachers and determine progress towards meeting the goal. How will you implement a standards-aligned curricula that meets the needs of your diverse learners, including ELLs and SWDs? As coherent with the Internationals model, teachers will collaborate to plan and refine Common-Core aligned curriculum, which is scaffolded for the needs of ELLs. In Mathematics, ELA and ENL, teachers will be using the EngageNY modules, New Vision resources as a way to further align curriculum to the demands of the Common Core and the Instructional Shifts. Furthermore, Science and Social Studies will continue to use and adapt the Next Generation/NYS Core Standards curriculum provided by New Visions and CCNY Debating US History. To specifically target the focus of embedding academic discourse and presentation into curriculum, teachers will be required to emphasize assessment tasks and instructional routines that foster academic discussion and presentation that is authentic to their disciplines and that further enhances English language acquisition for ELLs. Using resources from Learner-Centered Initiative, these curricular plans must include protocols for discussion and accountability tools for measuring student progress toward meeting this goal. Activity Guides and layered curriculum will be evident in classrooms to ensure that teachers are planning for the varying levels of learners in their classes, providing appropriate scaffolds for ELLs and SWDs such as graphic organizers and sentence frames, but also showing a gradual release from the confinement of these supports to allow for more student choice and productive struggle with the content. At PAIHS, all teachers plan and deliver interdisciplinary, project-based units which require a process of asking questions, finding resources and applying information. Teachers follow best practices for English Language Learners including modeling, use of leveled texts, scaffolded activity guides with multiple entry points for different proficiency levels, TPR (total physical response), charting, graphic organizers, linguistic frames that support academic talk around text, writing templates that serve as scaffolds for expository and argumentative writing, and sentence frames. In addition, in order to develop vocabulary and writing, the teachers will use tools such as the Frayer model, concept mapping, Mind Mirrors, and phrase frames and grammatical structures that live inside complex text. All lessons will allow for making students' thinking visible through hands-on activities and questions that deepen students' understanding. All curricula will be designed to keep content at the forefront, but with appropriate and relevant routines and strategies to support the development of academic language in support of explaining their content understanding in English and Spanish. Furthermore, we will continue to support our students through data-driven 2018-19 CEP-RISE 21  instruction by using various formative and summative assessments detailed in our year long assessment calendar, using Grade Team meeting time to share and discuss this data and revise horizontal curricula to provide consistent routines and approaches to learning across the grade, specifically with reading, writing and speaking. All learning at PAIHS is project-based and collaborative in which students learn by doing. All students work together in heterogeneous groups of 2, 3 or 4 students so that the more experienced ELL students can help the students who have less English proficiency. Students will be able to access their native language and prior knowledge to help them make connections to the current lesson and apply their learning to the real world. Students will engage in ongoing formative assessment, in order to help the teacher adjust and differentiate instruction and create various entry points of learning so students can access the curriculum. Instruction at PAIHS is becoming more student-centered. Teachers are expected to engage students in investigation, and students will pursue solutions to real world problems by asking and refining questions, debating ideas, making predictions, designing plans and/or experiments, collecting and analyzing data, drawing conclusions, communicating their ideas and findings to others, asking new questions, and creating artifacts. The basis of PBL lies in the authenticity of real-life application of the research. Students working as a team are given driving questions to respond to or answer, then directed to create an artifact to present their gained knowledge. Artifacts may include a variety of media such as writing, art, drawings, three-dimensional representations, videos, photography, or technology-based presentations. As referenced earlier, in September 2014, PAIHS and the other schools in the Internationals Network for Public Schools, (INPS) received an ELL waiver, which enables students to demonstrate their mastery through Portfolio based assessment tasks (P-BATS) in lieu of the science and social studies Regents. Teachers from each of the 15 Internationals schools met during the summer of 2014 to create Common-Core aligned rubrics by which the P-BATS would be measured. Students will present their portfolio projects to a panel of teachers, students, and visitors in all core subjects, and Native Language Arts, as well as their personal statements. In addition, they will be required to pass the ELA and Math Regents Exams. To prepare students for this rigorous process, regular mentoring periods have been programmed into the teachers' schedule and each teacher/mentor will meet with a set group of juniors and seniors to help prepare them for completion of their portfolio projects. Each student will present their portfolio projects before a panel at different assessment calendared weeks throughout the year. What is your vision for ensuring that all student have access to rigorous coursework that moves them towards career and college readiness? How will you support the personal and academic skills, habits, and behaviors needed for students to be career and college ready? In alignment with our focus of engaging in meaningful cycles of inquiry and analyzing student data, we are using our involvement with the Learning Partners Program to drive conversations and develop an action plan specifically targeting college and career readiness. This team, which includes the Principal, Assistant Principal, and 3 teachers, have created surveys and collected data geared towards understanding student and teacher college-going mindset and based on an initial analysis of the college readiness data revealed on the School Quality Guide. This team will engage in a weekly inquiry cycle, visiting classrooms and collecting data to determine to what extent students are being consistently exposed to college readiness skills including, but not limited to, exposure to rigorous, complex texts and tasks that promote higher order thinking skills. This data will be further analyzed every other week, using protocols, with the Coordinating Council, a team comprised of Administration and team leaders. The team will develop action plans to address gaps in instruction and curriculum in relevance to college and career readiness. This data will also be used to inform to what extent teachers are appropriately utilizing the resources and routines provided through Professional Learning and embedded in the CCLS-aligned curricula of EngageNY and New Visions. This year, all students also receive a College Readiness course or an Internship experience, which directly address college and career readiness skills and habits. 9th and 10th graders are programmed for a Social Emotional Advisory class, meeting 1x per week to learn important skills such as goal-setting, self-care and stress management. Through the ELT and multi-session teacher programming, we have also incorporated a variety of tracks to engage students with different career interests, offering CTE courses in technology (software and computer repair) and advanced Art. This year, we also have an Independent Reading course programmed for all 9th and 10th grade 2018-19 CEP-RISE 22  students to expose students to more and varied literature and support in building fluency, stamina, and reading comprehension. Across the grades and content areas, there is a unified goal of promoting academic discourse and maximizing in class time for students to read, write and discuss critically. How do you envision embedding the elements of culturally responsive instruction and how will you know that implementation is successful? This year, an AP launched the Culturally Responsive Education (CRE) committee. Along with 1 School Aide and 7 teachers who vary in experience and teach across different disciplines, the team analyzed important school data as available on reports such as the RESI. They analyzed their own pre-conceptions and judgments against the data that details students backgrounds, English Language proficiency levels, time in the country, etc. The team also began to compile resources that they felt would support the school community in better understanding the cultures of our students and how to create a more inclusive community. The team developed a PD to be executed in early September and will continue to meet weekly to craft activities to engage the community in meaningful discussion around culturally responsive pedagogy. Each teacher, who is anchored to a different discipline, will also be responsible for posing questions and providing feedback to teachers during unit feedback conferences and team meetings around how to make lessons and content more relevant to our students. For example, we have begun to discuss how to incorporate culturally responsive texts that enhance students' understanding and engage their interest such as Sugar Changed the World and the poem "Legal Alien." One method of monitoring progress, as determined by the CRE committee was to conduct learning walks as a team in search of evidence of culturally responsive pedagogy across classrooms. Each month, as part of the staff newsletter, a section will be included on raising awareness by "shouting out" practices that were seen that were culturally relevant and inclusive and providing excerpts from resources such as Pedro Noguera's work to address where we fell short as a school. The committee will track this data from the learning walks to analyze progress towards meeting this goal. This data will be shared in Coordinating Council to determine next action steps needed. We will measure success by the evidence of growth in use of culturally responsive and relevant texts, improved teacher to teacher communication, improved student attendance (particularly to first period classes) due to higher student interest and elevated expectations by teachers for students. What is your vision for the use of a comprehensive assessment strategy (diagnostic, formative, benchmark, and summative) to drive curricular, instructional, and organizational decisions that impact student outcomes? In alignment with this past school year's focus on assessment and Danielson component 3d, teachers will continue to follow a school-wide assessment calendar which includes specific windows of time for administration of pre- and post-unit assessments and mock Regents, mock NYSESLAT, mock AP exams and midterm exams. Teachers will use ongoing and daily assessments to check for understanding and adjust instruction in every class, as per the set of assessment tools and strategies given to our teachers at PD sessions from INPS and the FSC. During the first week of classes, teachers will use a diagnostic exam, developed by each content team, to assess their students on content and relevant academic skills. ENL teachers will implement a diagnostic to measure students' ability levels in correspondence with the different modalitIes. As ELA and Algebra Regents scores have decreased, all ELA and Algebra I courses will use a full-length Regents exams to determine students' current levels of demonstrating this content knowledge and for immediate analysis in their first inquiry meetings. Diagnostic data will be itemized and shared at the first Coordinating Council meeting of the year and include an action plan for supporting students in demonstrating progress toward meeting these benchmarks. All entering 9th grade students will receive an entry interview with the LAB BESIS coordinator and Guidance Team, including completing these assessments. This year, the primary focus around assessment will be on timely collection and analysis of data and using data to explicitly inform pedagogical practices. As we move into our second year of utilizing Mastery Based Learning practices 2018-19 CEP-RISE 23  and JumpRope, teachers will determine what student outcomes will be measured from unit to unit, outlining in their unit plans and making transparent to students which outcomes are expected to be mastered by the culmination of the year versus unit to unit. All teachers will continue to utilize a 4 point scale and align rubrics for all activities accordingly that are designed for students to demonstrate mastery. Every unit must contain both content-specific and language outcomes and teachers will receive feedback on the quantity and quality of these outcomes for every unit. Every unit must include a minimum of 4 different kinds of summative assessments (quiz/test, writing piece/essay, presentation, and project) that allow students multiple opportunities to demonstrate learning. For all content teams this year, and as part of the inquiry cycles, teachers will collect and analyze student data regularly and maintain a tracker which details every students' progress towards mastery. This tracker will be utilized at multiple levels including for: - planning for strategic approaches to be utilized across classrooms - assessing effectiveness of pedagogical practices being implemented - assessing effectiveness of teachers' use of pedagogical practices by use of comparative data - programming students for AIS courses, advanced courses, after-school tutoring, and one-on-one Regents mentoring We will also continue to have 3 marking periods per semester, with each culminating in an extensive, detailed progress report generated from JumpRope showing progress towards meeting outcomes. Each unit will culminate with a teacher/parent/student meeting for those students in jeopardy of not meeting the outcomes by the culmination of the semester and to provide families with a structured support plan. The counselors will track student progress data for each team (pass/fail rates) and ensure that appropriate support plans have been implemented. How do you envision differentiating teacher professional learning opportunities to support instructional foci, meet students’ unique needs and advance culturally responsive education in your school? As per our PROSE schedule, teachers will engage in Professional Learning sessions every other Friday, with alternating Friday sessions dedicated to structured planning time to incorporate the new learning. As determined by our preliminary analysis of Danielson ratings where we used end-of-year data to tier teachers based on needs and strengths, and given feedback from our PLF and Superintendent, we will streamline all PD sessions next year to focus intensely on the development of language acquisition and the utilization of academic discussion techniques across classrooms. All teachers will receive learning around discussion protocols and strategies specifically for ELLs provided by the FSC and INPS. This work will be done in collaboration with our school's instructional cabinet to ensure alignment between the sessions, resources and recommendations to our school's instructional focus and trends observed across classrooms. Additionally, to ensure that planning time is utilized effectively, each PCT and AP will be anchored to either a team or individual teachers who need more explicit and directed support with planning and executing these strategies. Each month, evaluators and instructional coaches will meet with a specific focus on sharing out trends in teacher practice and pedagogical needs and register teachers to attend professional learning sessions in these areas, provided by the FSC and our partner organizations such as INPS. Teachers will also receive offerings available each month via our staff newsletter and can volunteer to both attend and turnkey new learning from these organizations. Through INPS and Learning Partners Program, we will also continue to establish inter-school visitations for teachers to observe best practices as needed. All teachers who are directly responsible for implementing a PBAT project unit will also receive intensive support and will attend professional learning sessions with INPS. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 24  Unit feedback conferences will also be used for members of the CRE Team to share resources and support through feedback and questioning the use of culturally responsive texts and approaches. Each month, the social-emotional and/or CRE team, will conduct small group sessions as part of the Grade Team level meetings to address specific needs of our students outside of academics. Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Rise Benchmarks. By June 2019, all teachers will create, revise, and implement a minimum of 4 CCLS-aligned curricular units that explicitly address student needs and language outcomes, including formative assessment tasks that highlight analyzing complex texts. This will result in:  o A 10% increase of students achieving a rating of Outstanding on the presentation band of the Portfolio Based Assessment Tasks (PBATs) o A 25% average percentage increase of correct responses on Part I of the ELA Regents Exam Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Rigorous Instruction Annual Goal: Which school benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Rigorous Instruction Annual Goal? College Readiness Index Progress towards Graduation Years 2 and 3 Four year graduation rate Attendance 2018-19 CEP-RISE 25  Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? 1. Unit and project planning and feedback sessions with PCTS/instructional coaches and administration All Teachers  Four year College Readiness Index September 2018 – June 2019  Progress towards Graduation Years 2 and 3 Four year graduation rate  Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Administration oversees and participates in sessions, PCTs schedule and facilitate sessions, Instructional Coaches from Generation Ready and INPS How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program)  Creation of a minimum of 3 vetted, rigorous summative projects which include an explicit opportunity for student to demonstrate mastery in language outcomes for each teacher Completed and revised (based on written, documented feedback) unit maps, unit projects and unit activity guides Established calendars for unit planning meetings with teachers and an assigned teacher leader/coach Session agendas and minutes memorialized and attached to both 2018-19 CEP-RISE 26  2. Targeted feedback provided to all teachers in every observation in Danielson components 3b and 3d All Teachers  Four year College Readiness Index October 2018 – May 2019 Administration, PCTs, Instructional Coaches  Progress towards Graduation Years 2 and 3 Four year graduation rate  3. Creation and Implementation of Common Assessments and Rubrics across teams PCTs, Administration and Instructional coaches Varied and Scheduled as part of Assessment Calendar and Inquiry cycles Teachers Four year College Readiness Four year graduation rate Attendance original and revised unit plans  Cycles of observation (formative and evaluative) with written evidence of actionable feedback around academic discourse and assessment strategies implemented Improvement in quality of unit maps and projects with regards to pre-planning questions, increase in quantity and quality of questions on tasks and as presented for discussion, increased use of checks for understanding techniques in the classroom Increase in ratings in 1a, 3b, and 3d    Creation of common rubrics for academic discourse and presentation that will be used across classrooms and also integrated 2018-19 CEP-RISE 27  into the presentation band of the existing PBAT-aligned rubrics  Unit pre and Administration  Teacher Leaders, PCTs Counselors 4. Protocol-Driven Team Meeting Structures solidified across the school All Teachers Progress toward graduation August 2018-June 2019 Four year graduation rate College Readiness Index Attendance post assessments as well as Math and ELA mock Regents assessments will be administered and the data used to drive instruction Increase in compilation and dissemination of organized student data sets (ELA/Math Regents, Mock Regents, Mock AP exams, diagnostics, marking period grade analyses) Creation of action plan for each grade team including instructional strategies and AIS systems to be implemented to support targeted areas of need 2018-19 CEP-RISE 28  5. Mid-Year Assessment and Revision of Meeting Structures All Teachers Progress toward graduation February -June 2019 Administration Teacher Leaders, PCTs, Instructional coaches Four year graduation rate College Readiness Index 6 completed cycles of inquiry for both the ELA/ENL and Math Department Teams All teams using Meeting Wise structures APs to conduct observations of teacher teams - Department Teams will adopt a 3-6-3 structure for weekly meetings -3 sessions dedicated to providing targeted Unit Feedback -6 sessions dedicated to co-constructing student-facing documents and activity guides -individual conferences with coaches and teachers providing targetd feedback on constructed documents - 3 sessions dedicated to teacher share-outs of specific revisions made to unit plans and student-facing documents after provided feedback - sessions prior to Unit submission deadline 2018-19 CEP-RISE 29  4b – Parent and Family Engagement dedicated to co-construction of Unit plans including activity guide for unit culminating project How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. For the first Parent Teacher Conference in late September, all parents will be trained in using our grading system, JumpRope, and in understanding Mastery Based Learning. Each parent will also receive his/her student's Transcript and will participate in a structured activity so that they understand how to read the transcript and how the student's grades, attendance, the Regents exams and PBATs all determine a student's ability to graduate. Each month, the Parent Coordinator also organizes a Parent Meeting for parents to engage in a variety of workshops relevant to their needs and to help them support their students. This year, one of these meetings per Marking Period, beginning November, will be dedicated to disseminating data to parents regarding the school's progress towards meeting benchmarks (attendance, progress towards graduation, etc.) Breakout sessions will be held and facilitated by the APs and counselors to meet with parents of students at risk of not meeting the standards with specific, individualized action plans provided, including but not limited to, after-school and Saturday school intervention programs. This year, we will also have a Community Center for the Parent Coordinator, Counselors and Administration to meet with parents throughout the school day and maintain our open-door policy with all families. Additionally, through our PGC Family Night which occurs in late November/early December, all 9th grade and PGC leader parents and students will be invited to participate in activities that help them to better understand the high school experience from a social-emotional perspective and teach them how to improve communication with one another. A monthly parent newsletter will be created and shared each month with parents detailing special events, attendance trends, and activities they can do with their students to support them in improving their literacy and numeracy skills. Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, lead CBO’s community school budget, FSC Supports, etc. Using ELT, our unique PROSE schedule, and by dividing teachers into 2 sessions, we have been able to build team meeting time into the school day. To accomplish our goals, teachers assume the following leadership positions during school and after school: - Grade Team Leaders (4) - Department Team Leaders (5) - Portfolio Committee team Leader (1) 2018-19 CEP-RISE 30  - PD Coordinator (1) - Testing Coordinator (1) - Special Education Liaison (1) - Peer Collaborative Teachers (4) Our strategic programming has also allowed for team leaders to have a dedicated period for planning team meetings using Meeting Wise protocols. For bi-weekly PDs, the PD committee, including Administration and PCTs, will craft and facilitate the learning sessions and/or work with partners such as INPS and FSC to vet PD materials and ensure alignment to the instructional focus. The follow-up planning sessions will be led by PCTs and Administrators and the bi-weekly structure allows for a less significant strain on the budget. We use Per Session allocations to support with critical needs in the school. We have structured a variety of committees to track specific high needs areas of the school and who meet regularly to determine trends and next steps. These include an Attendance Committee, SIFE/Literacy Team, Testing Team, Accreditation Policy Team, College Readiness Team, School Implementation Team (SIT), PBAT Committee, and Culturally Responsive Education Team. To enhance teachers' professional learning, we schedule them throughout the year to attend targeted PDs provided through the FSC and other organizations that we have partnerships with such as INPS, Center for Supportive Schools, Learning Partners Program and CUNY. Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By February 1st, all teachers will have aligned and implemented at least three units of their curriculum to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) and implemented at least two project-based units that will lead to: a. at least 90% of 9th-12th grade students accumulating credits and making progress towards graduation b. at least 50% of Cohort U will pass the ELA and Algebra I Regents Exams To monitor our progress, we will achieve these benchmarks by the mid-point: ● Students in the 11th grade will demonstrate at least 65% mastery on Part I of the ELA Regents exam as evidenced on the January Mock Regents exam 2018-19 CEP-RISE 31  ● Students in the 9/10th grade will demonstrate at least 75% mastery in one high-leverage writing skill as evidenced on one culminating unit project At least 65% of 11th and 12th grade students, who have not done so, will pass the ELA and/or Math Regents in January 2019 ● Each teacher will produce a minimum of 3 rigorous, project-based units with explicit evidence of: - appropriate language outcomes - explicit strategies utilized to promote academic discourse - student work samples with feedback addressing content understanding and language use Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Mock Regents Data (November, December, February, April, May) Submitted and Revised Unit Plans (3 per teacher) ELA & Algebra I Regents Exam January 2019/June 2019 Data Wise Team Student Progress Trackers Pre and Post Assessments (per unit) Baseline/Midline/Endline per unit (Math) Think Through Math (TTM) (Weekly) Marking Period Analysis Reports Jump- Rope Progress Reports Unit Project Student Work Samples Danielson Framework for Teaching and Advance Evaluation Reports (specifically 3b and 3d) Instructional Cabinet Learning Walk Tracker focusing on Academic Discourse Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 32  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 5 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 5.2 The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. (aligned to Rise Key 4) 5.3 The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students. (aligned to Rise Key 4) 5.4 All school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health supports tied to the school’s vision. (aligned to Rise Key 5) 5.5 The school leader and student support staff work together with teachers to establish structures to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental health needs. (aligned to Rise Key 5) X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: SOP(s) Addressed 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? 5. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? According to the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide, 95% of students reported that they feel that the school community members talk to them about what they plan to do after high school and support them in understanding college and career goals. Additionally, 91% of students responded that they feel safe around the school and 96% reported they feel safe in their classes and on school grounds. Our school is supported by a full time College Counselor, a SAPIS Counselor, a Social Worker, and an academic Guidance Counselor that work arduously to reach out and help students with their academic, emotional, and social needs. To supplement our support, as we serve many students who are new to the country and/or are unaccompanied minors, we also have partnered up with The Child Center of New York (CCNY) which provides on-site clinical counseling. Counselors from CCNY also team up with our counselors to assess individually and to conduct 6-week-long social emotional groups for students, providing a positive space for them to learn skills and share ideas. In addition, the Parent Coordinator actively engages families in the referral process, building a bridge between the school and the Wellness Center. The Guidance team and Attendance Committee also identified students at high risk due to poor attendance and developed a mentoring program, pairing those students with staff and faculty across the school. This year, we are continuing to develop and strengthen our partnerships with community-based organizations such as Urban Arts and our Community School designation to improve in the area of Personal Attention and Support as identified in the School Quality Guide. While 79% of students responded positively in regards to Personal Attention, 2018-19 CEP-RISE 33  the school has identified socio-emotional needs and the creation of a supportive school environment as an area for growth. Moreover, only 71% of students “say that their teachers support them when they are upset.” Therefore, the school is mobilizing services offered by the Wellness Center including student socio-emotional mentoring and outreach for at-risk students to create an environment where students’ socio-emotional needs are addressed. As a result, we are going to be focusing on creating structures to support students with attendance by addressing the social and emotional factors that impede them from attending school each day. We are partnering with the CBO, Urban Arts, to create a system of attendance monitoring and mentoring to focus on at risk students. In addition, teacher leaders are looking at attendance data with guidance and the CBO staff to identify students who are at risk and conduct inquiry around the reasons why students are not attending, or are inconsistently attending school. Also, the guidance office came with a mentoring initiative based on attendance data in which each teacher have became a mentor of a couple of students with the focus of increasing our attendance rate. Furthermore, we will be providing significant training to teachers led by the Wellness Center, to aid teachers in understanding the socio-emotional needs of students in the school and to guide teachers in the student-referral process for services offered by the Wellness Center. Also, the guidance office came with a mentoring initiative based on attendance data in which teachers selected students to mentor and check in on with the goal of increasing their attendance. Teachers selected 2-4 students each. Our expectation of this initiative is for students and teachers to develop a more deepened relationship in which students feel supported emotionally and academically. In addition, The Child Center of New York, with its Wellness Center provides the additional emotional and social support through a variety of groups that meet throughout the week during their lunch period to talk about a variety of topics that allow students to acquire and strength their interpersonal and personal relationship skills. The implementation of a Senior Institute Assessment has allowed the Guidance Office to identify high need and at risk students in order to provide them with additional emotional and social interventions. The Guidance has created a tier system based on the results of the Senior Institute Assessment that includes a wide variety of interventions addressing social, emotional, and academic needs, including, but not limited to mentoring, referrals to Wellness Center, to Sapis counselor, social worker and/or psychologist. In addition, the RISA Report from ATS and the New Vision Attendance Heat Map have allowed us to keep track of attendance, credit accumulation, passed Regents Tests in order to identify and track students that are academically at risk. As a result, the Academic Guidance Counselor has shared this information with team leaders with the purpose of develop individualized action plans that addresses those academic needs for students to graduate on time. Part 2 – Summative Vision for Supportive Environment What is your vision for a supportive school environment? How will you, in partnership with each CBO and families, enact your vision? 1.) How would you want school stakeholders to describe the school? PAIHS should be viewed as a safe haven for immigrant children from Spanish-speaking countries who have been in the country for less than 4 years. It is important to note that we provide a quality education, based on the Internationals model, to children that other schools have refused to accept because of their deficiency in credits, as well as their lack of formal education in their native countries. We are a safe haven for all children, including unaccompanied minors, Students with Limited Formal or Interrupted Education students, Students with Disabilities, and children who have not experienced success in another school. PAIHS is a place where students come to learn English, while developing literacy and academic language in their native language. PAIHS is a community school where families can come looking for help and resources for a variety of needs, including socio-emotional and physical health, immigration process, learning English, navigating the College application process, and much more. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 34  2.) What do the CBO partnerships look like? The Urban Arts Partnership (UAP), a community-based, in-school and after-school program, has helped our students to develop their creative and analytical skills through arts-integrated classes that work towards closing the achievement gap. Also, the CBO is involved in tracking students attendance, creating activities that incentivize students to attend school, as well as their increase their involvement in the school community. The CBO has helped with the creation of classes such as art, dance, photography, that take place during school, after school, or during Saturday Academy. In addition, the CBO is involved with Parent Coordinator in the creation of events and activities as well as promoting the participation of parents in supporting the emotional, social and academic needs of their children at home. 3.) How is student voice and leadership developed? Students are afforded multiple forums to express their feelings and concerns on a variety of issues, including advisory, mentoring, Aspira, student leadership classes, and the School Leadership Team. In advisory, students discuss socio-emotional issues through Peer Group Connection, a partnership that builds student leaders to cultivate positive peer relationships. During mentoring, teachers are encouraged to not only review their academic work, but to check in on their socio-emotional state. In addition, a student-led club, ASPIRA, continues to operate, where students are able to make decisions about school wide events and extracurricular activities that pertain to the immigrant experience. We’ve added a leadership class as an elective so that students can have more time in the day to plan extracurricular activities. Lastly, students participate in the School’s leadership team monthly to discuss school wide policies. 4). What social-emotional learning framework will your school adopt? The social-emotional learning framework that we have adopted is the Restorative Justice with a focus on developing a strong community ties throughout the promotion of caring, safe, and respectful environment in which students feel comfortable resolving their situations through mediation. The Restorative Justice Counselor, in conjunction with the guidance counselor and the social worker, helps the students develop the capacity to understand and manage their feelings, allowing them to relate well to others, handle conflict, make good decisions, take responsibility for improving the school community and their communities. Through the Restorative Justice framework, we seek to address misbehaviors or transgressions using mediation and circles with those affected. 5). How should the school be more proactive in promoting improved students’ social-emotional skills? To be more proactive in promoting students’ socio-emotional skills development, we have adopted several initiatives in the school’s instructional program. Firstly, we are continuing our Peer Group Connection initiative to promote positive peer relationships among 9th graders while simultaneously developing student leaders in the 11 and 12th grade, whom deliver outreach to advisory classes. In addition, guidance counselors and teachers are conducting restorative circles in advisory classes for 10th graders using the Restore 360 curriculum from the Morningside Center for Teaching Social Responsibility that has been modified for the needs of ELLs. For the 11 and 12th graders, we have partnered with Planned Parenthood and the Child Center of NY workshop to support the needs of this population. Based on student feedback that 11th and 12th graders have offered the school, we are providing individualized counseling and target circles/support groups. We’re also designing more schoolwide activities and events to bring attention to socio-emotional and mental health, such as Mental Health Awareness Week, National Coming out Day, and Red Ribbon Week to stand up against substance abuse. 6) How will your school team measure a social-emotional development? 2018-19 CEP-RISE 35  The school uses various measures to assess the socio-emotional development of students. Firstly, the school examines survey data collected from the Student Perception survey and aggregated in the the School Quality Guide with regards to Supportive Environment. Furthermore, we also examine in house data collected through teacher anecdotes entered on Jumprope, our school’s internal grading platform, or anecdotes in iLog on ATS gathered by Guidance and support staff. Furthermore, the school team also examines the number of dean referrals and suspensions, as evidenced by ORSS. Moreover, we also consider data yielded from mental/emotional health student referrals and surveys from collected from students by members of the Guidance department and the Wellness Center clinical staff. Lastly, we use attendance data from the New Visions Data sorter/Heat Map to decide what students are in need of attendance intervention and identify root causes for attendance issues. All these data sources not only help us determine whether students are receiving the proper services, but also allow us to track the narratives behind these infractions as well as the number of infractions to help us measure how effectively we are addressing socio-emotional needs. 7) How would teachers, community partners, and school leaders use data to respond to student social and emotional needs? As mentioned above, there are several data forums that we utilize in order to connect students to clinical services. Jump Rope is a platform that is utilized to inform the guidance team when a student has demonstrated behavior that requires a follow up conversation by a counselor. The counselors then meet with the student and discuss the concerns. The counselor then assesses the student and determines if a referral to the wellness center is needed. Furthermore, the attendance data is a tool that is used to connect students to services as well. From this data, the counselors are able to set up appointments with parents and students to further discuss attendance problems. Through these meetings you are able to understand more of the family dynamic and underlying issues that may be the root cause of the problem. The counselor is able to refer the student to the Wellness Center. Lastly, Pan American International High School has prepared a program for assessing students that may be experiencing elevated stressors and heightened emotions in order to provide them with the necessary support to assist them during difficult periods and help ensure their success throughout the year. As part of this program, we use a questionnaire which measures students’ stress, behavioral problems, concentration, and peer relationship issues. This questionnaire is an evidence-based tool which is utilized by schools, research institutions, and social support services worldwide. The results of the questionnaire will be utilized by school staff to identify students with possible areas of concern in order to provide them with additional support and help, refer them to services to ensure their continued success as they move toward high school graduation and beyond. 8) Indicate how your attendance and chronic absenteeism rates will improve? This year, we have established an Attendance Team. This team meets every Wednesday to analyze attendance data and trends and discuss specific students who have been truant or consistently late. This team, which includes the school support staff, parent coordinator, attendance teacher, restorative justice coordinator, guidance counselors and principal, CBO representatives. Their goal is to determine an action plan for each student that has been identified as requiring an attendance intervention. This includes, but is not limited to, parent outreach, student mentoring and home visits. The New Vision Sorter is used to deeply analyze trends and patterns in order to determine interventions. An analysis of this data revealed that our severely chronically absent students are mostly from the 11 & 12 grade, with over twenty percent of chronically absent students working full time jobs. A daily messenger system is established to call homes immediately alerting parents/guardians that their child has been absent or late to school. Additionally, teachers use one period per week, as required by the UFT contract, to engage in parental outreach and call parents of students who have been frequently absent or at risk academically. Every day, the school support staff also makes personalized phone calls for parents of truant students to come in and meet with the principal and social worker. These conferences are being used as a collaborative effort between the school and family to determine if there are outlying circumstances preventing the student from attending school and whether outside resources need to be used to assist the family. We have also implemented period attendance to ensure that the message of the 2018-19 CEP-RISE 36  importance of being on time to each class is clear to all students. Perfect Attendance awards will be given each marking period with rewards such as pizza parties or special outings as incentives. Describe your plan to implement a culture of trust and high expectations for teachers, students, families and community partners. The administration team has implemented structures of communication, and opportunities for all stakeholders, teachers, student, families and community partners to be part of the decision process of the school. The first structure is the Coordinating Council where grade team leaders, content team leaders, counselor, UFT Representative, CBO and administrators meet every Monday from 4:00 pm to 6:00 pm to discuss and make decisions about school environment, instruction, assessments and other items affecting the daily operation of the school. During this school year 2018-19, the Coordinating Council will conduct inquiry about College and Career Readiness. Other additional structures that have been implemented to foster a culture of high expectations for all stakeholders are newsletters to parents and staff, multiple conferences to discuss student progress, meetings and workshops to discuss college and career decisions, progress reports after each unit, unit feedback sessions, union meetings between UFT Representative and the Principal, and the School Leadership Team (SLT). In addition, Professional Learning structures are embedded into teacher schedules for opportunities to improve their practice. Teacher planning, both at the content and grade team level, is amply provided within their schedules. Who are your CBO partners? How will each CBO sustain and support the social-emotional and academic growth of your students? CBO Partner Urban Arts Partnership CUNY International Network for Public Schools (INPS) Center for Supportive Schools ELT program offerings, mental health social worker, support with attendance initiatives CBO Focus College Now courses, CUNY LINCT courses, BECAS, advisory curriculum Academic support with the Portfolio process, project-based curriculum and English Language Learners research based-practices Peer Group Connection (PGC) advisory and leadership program How will you, in partnership with your CBO, create a supportive and engaging environment for your students’ families? Through our primary CBO, Urban Arts Partnership, we will expand our adult classes for parents/families including Saturday English as a new language classes. Each month we will continue to host a parent night and the CBO will bring in representatives for more varied breakout sessions including but not limited to immigration services, substance abuse awareness and support services, etc. Also, the CBO is involved in promoting the Parent Breakfast Workshop to be happening every month. During these workshops the parents receive crucial information pertinent to how to develop a healthy relationship with their kids, effective communication, and topics about helping students to become successful in high school. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 37  What essential questions, or key themes, will be explored by all staff and students that acknowledge and celebrate the culture and heritage of the student body? - What historical impact have Latino women had in the social justice movement? - School-wide celebrations for both students and parents that acknowledge the cultural diversity. - Academic projects/portfolios that recognize the achievements of historical figures that the student body can relate to. What evidence will you use to gauge the impact of your plan to create a positive school environment? We will use the results of the Parent/Student Surveys to gauge the impact of our work in promoting positive school environment. Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Supportive Environment. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Rise Benchmarks. By June 2019, the overall student attendance rate will be at or above 94.1%. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Supportive Environment Annual Goal: Which school benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Supportive Environment Annual Goal? Increase of overall student attendance Increase in credit accumulation particularly in grades 9 and 10 Increase in college readiness index for 12th graders Decrease in number and severity of behavioral referrals 2018-19 CEP-RISE 38 How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) -incremental increases in attendance; reduction in latenesses and/or cutting of classes Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) To increase student attendance to 94% or above. Chronically absent students Increase in overall Attendance September 2018 - June 2019 Community Schools Director, Staff Mentors Staff Mentors 1. THE CBO will create a system of designating a school based attendance mentor for students who have been identified as being Chronically absent/late. We will use data from the attendance assessment to organize a lunch with teachers and peers students identified as a positive motivator to continue attending school. Administration, Community Schools Director, Urban Arts Director, 21st Century Grant Supervisor, Teachers 2018-19 CEP-RISE 39  2. Organized outreach from alumni students Organize a day where current students can hear stories from our alumni students. Encourage our current students to come to school for a better future. 3. Trips for students with improved attendance Students who improved attendance for the month will be invited to our attendance field trips. There will be 8 trips scheduled for the school year. All students Increase in overall attendance 2x per school year CBO, Guidance Counselors, Student Congress during advisory class Increased overall attendance September 2018 - June 2019 students with improved attendance/ perfect attendance CBO, support staff, teacher student survey data and feedback from outreach day -increased overall attendance rates; decrease in tardiness - Monthly guidance updates - Referral tracker 4b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. In PAIHS we understand that all stakeholders play an important role in the emotional and social development of the students and their academic success, therefore we want for parents to be involved in our school community. To specifically target parent involvement we keep them inform about the different activities that will be taking place in our school through the monthly Parent Newsletter written in Spanish by the Saturday Academy Coordinator. Every week the Saturday Academy Coordinator send a recorded phone message using the School Messenger to inform parents about the mandatory credit accumulation Saturday Academy classes, besides meetings, and an invitation to the ENL classes for parents. In addition, when students are not attending the Saturday Academy classes the parents receive an individualized and personal phone call make by one of the staff members working on Saturdays. In addition, letters informing attendance are send by the Academic Counselor. Also, the Parent Coordinator in conjunction with the Wellness Center and the CBO are inviting parents to have breakfast once a month to engage them in meaningful and relevant conversations about healthy relationships, tips on how to deal and talk to teenagers, helpful tips on how to help students to academically succeed. Parents Nights specifically 2018-19 CEP-RISE 40  target the importance of attendance and students academic progress. These meetings are organized by the Parent Coordinator to happen once a month. The Academic Guidance Counselor is responsible for the continue and constant communication with parents of students with chronic absenteeism. The Parent Coordinator and the Attendance AP make daily phone calls to parents whose kids has being either absent or late to school. Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, lead CBO’s community school budget, FSC Supports, etc. - Teacher teams - Guidance counselors - Teaching Artists - Administration and Team Leaders - CBO and partnership organization point persons (especially The Morningside Center) - SAPIS counselor - College Readiness Team - Discipline Committee - Attendance Team - Parent Coordinator Program - Advisory has been programmed into academic program of all students Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 41  By February 2019, we will have achieved a 92% or better daily student attendance rate as evidenced on ATS for the Fall semester of 2018-19. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. New Vision Attendance Tracker / ATS attendance Report Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 42  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 4 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 4.2 School and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. (aligned to Rise Key 2) 4.3 Teachers provide coherent, and appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. (aligned to Rise Key 1) 4.4 Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences and tailored to the strengths and needs of all students. (aligned to Rise Key 4) 4.5 Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, and progress monitoring). (aligned to Rise Key 3) Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: SOP(s) Addressed NA NA NA x 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, and progress monitoring). Last year, based on feedback provided during our Quality Review process in 2017 and PPO visits, we shifted our instructional focus to hone in on formative and summative assessment practices across the school. We received a “Proficient” in Component 2.2 and the reviewer noted that some teachers were observed making adjustments to instruction based on in-class formative assessments and that we have employed systems for tracking student academic progress, particularly in regards to skill development as relevant to the Regents exams. As a school that serves ELL students and with the belief in developing both their content and language abilities, we shifted to a Mastery Based model. Across the school, the expectation shifted toward constructing curriculum units with clearly defined skill, content and language outcomes and assessments to measure these skills throughout a unit. One such school-wide assessment practice that has been implemented is the use of diagnostic exam/unit pre-tests to assess what students know about a particular unit of instruction in advance. Teachers use data from these diagnostics each unit to tailor their instruction to the needs of students, especially with regards to scaffolding for language demands. In the past school year, we provided purposeful professional development on how to incorporate formative assessment in project-based units to support the development of our school's PBAT/portfolio culture. In these PDs, 2018-19 CEP-RISE 43  teachers were supported on how to strategically group students and scaffold lessons and materials, using benchmarks and formative data for such planning. Assessment continues to be an area of growth for the school as evaluation of our practices has shown that while teachers have made attempts to incorporate checks for understanding, exams and projects, this is not done so consistently across the school. Most importantly, teachers still need to develop using data to inform long-term planning and in crafting tasks that are meaningfully adapted for a variety of learners. To build on consistent practices and common assessments across the school, as recommended by the QR reviewer, this year, we have incorporated diagnostics such as the online HMH Reading Inventory to determine Lexile levels for all students, an online Phonics Inventory to measure reading decoding skills for SIFE students, and an Algebra diagnostic through Imagine Learning. We also have enhanced our PD plan to provide extensive learning on how to incorporate accountable talk structures and routines as a means for developing language and assessing student learning. Each PCT, anchored to a content team, is also being trained to facilitate data-driven cycles of inquiry that require close examination of student data, student work products, and teaching strategies to meet revealed student skill/learning gaps. Each team is responsible for tracking student progress and memorializing adjustments made to planning and instruction based on this data. Part 2 – Summative Vision for Collaborative Teachers What is your vision for collaborative teaching? 1 ). How is the school organized to promote teacher collaboration? Teacher Team planning time is programmed into the daily schedule. Grade level teams and content teams each meet twice weekly. Peer Collaborative Teachers meet once a week on Mondays, often with the Achievement Network coach (ANET) to conduct inquiry cycles that will then be mimicked in teacher meetings. These inquiry cycles will include structured opportunities for collaborative planning based on a shared focus for instruction and will engage teachers in intervisitations to address pedagogical needs. DATAWISE Math teams meet Thursdays for an hour and a half after school to track student progress towards meeting proficiency as required for the Algebra I Regents Exam. All faculty and staff meet bi-weekly for 80 minutes for professional development sessions. All Humanities teachers are also expected to produce interdisciplinary units and time is built into their schedules so that they can co-plan. 2). What will teaching and learning look like? Teachers will continue to work together in their teams, and using a backwards planning design method, in which they are continuing to receive PD, will create assessments for all units and lessons. They will analyze assessments and other student work in their team meetings every month and make revisions to curriculum and instruction in order to support their work and their students’ learning. The school will continue to use assessments aligned to the CCLS to acquire a good understanding of the performance of students and in order to adjust curricular decisions resulting in actionable feedback regarding student progress. PAIHS uses a variety of assessments aligned to the CCLS to assist school leaders and teachers in accurately identifying student strengths and weaknesses. In addition to analyzing these assessments, teacher teams use item analysis to clearly pinpoint specific skills and standards that students need additional support in, as a means of pushing academic achievement. This system aids teachers in gaining a clear picture of how students are performing and fosters accurate feedback to students on 2018-19 CEP-RISE 44  student performance. At PAIHS, our goal is for learning to be student-centered and that activities are geared towards developing students' abilities to read, write and discuss critically. Learning is also project-based so that students develop problem-solving and analytical skills across content areas that will allow them to be successful with college academia. This is the main focus of our PD sessions this year where we are helping teachers include academic discourse in their rigorous, data driven projects and lessons that are engaging for students. Specifically, in alignment with this year's instructional focus on building academic vocabulary, teacher meeting time and PD time will be allocated to identifying common strategies for introducing and practicing vocabulary in academic discourse. Moreover, the interdisciplinary teams will identify cross-content academic vocabulary to target in addition to their discipline-specific language. This will provide more opportunities for interdisciplinary connections and will help solidify student knowledge and usage of new vocabulary in writing and in discussion. 3). How are teachers providing opportunities to deepen learning for higher achieving students? This year, teachers will continue to collect and create item analyses on the data. Higher achieving students will continue to be able to take a variety of College Now and University in the Classroom courses. All 11th grade students are currently being exposed to the AP Spanish curriculum but only those who show high achievement will be allowed to take the AP exam and move on to AP Spanish Literature in the 12th grade. Introductory AP computer science courses are also being offered across all grades. Additionally, AP Studio Art is being offered to 11th and 12th grade students. For all other classes, teachers are being shown how to differentiate their curriculum in order to provide opportunities for higher functioning students to engage in higher order thinking skills, oral and written discourse and presentation. 4). What system do teachers use to ensure that every child is safe in their class? PAIHS promotes Respect for All. All stakeholders are respectful and considerate of others and model for students how to treat others with dignity. The majority of teachers at PAIHS demonstrate a good rapport with students and a caring for their overall well-being and academic achievement. We are working towards strengthening our systems and structures, particularly around attendance and referrals for behavior, so that teachers further develop their restorative practices and so that students become more self-reflective and are able to self-monitor successfully. On Jumprope, teachers can track non academic outcomes for students and encourage students to safely participate in class. 5). What data should teachers review regularly to ensure they plan for individual student needs? Teachers should review data collected daily in their classrooms, first and foremost, to inform their instruction. These many include student journal entries, exit tickets, in class discussions, class work, and homework. As a team, teachers should be analyzing student work products, in particular projects and major assessments that students have completed. Teachers should also be using SESIS and school-wide data such as the Regents REDS reports to determine student progress towards meeting goals and standards. Attendance data is also disseminated electronically and should be reviewed every day. 6). How do you intend to use community educators/partners to support a collaborative teaching approach? This year we have acquired professional development sessions through Queens North. These p.d. sessions will be focused on supporting teachers on creating opportunities for academic discourse and how to assess student 2018-19 CEP-RISE 45  understanding through academic discourse.. Queens North both facilitates at the school-wide level and at the targeted teacher level, so as to give specific attention to teachers in need of additional assistance. According to the data we looked at during the AIR co-interpretation, respondents cited a gap between social-emotional supports available and those accessed by students. Our community coordinator, a social worker and other key staff maintain the nurturing environment we have built. We also have a full-time dean and an additional guidance counselor. Together these staff members meet for a guidance meeting once a week and discuss updates from Jumprope and behavioral writes up to address teacher concerns while ultimately help student achievement. How do you envision enhancing collaboration amongst your Instructional Leadership Team to improve teacher practices and student learning? Our School Instructional Cabinet (Coordinating Council) meetings occur once a week and include all of the team leaders (grade and content), administrators and our instructional coaches. This important work will continue and it will provide a space for our teacher leaders to gain familiarity with how to analyze, interpret and employ a wide range of data sources for the improvement of both instructional practices and student learning. In alignment with our Learning Partners, this team will be reviewing data pertinent to College and Career Readiness. The goal is that eventually, the members of Coordinating Council will turn-key this process with their own grade/discipline teams so that the collaboration around data-driven analysis of school-wide challenges that began in CC has ripple effects throughout the entire school. In addition to inquiry cycles in Coordinating Council, the CC devotes the other half of its meeting time to discussing and devising action plans to address the other challenges that the school faces, including consistency in disciplinary structures, systems to target concerns about students as well as issues brought up by students. Instructional strategies to support struggling teachers are also discussed in the meeting. The decisions made in CC are openly shared with the staff through email briefs. How do you envision collaboration within teacher teams to improve teacher practices and student learning? This year, teachers continue to work in their teams and with their coaches to align curriculum to CCLS and insert multiple entry points into their lessons. Teachers will meet in grade level teams to look at student work together, using a tuning protocol, so they can detect students’ challenges and adjust curriculum to help students overcome those challenges. Teachers will continue to work together in their teams, and using a backwards design method, they will create assessments for all units and lessons first. Discipline teams will also focus on the crafting of rigorous, engaging, discipline-appropriate Performance Based Assessment Tasks (PBATs). Given that our school operates under the city’s ELL Waiver, one of our important benchmarks for success is students’ performance on the PBATs, which are envisaged to engage students in college-level work in each discipline. In order to ensure high quality projects, the discipline teams will undergo a collaborative feedback cycle to target the different stages of the project, from inception to roll-out to the student revision process. Each teacher on the discipline team will craft a PBAT-level project so that students gain exposure to these types of tasks from the 9th/10th grade. Lastly, the four Interdisciplinary (grade-level) teams will meet weekly in order to devise interventions to meet student needs, focus on identifying opportunities for interdisciplinary curricular connections, including academic language requirements and serve as the bridge between teachers and the Coordinating Council. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 46  How do you envision collaboration across teacher teams to improve data driven teacher practices that result in improvement in student achievement? What data will teachers and the Instructional Leadership Team regularly review to ensure that they are reflecting upon needed adjustments to teaching practices and meeting individual student learning needs? Data Reviewed Regents Data Portfolio Data Mock Regents NYSESLAT scores Imagine Learning Intent to monitor students mastery on Regents and determine to what extent students are meeting benchmarks for College Readiness or remediation To monitor master of Common Core Standards on authentic assessments; identify interdisciplinary skills that can be targeted across content areas To monitor student progress in preparation for Regents Exams; identify areas of leverage to improve student achievement on Regents to identify student proficiency in English; to program students heterogeneously according to Internationals Model to monitor student academic achievement and math skill progression/gains by using Imagine Learning Describe the screening process you use to identify students who need extra help? How do you use this process to determine which intervention to provide?  Common core standards aligned data from unit assessments and mock regents to identify student academic needs.  Data-Link Scantron program to generate comparison reports to identify academic trends.  Think Through Math (TTM) digital intervention program.  HMH reading inventory program to identify lexile levels. Teachers will have access to these data resources, and in teacher teams, they will begin their 6 week inquiry cycles using these data sets. From there, teachers will look for trends areas of support and look deeply into student work samples or specific questions students performed poorly on. Afterwards, teachers will select a high leverage instructional strategy that will address the learning gap. Teachers will be able to use these instructional strategies in their practice and may choose to differentiate these strategies to accommodate small groups that require specific intervention Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Rise Benchmarks. By June 2019, all teachers will develop 3 units of study that include at least one key/rigorous speaking and/or listening formative assessment task that will be analyzed during the cycle of inquiry in protocol-driven discipline team meetings to refine the curricula and teaching practices around discourse impacting  2018-19 CEP-RISE 47 o A 10% points increase in students’ speaking raw scores on the NYSESLAT exam Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Collaborative Teachers Annual Goal: Which school benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Collaborative Teachers Annual Goal? List of Renewal Benchmarks expected to improve Attendance Graduation Rate Regents Scores College Readiness Index 2018-19 CEP-RISE 48 Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Academic year 2018-2019 Instructional Team Leaders, Coaches, Facilitators, Teachers, Administration Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. Teachers will engage in professional learning activities geared towards helping them utilize backwards planning strategies that include formative and summative assessments, and help teachers execute data-driven, rigorous instruction. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? All teachers Regents Scores Graduation College Readiness How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) All teachers will attend Professional Development provided through Internationals Network for Public Schools to help them design project-based curriculum that meets the needs of every student and enables them to access challenging curriculum. Teacher learning will be monitored and assessed through bi-weekly presentations of their units and lessons to the entire faculty. Additionally, coaches and administration will provide targeted feedback on unit maps and observed lessons using 2018-19 CEP-RISE 49  Teachers will collaborate daily to share best practices and improve on pedagogical skills. All teachers Graduation Regents Scores All teachers, coaches, administration, team leaders Academic year 2018-2019 Teacher's, team leaders, administration the strategies learned as a primary focus. There will be four coaches (Generation Ready, INPS, Peer Collaborative Teachers) to help support teachers with the planning and implementation of Common Core- Aligned curriculum. A minimum of four teachers will participate in the WIT 101 trainings throughout the year to learn data-informed writing strategies and techniques. 9th and 10th grade math and ELA teachers will attend the regular Teachers will participate in monthly peer inter-visitations within content areas and grade levels. They will use protocols to share warm and cool feedback and provide each other with actionable next 2018-19 CEP-RISE 50  Teachers will develop systems and structures to monitor student learning and for students to self-assess. Administration, coaches, team leaders Teachers College Readiness Regents Scores Academic year 2018-2019 Teachers, administration, coaches, PD coordinator, INPS PD facilitator Team Leaders, PCTs Students Teachers, coaches, administration, leaders Team leaders, teachers administration steps to improve instruction. The coaches, administration, and team leaders will engage in monthly "learning walks" to determine overall trends across grades and content areas and assess next steps for professional learning, support, and feedback Teachers will learn and execute specific strategies for checking for understanding and determining prior knowledge. Teachers will use common rubrics including the PBAT and Common-Core Aligned Regents rubrics to assess student mastery and growth. Teacher teams will analyze school wide assessment data and evidence how they are using data to 2018-19 CEP-RISE 51  Teachers will work in collaboration with our CBO to create engaging, diverse curricula to meet the varying needs and interests of our students. Graduation College Readiness Academic year 2018-2019 Teachers and teaching artists Teachers, teaching artists, administration, CBO directors administration, CBO representatives, teachers inform instruction. Teacher teams will develop student-friendly rubrics so that students can self-assess their work and lead conversations about their next learning steps. Teachers will identify student needs, differentiate instruction and create multiple access points, track progress and evaluate efficacy of their strategies. Teachers will meet regularly with teaching artists provided by Urban Arts to plan cohesive and rigorous activities and lessons. Teachers, together with the teaching artists will review student data and determine appropriate methods to differentiate and create multiple access 2018-19 CEP-RISE 52  Teachers, teaching artists, administration, CBO directors points for students. Teachers and teaching artists will help students develop self-confidence and self-monitoring skills to help them improve academically across all content areas. Administration and Urban Arts representatives will meet at least twice prior to June 2016 to evaluate efficacy of the current programs and structures being used in relation to the integration classes and CBO courses. 4b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Teachers have time built into their schedules for parent outreach. During this time, teachers work collaboratively to discuss students who are struggling in class and who need additional support both at school and at home. Guidance counselors serve as liaisons for parents during meetings and schedule meeting times between teachers, students and and parents. Our parent coordinator, Juana Adames receives messages on jumprope from teachers, as well as data from daily attendance about students with low attendance. She makes daily calls to parents and schedules meetings with parents and invites teachers to those meetings. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 53  These actions and notes are presented during attendance meetings. Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, lead CBO’s community school budget, FSC Supports, etc. -INPS Coach and PD facilitator -Director of School Renewals -Guidance counselors -Dean -Teacher Teams -Team Leaders -Administration -Generation Ready Coach - Community School Director - CBO Directors - CBO Teaching Artists - Peer Collaborative Teachers - Portfolio Committee - Instructional Resources Laptops/Ipads/Chrome-Books will be purchased for all student population Instructional Supplies will be purchased to support teachers' instruction Non-fiction literature as well as classroom textbooks Think Through Math digital tool available to all students We also provide After-school activities and a Saturday Academy. There are 15 teachers involved in providing extra curricular activities during our after school. There are 10 teachers involved in our Saturday Academy. We also count with a Guidance Counselor for our After school program as well as for our Saturday Academy. There is also an 2018-19 CEP-RISE 54  administrator in charge of supervising the After School program and another that supervises Saturday Academy. Saturday Academy's goal is to provide opportunities to earn credits. Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant X 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By February 1st, 2019, all teachers will have engaged in 3 cycles of inquiry in which they collect and analyze student data and evidence of a strategic next step they employed to meet the needs of students. 1. Every grade-level team will have used a protocol for analyzing student data (mock Regents or other Common-Core aligned task). 2. Every grade-level team will have produced an item-analysis for the student data and devised a summary of the trends found in the data including student strengths and learning gaps. 3. Every grade-level team will have determined a high-leverage skill that needs to be addressed in their classes and devise an action plan for addressing that skill across content areas. 4. Every grade-level team will have re-assessed by February to determine if the strategies implemented were effective, identifying which students made significant progress versus which students showed no movement. 5. Every grade-level team will have disseminated their analyses and findings via Google Drive. 6. All team leaders will have met with administration bi-weekly to discuss the progress of the cycle of inquiry. 7. By February, administration will have conducted at minimum 2 cycles of observation providing targeted feedback and actionable next steps to teachers around planning practices and using data to inform instruction. Benchmark 2: By February 1st, 2019, at least 85% of juniors and seniors will have accumulated 5 credits over the course of the Fall semester. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Mock Regents, Pre and post Unit assessments Instructional Observations Reading Programs such as Rewards, Reading Plus 2018-19 CEP-RISE 55  Interim Assessments Instructional Observations Imagine Learning Inquiry: DataWise , Cycles of Inquiry Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 56  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 2 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 2.2 The school leader ensures that the school community shares the Specific, Measurable, Ambitious, Results-oriented, and Timely (SMART) goals/mission and long-term vision inclusive of core values that address the priorities outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP). (aligned with Rise Key 2) Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital resources. (aligned with Rise Key 6) 2.3 2.4 The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district's Annual Professional Performance Review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. (aligned with Rise Key 1) 2.5 Leaders effectively use evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve critical individual and school-wide practices as defined in the SCEP (student achievement, curriculum and teacher practices; leadership development; community/family engagement; and student social and emotional developmental health). (aligned with Rise Keys 4 and 5) Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: SOP(s) Addressed NA NA NA X 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? Currently, the principal ensures that the entire school community shares common goals and values. At the beginning of the school-year, administration shares the CEP goals and instructional focus for the year, that were created in collaboration of the various stakeholder of the school, as well as reviews the principles of the Internationals Network to make sure that these are clearly communicated to constituents of the school. To ensure that these goals and principles are realized in practice, various systems and teams have been established across the school. One of these teams is the Coordinating Council, which includes content and grade team leaders, instructional coaches, the UFT representative, CBO director, guidance counselor, and Restorative Justice Coordinator to ensure that all members of the school community are represented when making critical decisions for the school. In addition, there is a weekly instructional cabinet meeting composed of peer collaborative teachers and instructional coaches that meets weekly to make sure that the instructional focus is being realized and that teachers are conducting inquiry that targets the school’s goals. Administration also collaborates with vetted leaders in the building to create a program that is supportive of the needs of our students, in accordance with component 2.3 In 2018-2019 school year the Principal of PAIHS together with his administrative team had made strategic programmatic decisions which will impact student achievement. According to the ELA Regents results there was an 18% drop in passing rate. Therefore, the student's program will reflect classes that will support the students in preparing for the ELA Regents as well as other classes or programs 2018-19 CEP-RISE 57  that will impact the students' progress in school. Some of the strategic programmatic changes are offering Internship, Coop, CTE Program, AP Studio Art and Independent Reading. Teachers have been program strategically as well, matching and aligning their expertise and strong teaching practices to grade levels and the content. For example, College Readiness classes will be taught by teachers that have been receiving extensive professional learning on this area. Teacher leaders have been selected by selecting teachers that have exemplified a strong set of leadership qualities. Capital resources have been match to the school goals. Money have been allocated for libraries, professional learning, coaching, college trips and mental health resources. With regards component 2.5, which calls for the use of evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve critical individual and school-wide practices, the school leader was rated "Effective." administration. This has been recognized as an area of prioritized need in light of the fact that there were significant decreases in ELA Regents grades, Starting in September 2018, the inquiry work utilizing the Datawise has been extended to include the ENL department team, with one additional instructional lead being trained to facilitate the work accordingly. Each week there is also an Instructional Leadership Team (ILT) meeting specifically designated for discussing findings and trends from the inquiry work and includes the Administration Team and the DataWise Leaders. The ILT also plans during these meetings for sharing and disseminating data and implications of the work with the Coordinating Council team so as to create coherence across the school and so that they can turnkey critical information and strategies in their respective grade-level and department team meetings. Part 2 – Summative Vision for Effective School Leadership What is your vision for effective school leadership at your school? 1.) How will school leader articulate a shared vision and mission to the entire school community? The shared vision is an ongoing process and occurs through collaborative discussions in which all stakeholders have a voice. The school leader meets regularly with the Coordinating Council, School Leadership Team (SLT), teacher teams, Office of Renewal school coaches and personnel, the Community School director, and other CBO partners to articulate the agreed upon shared vision. Meetings with the SLT, teacher team leaders and teams, coaches, Community School director, and Coordinating Council are calendared and are occurring regularly (no less than once per month). In addition, the administrative team meets weekly with the CBO Urban Arts to follow a set plan for school year which is aligned to the vision and goals of PAIHS. The principal and APs observe the courses being offered through the CBO and give direct feedback to the teaching artists as well as to the Community School Director indicating how the instruction can be better aligned to the school's goal and also delineate expectations for rigor. Any proposed changes or adaptations to the school's vision, mission or instructional focus are vetted with the Coordinating Council and then with teacher teams, SLT, CBO, and staff for approval. 2). What kind of evidence-based systems would a school leader put in place to ensure that the school and individuals continues to improve? The school utilizes various evidence-based systems to make sure that the school is progressing toward its stated goals and meets its targets as a Rise school. With regards to the supportive environment and Strong Family and Community Ties, Counselors will keep logs, case studies and an action plan which will be reviewed periodically. Student progress data will be reviewed and compared against the data the counselors’ provided. Attendance data will also be compared against the systems implemented to determine what needs to be improved upon, and what is working. A guidance team made up of administration, guidance, the CBO, the attendance teacher and other members of the staff will review the data and will continue to fine-tune the systems in place. WIth regards to Instruction and Collaborative teachers, Teacher team leaders have been directed to share all meeting agendas, notes, and collected student data and data analyses in an electronic Google Drive folder. This information is reviewed and discussed when administration meets with teacher team leaders to determine next steps for the team and to assess whether the 2018-19 CEP-RISE 58  work teacher teams are conducting is effective to promote student growth. In addition, the International Network for Public Schools will be providing professional development to the teacher leaders. Coaches also share their observation notes, feedback and coaching notes via Google Drive to ensure cohesion and follow-through. Teachers are using Jump Rope as a tool to generate data reports on in-class and school-wide assessments and also sharing these electronically. In their meetings, teachers are expected to discuss the trends found in the data, target a specific skill they will be addressing with students, and delineate a plan of action for addressing the skill gap. These plans must be shared with administration and coaches and also be evidenced in their unit plans and daily lesson plans. Lastly, with regards to Effective school leadership, administration has devised a feedback calendar for unit maps and will use lesson plans, student work samples, and data analysis as a point of focus for lesson observations and feedback sessions. All committees established have been set up with a specific area of focus for the school and has 1-2 point persons in charge of holding the team accountable and ensuring all information is shared. The point persons will be held accountable by administration through regularly scheduled meetings and period checks of the electronic files. Additionally, administration, counselors, and team leaders use the New Visions Data Portal as an extensive source for data of all students. Administration and the counselor also engage in periodic check-in meetings with their New Visions support liaison to address and plan for student needs including tracking progress towards graduation and Regents readiness. 3 ). How would the leader organize student and teacher programs to ensure students’ needs are met? The Principal, and programming team works strategically in tracking credit data to ensure that students are being programmed effectively. Also, in compliance with CR 154, an academic program has been created makes sure that our English language learners received the ENL instruction they are mandated in both free-standing ENL and integrated content courses. This year, additional ENL teachers were hired to support the need for more intervention and instruction hours to meet the needs of our high percentage of ELLs. Independent Reading classes were also integrated into the academic program . With the establishment of the SIT, the Special Education teacher and coordinator meets with administration and faculty to review IEPs and ensure that students are receiving their mandated educational programs. Over the summer, the administration and programmer collaborated to create a schedule which allowed for a varied student program, addition of English and Math classes, and that built in common planning and meeting time for teachers. In 2018-2019 PAIHS will continue their PROSE schedule, all 11th and 12th graders receive a stand-alone 70 minute PBAT Mentoring period while 9/10 graders participate in the ELT program offering independent reading and other classes that support the students academically. 4). What approach would the school leader have to conducting observations ? With the support of the TDEC, administration devised a detailed observation calendar, including 5 rounds of observations and 2 cycles of reflection (1 for IPCs and 1 for End of Year Conferences). For September through January 15, administration has established which teachers they will see jointly to norm the observation and feedback process before moving to a focused set of teachers for the Fall. For this school year, the Principal will observe all teachers who are not tenured, while the two Assistant Principals will divide all teachers and observe by department. All Fall term observations will be informal with the goal of each teacher having received 3 observations by the end of January. To accommodate for Regents preparation, examination and PBAT presentations, January will be used by administration to calibrate foci for observations and retrain teachers. For teachers consistently demonstrating "ineffective" and/or "developing" teaching practices in the Fall, an informal TIP will be created with a specific action plan for improvement. Rounds 4 through 5 will be used to jointly conduct any formal observations and complete informal observations. Prior to end of the year conferences, the administration will again retrain teachers and determine eligibility for tenure. The principal will have observed each teacher up for tenure this year a minimum of 3 times to determine whether he will submit their application for approval. In January, administration will also meet with these 2018-19 CEP-RISE 59  teachers for them to present their portfolios and case for tenure approval. New teachers have each been assigned a mentor and partnered with another teacher to plan curriculum. 5 & 6: How will the school support a shared accountability? What and how will the leader delegate to AP and the community school director? In creating committees and teams, and an organized system for sharing information and data, we are ensuring that committee work is occurring and that all members of the faculty are able to hold each other accountable to that work. We have also designated leaders for each committee and team who then report to administration on a weekly basis, sometimes more often, to discuss what is working well and what still needs to be improved. This system of distributed leadership empowers teachers to not only take on the work, but also become vested in the work. Because it is collaborative, all members work together to achieve a common goal. The administration, specifically the Principal and two AP's, met over the summer to establish their individual strengths and areas of growth. Responsibilities were distributed between the three to allow for compliance work to be effectively completed in a timely manner and also allow for administration to strengthen their individual skills. Administrators are responsible for observing, rating, reporting on ADVANCE, programming and managing the school-wide staff. Administration meets daily to determine goals for the day and the Principal delegates which components the two Assistant Principals are responsible for. All administrators observe the teachers. The Principal and Assistant Principals divide the observations in rounds. For example, on the first round one AP is in charge of Math, Science and Physical Education teachers and the second Assistant Principal is in charge of English Language Arts (ELA), English as a New Language, Social Studies, and Native Language Arts. The Principal observes all teachers, especially those that qualify for tenure. The Principal and APs also meet regularly (once weekly or upon immediate need) with the Community School Director to articulate short-term and long-term goals for the CBO. The Principal makes specific requests for resources and programs needed for students and families. The Principal has also held a meeting with the director and the parent coordinator, articulating the specifics of their work and how he wants them to collaborate to meet the social-emotional goals for the school community. The AP also meets with the Community School Director weekly to discuss the implementation and efficacy of current programs being offered by the CBO. The AP keeps the director informed of changes that need to occur to keep the programs aligned with the school's goals. The community school director reports all concerns to the directors of the CBO. What are your core belief(s) for school improvement and how they inform your vision for developing instructional leadership at your school? Maintaining clear expectations around the school's inst2018-19 CEP-RISE 60  ructional focus and goals by consistently engaging in: regularly observation and feedback cycles with teachers, providing targeted feedback on unit maps and projects to teachers, 2018-19 CEP-RISE 61  data inquiry What is your vision for developing differentiated leadership throughout your school? How will you utilize teacher leaders to build broad capacity within your school? Every grade team and department will have a team leader. Additionally, there will be leaders for a variety of committees including the attendance team, PBAT coordinator, , professional development planning team and instructional cabinet. Team leaders meet bi-weekly with administration to discuss the focus of meetings for the week, discuss important deadlines, and most importantly engage in collaborative protocols that can be used with their respective instructional teams. Furthermore, the Portfolio Coordinator and Professional Development Liaison attend monthly meetings with the Internationals Network to support them in their roles. Our Inquiry teams are also attending extensive Professional Development teams for each of their foci. The Instructional Leadership team will be engaging in Professional development to train teacher leaders in the inquiry process and turnkey the inquiry process with their respective teams. Furthermore, teachers were strategically selected to be members of the Learning Partners Programs to improve upon their capacity as teacher leaders. The Learning Partners team is composed of a veteran teacher leader, two teachers who will be designated as model teachers, and two teachers who are not tenured who are wishing to improve upon their leadership capacity and professional contributions to the school. How will the leader foster collaborative school governance processes, and ensure full family participation together with other stakeholders? Parents will continue to be active participants of the SLT. Additionally, a monthly newsletter with important updates related to our vision and instructional initiatives will be disseminated to all families. How will you use evidence-based systems to ensure school and teacher leaders are led by a cycle of continuous learning and use this to inform their teams’ priorities? Evidence-Based System Support(s) Collaborator(s) Mock Regents Portfolio (PBAT) Data Student Work Analysis using Data WIse Protocols Regents Data Part 3 – Annual Goal Schedules Team Leaders, AP Schedules for PBATs Calendared out, teachers receive PD to norm, teams create and vet projects Training in Data Wise protocols, structured meeting time for instructional cabinet All teachers, administration, PBAT coordinator Instructional cabinet New Visions Data Sorter training Tech specialist, data specialist 2018-19 CEP-RISE 62  Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Rise Benchmarks. By June 2019, school leaders will support grade team leaders through professional learning and a feedback structure to increase attendance data higher than 92% for the school year. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Effective School Leadership Annual Goal: Which school benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Effective School Leadership Annual Goal? Attendance Credit Accumulation Graduation Rate 2018-19 CEP-RISE 63 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) All Teachers Attendance Academic School Year 2018-2019 Administration, Teachers Analyzing and creating action plans Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. The administration will share goal with all team leaders. 1. The Principal and Assistant Principal will meet with all teachers and team leaders to discuss attendance data including chronic attendance and patterns. 2. Teachers will create an action plans for meeting their attendance goal and share with administration for feedback and follow-up. 3. Administration will provide opportunities for Professional Development to Grade Level teacher leaders. 4. Administration will meet with Attendance Committee to update Attendance Plan. Systems and structures will be put in place to ensure that attendance student data is All Teachers and Teacher Teams Attendance Credit Accumulation Academic year 2018-2019 Administration, Teacher Team Leaders, teachers, coaches, committees, committee leaders Monthly Progress Reports 2018-19 CEP-RISE 64 Graduation All Teachers Attendance Parents, Students, Graduation Academic year 2018-2019 Administration, Families, Teachers, Community School Director Monthly comparison rates with previous year Credit accumulation and Administration constantly shared and used for tracking. 1. Administration will meet with teacher team leaders on a bi-weekly basis, or with more frequency if deemed necessary, to establish team goals and agenda priorities, including attendance outreach action plan. 2. Teacher teams will meet twice per week each, as delineated in their teacher schedules, to analyze student work, assessment data and students' attendance. Teams will create initiatives to improve attendance within their teams. 3. Teachers will use tools such as Jumproap, New Vision Tracker, ATS reports and other documents that track student attendance. 4. Team Leaders will meet once a month with the Attendance committee to follow up with outreach efforts. All members of the school community will be collaborate in maintaining and addressing school-wide instructional focus, goals, and vision. 1. A weekly faculty newsletter will be created and disseminated to entire 2018-19 CEP-RISE 65  faculty and staff whereby the principal articulates a goal for the week relevant to the school-wide focus. 2. A monthly newsletter will be created and disseminated to all families and students informing them of purposeful changes, updates and events and their connection to the school-wide focus. 3. Administration will work closely with all CBO partners to ensure that programs are regularly monitored and/or added to push the school-wide focus for all members fo the school community. Administration will meet with CBO partners/director at minimum once weekly to continually assess efficacy of current programs. 4. The Community School Director will connect with outside resource agencies to establish partnerships in the school for students and families. The director will also report concerns and questions that arise pertinent to current programs to CBO directors. 5. The attendance coordinator will send a monthly newsletter indicating the percentage of the 2018-19 CEP-RISE 66  student monthly attendance. 6. Conferences as needed with counselors, team leaders and administration. 4b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Annual goal will has been shared during SLT meetings, and will be shared during general parental meetings. Parent Coordinator, attendance coordinator, administration, teachers and teacher leaders will work together with parents in as needed conferences in order to improve students' attendance. Communication with parents will improve with monthly newsletters, face to face conferences, daily phone calls, text messages and parent-teacher meetings. Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, lead CBO’s community school budget, FSC Supports, etc. -Administration -Committees and Committee Leaders -INPS coach and PD facilitator -Teacher Teams and Teacher Team Leaders -Community School Director Programs will be structured to allow for regular team meeting time. A school-wide calendar will be created and disseminated including all committee, team, and leader meetings. Coordinating Council will be assembled will meet once weekly. Professional learning sessions every other Friday. Instructional Resources Laptops/Ipads/Chrome Books will be purchased for all student population New Vision Data Tracker ATS Reports 2018-19 CEP-RISE 67  Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Monthly attendance progress reports will be used to keep the progress of the goal especially during the months of September and December. In addition, parental outreach logs will be analyzed monthly to see the progress in parental outreach. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. New Vision Attendance Tracker Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 68  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 6 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 6.2 The school leader ensures that regular communication with students and families fosters their high expectations for student academic achievement. (aligned with Rise Key 2) 6.3 The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders so that student strength and needs are identified and used to augment learning. (aligned with Rise Key 4 and 6) 6.4 The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to support student success. (aligned with Rise Key 5) 6.5 The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school community members centered on student learning and success and encourages and empowers families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their children. (aligned with Rise Key 3) NA NA NA x Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: SOP(s) Addressed 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? We can recognize that our strength as a school community according to the 2017-18 School Quality Guide is our strong family-community ties in terms of our parental outreach. Moreover, 99% of families say that they are greeted warmly when they call or visit their school, and 98% of families say that they feel well-informed by the communications they receive from Pan American International High School. Furthermore, the 2014-15 Quality Review, 3.4 was recognized as an Area of Celebration for our school. The reviewer noted: "Parents offered praise in regards to communication from the school regarding their children and the information regarding their progress in meeting goals. Parents highlighted the school’s curriculum night when they have the opportunity to meet their child’s teachers and review the expectations for the class. They also referenced translated communication in their native language coming in multiple forms such as letters home, and phone calls from the Parent Coordinator, as well as email and the school website. All parents present stated that they have meet with the college advisor and their child’s guidance counselor to discuss expectations connected to college and careers." For the 2017-2018 school year, we maintained our monthly parent meetings. They continued to be well attended, as evidenced from our Curriculum Night when we had approximately 250 parents present. During our monthly parent association meetings, we brought in experts to provide workshops for families on financial literacy, substance abuse, improving communication with teenagers, the college application process, study skills, immigration and legal support, health care and mental health services, and other areas in which our parents have expressed interest. We also currently offer adult ESL classes on Saturdays. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 69  Although this is one of our areas of celebration, we continue to look for ways to engage every family at a high level. For the 2018-2019 academic year, we have planned for the following in order to share data to promote dialogue among parents, students,and school community members:  The Parent Coordinator will create and disseminate written and telephone notices to all parents, providing  them with current information they need to know in order to support their children’s education. In collaboration with the guidance counselors and community school director, a Spanish teacher will create a monthly newsletter for families, available in Spanish.  Workshops to help parents read their children’s transcripts, understand how to use of Jumprope (our online grading system) and learn about other topics that are relevant to parents, including information sessions about financial aid, and the college application process are facilitated by in-house and outside experts. Child Center of NY will run small parent groups and provide education on how to support their students emotionally. We will institute a Parent Orientation in August for all families that are new to the school community so that they fully understand the expectations of the school and how to best support their students. Our website will be updated to include a video message/verbal letter to parents from the Principal on a quarterly basis     We will extend our adult courses to include evening and Saturday, ESL, GED and Spanish literacy classes  During the school day, for a period, the teachers will engage in parent and family outreach, as designated by the UFT contract. Appointments will be made for parents to meet with teacher teams to discuss action plans that ensure their children’s academic success. Report cards will be generated 6 times per year (three per semester). The Attendance Team will continue meeting weekly to identify at risk, truant students and schedules conferences with families to assist in ensuring students come to school. This year, 9th and 10th grade students will have an advisor and advisory class. In addition to the Parent Coordinator reaching out to parents, now all students will have this advisor as their main point person and liaison between the school and home. Once a week, all grade team members will meet to discuss students' progress and advisors will lead outreach for those students they teach in advisory classes. In addition, our CBO, Urban Arts Partnership, will expand our community and family support in working with:  Our Community School Director will be working toward establishing our school as a "community center" after school hours. This will include bringing in programs and workshops for parents, families and students to participate.  ActionNYC - will continue to provide our students and their families with legal and social services both during  the school year and during the summer. A new advisory program, Peer Group Connection, will continue the partnership with Center for Supportive Schools, whereby 2 new faculty advisors and students will be trained to lead freshmen outreach groups and conduct family engagement nights Counselors will be providing socio-emotional circles every week for 10th graders during the Advisory class. Part 2 – Summative Vision for Strong Family and Community Ties What is your vision for strong family and community ties at your school? What opportunities exist for the school staff to know the students and their families in order to better communicate and partner with families and communities in the vision for the school? 1). Within the Community School model, how will families be welcomed? 2018-19 CEP-RISE 70  Our open door policy will continue as next year and beyond. Because our families often have long workdays, our school is open until 6 pm each day and on Saturdays. Our attendance teacher will follow a flexible schedule so that she can come in later in the day and visit homes after 5 p.m. or conduct Saturday visits in order to make contact with the parents. We are flexible when it comes to appointments for parents, because many do not know from one day to the next if they will be able to keep an appointment, given the many responsibilities they have. Therefore, our guidance staff, parent coordinator, teachers, community school director and administrators are accessible throughout the day, as needed, to support the families. School safety is polite and welcoming, and if a parent does not have an ID, they call us, so that we can come down to the main lobby to greet them. 2). How does the school provide support to families so that they understand and can take an active role in what their child is learning? Every Fall, we have a very well attended curriculum night where parents learn about their students' classes. This year, our teachers engaged parents in an interactive approach where parents were able to experience first-hand activities similar to those their students would throughout the course of the year. We will continue this practice for this next September. Additionally, we will have a 9th grade and new admission orientation for parents in August prior to the start of the academic year to ease the transition for the students and inform parents on how best to support their students. In addition, we are providing a Bridge program for all incoming 9th graders, where they not only get a Math, English and Leadership credit but also understand the demands of PAIHS. A monthly parent newsletter will be distributed including not only event information but important academic notices such as Portfolio Presentation expectations, Regents and SAT exam updates and calendars. Through our monthly Parent Workshops, we will continue to inform parents on a variety of topics relevant to their children such as the Common Core Standards, College Application and Financial Aid process, and PBAT preparation. During parent teacher conferences, teachers will meet individually with parents to discuss their child's progress and also the curricular expectations. Additionally, this coming year, most teachers will have a small advisory group for which they will be the main points of contact with the parents and keep the parents well-informed of their child's progress. 3 ). How would the school engage the community and families? All parents are invited to join the SLT and Parent Association meetings where they receive valuable information through workshops facilitated by Urban Arts Partnership and other community organizations on topics ranging from legal rights to understanding your teenager. We will continue to provide information about legal services, medical services and financial services through our main CBO and other organizations. We will also continue to provide Adult English classes and will also add GED classes to our parents during the week and also on Saturdays. This helps parents become more equipped in helping their children do their schoolwork. The Guidance counselors will also continue to provide workshops for parents on how to read a transcript and keep track of graduation requirements; financial aid night; the college application process; social-emotional issues and signs to look for; outside agencies that are available to support all family members, and more. The Parent Coordinator and the Technology Specialist will conduct an in-depth workshop in September so that parents can access our online grade system, “JumpRope.” Parents also receive important mailings, such as the quarterly newsletter, and phone messenger messages in both English and Spanish. 4). How do families partner with the school CBO? Our main partner, Urban Arts will link with other organizations to bring our families services that they will need. Our Community School Director has been working closely with the parent coordinator in an effort to reach out to a multitude of outside agencies focused on our parent and family needs. Examples include breast cancer screens, mental health support, drug abuse counseling, and legal aid. 5) What adult education offerings can your school community provide to families? 2018-19 CEP-RISE 71  We are currently offering adult ESL classes on Saturdays here at the school. This incoming school year we will offer GED classes due to parental demands. The Community School Director will continue to seek partners and resources to grow our adult education offerings. 6 ). How would families be able to access student data and progress? At new student orientation and again at the beginning of the year, there will be a workshop for all parents to help them access the JumpRope system and provide them with their own password. Throughout the year, parents will always be welcomed and helped in accessing the system, so that they can continue to track their child’s progress. Within the Community School model, how will families be welcomed into the school and made a part of the school community? What support will administrators, teachers, school staff and school safety officers be given to help create a welcoming environment? Will there be a dedicated space for families in the school? Our school has always prided itself on its open door policy. Parents do not need to make appointments as we have several members of our team that directly respond to parents and their needs. Because we are a campus school, parents come into the main lobby through the safety agents. The agents are familiar with the needs of our families and understanding that many are undocumented and may not have IDs. The agents usually call our main office and parent coordinator who personally goes down to the main entrance to pick them up and bring them to the appropriate office. Most of our parents are able to work directly with our parent coordinator who has her own large office to accommodate them comfortably. Our office staff supports waiting family members or escorts them to our guidance department which includes 4 members who work together to work closely with them as well. There are 4 support staff members stationed in the main office in addition to the Parent Coordinator who immediately and warmly greet and assist families. Additionally, the Community School Director has a large office on the main floor shared with our CCNY mental health provider to assist with families and students in crisis and assure privacy. How will the school identify and develop families to take leadership roles in school decision making/school governance structures? Currently, we have parents that not only serve on the PA and SLT, but also volunteer in our school to support students and families. These parents are able to assess the needs of the school, not just from the perspective of their students but from being part of the structures that help to run the school. Additionally, we extend opportunities for parents to facilitate components of our parent monthly workshops and we have parents who actively participate in the Scholastic Dual Capacity Training. How will the school engage the community and families? How will they ensure that teachers are able to learn from families about the children being taught? We will continue to have monthly parent meetings where in addition to our own internal informative workshops, there will also be a variety of community based organizations that will be present at those meetings to provide parents with a wider network of support. In addition to the contractual parent teacher conferences, this year the role of the advisors is to get to know the students more holistically - not just academically. Their charge will be to connect with the parents of their advisees frequently and then inform their team members of any important information relayed about the students. Through PGC, we will keep hosting Family Night which includes structured activities that allow parents to talk about their feelings and concerns about having a student in high school. All members of the staff/faculty are invited to this event. How do families partner with the school and CBO to support student success? Will there be dedicated space for families? 2018-19 CEP-RISE 72 Family partnerships with school: SLT, PGCstakeholder team, Parent Association, parent volunteers Family partnerships with CBO: adult learning classes Is there dedicated space for these partnerships? yes What data and student progress feedback loops will be present at the school to ensure that families knowledgeable of their children’s scholastic success, in addition to report cards? We currently use JumpRope as the centralized grading and academic progress platform. Last year, the school changed their grading policy to mastery-based grading. Jumprope supports this type of grading,. All parents will be provided an account and trained during our Curriculum Night to ensure they know how to access and use the system. Additionally, advisors will make periodic phone calls home and progress reports will be sent home at the end of each unit to inform parents of their students' progress. Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Rise Benchmarks. By June 2019, each marking period will culminate in a dedicated parent meetings focused on strategic action planning for students not meeting academic benchmarks as well as celebration of academic achievement resulting in:  An increase of 5% in credit accumulation/pass rate per semester Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Strong Family and Community Ties Annual Goal: Which school benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Strong Family and Community Ties Annual Goal? Attendance rate Graduation Rate 2018-19 CEP-RISE 73 Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Administration, Parent Coordinator, Community School Director, Staff, Teachers, Advisors, Guidance Counselors How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) - Attendance Rate will remain at 92% or higher - increase is students' performance as evidenced in scholastic reports, unit progress reports, and successful completion of first round of PBAT presentations Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? There will be an established, structured system for communication with parents and families. Parents, Families and Guardians, Students Attendance Rate Graduation Rate Academic year 2018-2019 1. Parents will receive phone calls, electronic, and paper mail informing them about upcoming events, meetings, etc. 2. Office personnel will constantly update and maintain accurate contact information for families and work with technology specialist to update JumpRope with this information. 3. A family newsletter, available in English and Spanish, will be created and distributed to families quarterly. 4. Teachers will engage in an hour of parental outreach every Wednesday in which they will update the electronic grading system, call parents, or meet with parents to 2018-19 CEP-RISE 74  discuss student progress. 5. A monthly Parent Association meeting will be hosted for parents to receive key information. 6. Parent-teacher conferences will be held 4 times throughout the year, including a Curriculum Night, for parents to learn about their child's academic progress. 7. Members of the attendance team will make daily phone calls and schedule conferences with families of students frequently absent or late. Any parent of an absent student will receive an automated phone call on a daily basis to alert them of child's absence. 8. Parents will receive a unique password for accessing JumpRope in order to track their student's progress. 9. Every student will have an advisor and advisory class. Advisors will be primarily responsible for reaching 2018-19 CEP-RISE 75 Academic year 2018-2019 Administration, Parent Coordinator, Community School Director, Increase in parent enrollment/attendance in adult learning classes and parent meetings Staff, Parent Association members Parents, Families and Guardians Attendance Rate Progress toward graduation Graduation Rate out to their advisees' families and serve as a main point person for families to get information about their child's progress. 10. Every month students with a monthly attendance rate less than 90% will receive a notification and conferences will be set up to generate an action plan. In partnership with our CBO and outside community resources, parents will be offered relevant workshops and trainings. 1. A free adult English literacy class will be made available to all parents at our school every Saturday. 2. A free adult English literacy class will be made available to all parents at a neighboring school weeknights. 3. The Parent Coordinator and administration will plan and conduct parent workshops that will help parents understand curriculum and assessment expectations. 4. The Parent Coordinator and 2018-19 CEP-RISE 76  Community School Director will work with the PA and outside resources/agencies to provide monthly workshops for parents on a variety of topics. 5. Parents will be trained on JumpRope to help them access student data reports. 6. A GED class will be offer for parents that are interested in completing their High School education. We will increase overall parental engagement in the school community. Parents, Families and Guardians Attendance Rate Graduation Rate Academic year 2018-2019 Administration, Parent Coordinator, Community School Director, Increase in events offered and parental engagement in these events Staff, Teachers Increase in parents participating in monthly meetings and events 1. We will host an annual family festival as well as a social services fair on campus at which time agencies such as the Immigration Coalition, The Door, ActionNYC, and Health Plus, among others, will provide our families with timely and important information about housing, medical, dental and mental health care, as well as legal matters. 2. We will expand our methods for inviting parents to special events to include paper mail, electronic 2018-19 CEP-RISE 77  correspondence, phone messenger blasts, phone calls, student backpack flyers, monthly family newsletters, and website updates. 3. We will have a parent orientation in early September to welcome new and returning families and establishing and connection with parents. 4. Our Peer Group Connection peer leaders will host a family night at the school for 9th grade students and parents Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, lead CBO’s community school budget, FSC Supports, etc. -Laptops, Smart boards/Technology for specific workshops/trainings -Skedula, School Messenger, School Website, Office Staff to create and issue mailings -Adult Literacy Teachers (English and Spanish) -Faculty and Staff (Parent Coordinator, Office Staff, College Readiness Team, Dean, Administration, Teachers) -Workshop Facilitators -General Supplies - Community School Director and CBO partners - Advisors and Peer Leaders 2018-19 CEP-RISE 78  1. Ensure workshops are calendared and disseminated to entire school community 2. Ensure website is maintained and updated 3. Ensure correspondence to parents is inviting, accurate and timely 4. Team Members will be designated with specific roles for parental outreach (Attendance coordinator for attendance issues/concerns, CBO and Parent Coordinator for organizing and promoting parent/family events, PGC Advisors and Peer Leaders for Family Night, Restorative Circles Coordinator and Dean for issues concerning discipline and mediation, established grade-specific guidance counselors and advisors for academic and social-emotional progress outreach) Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By February 1st, 2019, parent attendance to planning school-wide events will have increased by 5% as evidence on average attendance to parent teacher conferences and PA meetings. In addition, parental classes will have a minimum of 15 parents per class. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Parent attendance reports Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 79  Section 6: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) Program Description Directions: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) activities are directly aligned to the elements of the Framework for Great Schools, Rigorous Instruction, Supportive Environments, and Strong Family and Community Ties. ELT provides enriching educational experiences that happen outside of the traditional school day and blend skill acquisition, relationship-building and fun to foster academic and social-emotional growth. Summer learning, afterschool programming, and extended-day ELT models, when well-implemented, play a critical role in supporting students in all grades and ensuring that they graduate from high school, college and career ready. SED requires that Priority schools offer a minimum of 200 additional student contact hours as Expanded Learning Time in addition to the current mandated length of 900 hours of instruction per year (25 hours per week) in grades K-6 and 990 hours of instruction per year (27.5 hours per week) in grades 7-12. Effective ELT models will blend school staff with community partners, and will provide a balanced curriculum that can include ELA, math, STEM, arts, physical activity, and leadership development. Complete the sections on this page to demonstrate how the school will meet these requirements. Part 1 – ELT Program Goal(s) Describe the summative goal(s) of the ELT program for the 2018-19 school year. Goals for ELT should aligned to the Rise Benchmarks. How will the school will ensure that all students’ individual needs are served during the Rise ELT and how the school’s vision for ELT will impact both academic achievement and social emotional growth? Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we will implement a cohesive Renewal Hour program that addresses individual student needs and interests in order to achieve:  o a pass rate of at least 50% on the Common Core ELA Regents Exam o A pass rate of a least 60% on Algebra I Regents Exam  o An increase of 3% of students achieving the College Readiness benchmarks on the ELA and Algebra I Regents exams o A 200-point increase on the SAT exam for students who are programmed for SAT classes Part 2 – ELT Program Type Is the ELT program voluntary or compulsory? Voluntary X Compulsory Rise ELT – Describe what accountability structures the school will employ to ensure participation of all students, including special populations, will participate fully in Rise ELT. Additional ELT - If there is a voluntary ELT program in addition to the compulsory Rise ELT, indicate how you will actively encourage the participation of all students, with the goal of serving at least 50% of students. ELT is built into the daily program. It is not a stand-alone period at the beginning nor end of the day so all students must participate as part of their regular schedule. Part 3 – ELT Program Description Target Population: The ELT program for a Rise School will be offered to all students in the school. Describe how the school will meet the following SED requirements for an ELT program: How will the school integrate academics, enrichment, and skill development through hands-on experiences that make learning relevant and engaging? How will CBO staff and the school’s teachers be integrated to provide a seamless learning day?  Offer a range of activities that capture student interest and strengthen student engagement in learning so as to promote higher attendance, reduces risk for retention or drop out, and increases the likelihood of graduation. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 80   Actively address the unique learning needs and interests of all types of students, especially those who may benefit from approaches and experiences not offered in the traditional classroom setting.  What new content areas and opportunities will be offered to students? How will the school ensure all IEP and language mandates are met during ELT?  Contain components designed to improve student academic, social, and emotional outcomes, including opportunities for enrichment programs such as in music and art.  Ensure instruction in any core academic subject offered in the program will be delivered under the supervision of a teacher who is NYS certified in that particular content area.  How will community educators receive professional development? Are there plans to provide joint PD to school faculty and community partner staff?  What content will be led by pedagogical staff and what content will be led by CBO partners?  How will the school best utilize CBO partners to impact student achievement?  How will effective outreach be conducted to families?  How will programming be made easily accessible to students and families in order to encourage participation? In order to meet the SED requirements, a strategic teacher and student program has been created. Our teachers, through an SBO vote, determined it best to continue to follow a multi-session program. With the 2 sessions, we were able to create a student program whereby ELT is built in during the day and allows for purposeful structuring of the courses offered. For the 2016-2017 school year, our ELT offerings will not just include our current teaching staff but additionally we will acquire Teaching Artists through our CBO, Urban Arts Partnership, to allow for more variety. Students will continue to receive additional literacy classes in English and Spanish across all grades. We are also able to offer a variety of math classes, such as a Finance and Statistics course to further support our students with math literacy. Through our partnership with Urban Arts and funding from the 21st Century grant, 9th and 10th graders are receiving ELA - Art integration classes. The ELT has also allowed for us to add in Math and ELA CUNY LINCT courses for our senior classes. Additionally, students are receiving targeted courses such as Regents Preparation and intensive writing. We are also using programs such as Reading Plus across ESL classrooms to further build our students' literacy skills. Two classes of students (one in 9/10 and the other in 11th) will have a Rewards class to support in increasing their reading levels and abilities. ELT math teachers will be using Think Through Math as the primary platform for instruction and intervention in these designated periods. As part of the Renewal initiatives, we are also participating in the Writing is Thinking through Strategic Inquiry and 11th Grade Regents Inquiry PDs. Teachers and administration attend the WITsi PDs and we have been able to structure meeting time within the school day for members of the teams to engage in this purposeful inquiry process. During an orientation in early September as well as at our Curriculum Night, we will inform parents and families of our status as a Renewal School and the steps we are actively taking to improve student progress. This information was also shared with the SLT and PA. Official letters denoting our status and implications were mailed out in September as well. We will continue to keep our parents informed through monthly PA meetings, mailings, phone messenger, updates on our website, and monthly newsletters. Currently, as per the UFT contract, we offer professional development sessions to all faculty and staff here at the school every Monday. Additionally, teachers are being sent to a variety of workshops offered to us as a Renewal including WIT 101, WIT 103, WIT Bootcamp, WITsi Train the Trainer, EngageNY ELA and Math, New Visions trainings for Social Studies and Science curriculum, REWARDS and Think Through Math trainings, and Scholastic Dual Capacity Framework. Any such offerings that are pertinent to our family and parental outreach are also attended by our Community School Director. Additionally, our current CBO will be providing a series of PDs to ensure that the collaboration and integration courses we are currently offering are in accordance with the school's vision and are designed to push student progress. Teacher team time has been built into the schedule to allow teachers ample time to plan within their grade level teams as well as with their content teams. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 81  Through our CBO, we have acquired a social worker so that we have been able to expand our guidance and PBIS team. We have 3 guidance counselors, the SAPIS social worker, a college office intern, a full-time community associate who also supports with disciplinary challenges, and a guidance counselor who will serve as our Restorative Justice coordinator ensuring that disciplinary infractions are handled with a restorative, meditative approach across the school. Part 4 – ELT Program Implementation and Oversight Part 4a. Who will implement the ELT program? Who will oversee the program? 1. Indicate the key personnel that will be responsible for implementing and overseeing the ELT program, including school-based staff and any high-quality community partners that will be involved. If applicable, describe the scope of involvement of all community partners and how the joint ELT program is structured. How will the school assess the impact of ELT on individual student achievement and social emotional development? 2. 3. 1. Administration, technology specialist, guidance counselors - ensure program meets ELT guidelines - ensure students are programmed according to credit and academic needs - meet regularly to adjust schedules/programs as data is collected on efficacy of overall program 2. Grade, Content and Data teams - collect student data on an ongoing basis to determine impact and revisions needed to be made to curricula - use data to establish school-wide trends and patterns in relation to student skills and progress - identify and implement targeted instruction to improve student performance 3. Guidance counselors, Career Readiness Team, and Accreditation Policy Committee - monitor and track student data as pertaining to credit accumulation, readiness for graduation, college readiness - determine eligibility for Honor Roll, National Honor Society and academic scholarships 4. Community School Director, CBO directors, administration - monitor and review currently offered integration courses - provide feedback to teaching artists - ensure that teachers and teaching artists are effectively planning with school-wide instructional focus at the forefront 2018-19 CEP-RISE 82  - ensure that after-school program offers a variety of clubs to promote student participation and engagement 5. DataWise Committee, WITsi Teams, and Coordinating Council - engage in inquiry work centered on student learning (specifically on writing strategies and ELA and Algebra I Regents performance) - use collected student work and data and utilize protocols to assess student need - develop instructional strategies to support student learning and address targeted needs - use data to inform adjustments to ELT programming and support structures Part 4b. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. June 30, 2018 - June 2019 Part 5 – ELT Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the ELT program. - Administration (ensure accountability across all areas) - Teacher teams and team leaders (collect and track data, engage in inquiry teams) - Community School Director and CBO partners - Technology specialist/programming AP - Guidance counselors - Budget and Operations coordinator Resources/Scheduling Adjustments - hour long periods to accommodate instructional needs - 2 teacher sessions programmed - 80 minute PD time allotted each Monday afternoon - after school and Saturday program established (acquire permits and personnel) - teacher schedule with required team meeting time (content, grade, Regents inquiry, Data Wise, testing, college readiness, etc) Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support the ELT Program. Note: If the program is funded by 21st Century Community Center Learning Funds, it must be offered in conjunction with a high quality, high capacity community partner. 21st Century Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA P/F Set-aside C4E 2018-19 CEP-RISE 83  Title I 1003(a) Title III PTA Funded SIG Grant School Achievement Other Funding Part 6 – ELT Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By February 1, 2017, 40% of students will have increased their literacy skills by one grade level, as evidenced by assessment data from Reading Plus and other content-based assessments. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Reading Plus periodic assessments, Gates Macginitie Reading Test, Imagine Learning math assessments, ELA Common Core Regents, Algebra I Regents Exam, mock Regents exams in Algebra and ELA, REWARDS periodic assessments, HMH Reading and Phonics Inventories Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 84  Section 7: Community School Description Directions: The Community School strategy is directly aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. Community Schools bring schools and community partners together and integrate academics, health, youth development, and family engagement to provide students with the tools and opportunities they need to succeed. The Core Services in Community Schools are Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness. Part 1 – The Community School Program Goal(s) How is the Community School strategy integrated into academic instruction at your school, and what impact has it had on student academic outcomes? The lead CBO (Urban Arts) is dedicated to identifying the needs of the students and families of Pan American. Our programs during ELT and after-school will provide students with the opportunity to improve their English skills through the lens of arts education. A student-centered approach to education puts students at the core of the classroom experience. As opposed to traditional approaches, which create an information bottleneck by putting the teacher at the front of the classroom, a student-centered approach treats the educators as facilitators responsible for fostering an environment that promotes student engagement. Through relevant curricula, activities and performance-based assessment, UAP teaching artists and partnering teachers create learning experiences that give students choice and diverse opportunities to explore and show their understanding. Indicate the summative goal(s) of the Community School program for the 2018-19 school year. Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the school and CBO will create and implement a structured incentive system focused on attendance, behavior and family engagement goals, resulting in: * 5% decrease in infractions according to OORS Data * 5% increase in attitute towards fairness in discipline on School Quality Guide Survey on the part of teachers and students (only 82% of students agreed that discipline is applied fairly in the school) * 3 % increase in parents responding that they have attended a general school meeting/event (last survey was 92%) * A 2% increase in overall attendance Please answer the following question as it relates to meeting your Community School Program Annual Goal(s): How will achieving your Community School Goal(s)--in ELT, Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness--support your academic goals for students? Students find the learning process more meaningful when topics are relevant to their lives, needs, and interests. Students who are actively engaging in the arts have an increase in academic achievement. Our partnership with Child Center of NY (CCNY) has improved health and social services, and family support in the school. The lead CBO and CCNY will continue to host monthly parent meetings with topics pertaining to Health & Wellness. Part 2 – Community School Program Description Part 2a. Identify the CBO partnerships that you will develop in ELT, Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness, their target student population(s), and scope of the services provided. As well as supporting schools’ supportive environment and attendance work, CBOs should be helping to support your school’s instructional focus. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 85 CBO Partnership Target Population Scope of Service Urban Arts Partnership All students and families Make the Road NY All students and families Center for Supportive Schools Selected 11/12 grade peer leaders, 9th grade students and families, teachers and staff Field Support Center Teachers and Staff personnel Action NYC All students and families Child Center of New York All students and families Recruit and hire ELT Teaching Artists, secure internship opportunities and leadership programs for students, recruit and hire teachers for after-school programs and Saturday school for students and adults, network and secure partnerships with other agencies and CBOs that offer programs and opportunities for the school community Legal support, specifically for challenges pertaining to immigration law Through Peer Group Connection program students will be trained to facilitate advisory groups with freshman class and serve as mentors to these students, program also includes staff development and parental engagement events Training for staff/faculty on restorative practices and engaging families in a restorative approach Provide full day sessions throughout the year in which families and students can have private appointments in the school for legal advice and support, particularly pertaining to immigration law issues Support students and families particularly those dealing with substance and alcohol abuse, provide mental health workshops for families Part 2b. Describe how the school will partner with the Lead CBO to do the following: 1. Community Schools are expected to partner with a community-based partner organization (CBO) and together with members of the School Leadership Team, hire a Community School Director. The Director will lead implementation of the asset and needs assessment process, and other critically important coordinating activities. Indicate how you will leverage this aspect of the work. Community Schools are expected to personalize the needs of all students, through strategic programming and services, as determined by the asset and needs assessment, and must also offer Expanded Learning Time (ELT) and mental health programming. In completing this section, ensure that you think about how: (1) the right services are provided to the right students and families at the right time; and (2) how you will seamlessly coordinate services with instructional programming happening throughout and outside of the school day. Indicate how you will implement this work, and describe other programming you anticipate to be in place to strengthen this initiative. Community Schools are expected to emerge as Partnership Schools, which are places where parents and families feel welcome, actively participate in the conversation and decision-making around the renewal of their schools, and have many opportunities to advocate for their children. Monthly meetings and Community 2. 3. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 86  4. School Forums engaging families and community stakeholders will be a critical part of this family engagement strategy. Describe how you will implement this aspect of the work. Community School Principals are expected to meet on a weekly basis with their Community School Director, select Assistant Principals, key staff, and other CBOs, to analyze trends in data and case manage individual students. Data tools – including the New Visions Data Sorter - and training will be available for schools to use. Indicate how you will implement this aspect of the work. The Community Schools Director through Urban Arts Partnership met with the administration to discuss the needs of the school, academic, social, emotional, legal and enrichment needs. UAP later conducted a needs assessment with families to determine the more specific needs of the families. UAP has been involved with a variety of aspects that drive our renewal efforts. They have taken part in the AIR co-interpretation to help support our work around the Key Findings. The Community School Director is also reaching out to other CBOs who have expressed an interest in serving our families, in order to develop linkages that could bring those services to PAIHS. This year, the Community School Director of UAP will continue to be based at PAIHS. She will coordinate all academic and social emotional programs supported by UAP. Additionally, she will manage the linkages with other CBOs to help parents and children access the much-needed services these agencies provide. Co-Teaching with a UAP teaching artist and ELA teachers will continue this year. In collaboration with the CBO director, we have successfully programmed 7 part-time ELT Teaching Artists. 3 of them will be co-teaching during our regular school day and the other 4 will be teaching as an After-School Activity. Our full-time social worker works closely with the Restorative Justice and PBIS team to address the social-emotional needs of our students and provides crisis intervention services throughout the day. Referrals will be made to outside agencies for matters needing greater support. The social worker will also work closely with the guidance team to identify students in crisis. The addition of this social worker has also allowed for our 2 guidance counselors to concentrate on different parts of the job. We have one working solely on Academics for all grades and the other one working as a College Counselor. UAP will also provide expert guest speakers to address families during monthly Parent Association meetings about issues affecting them. UAP will continue to partner with our parent leaders, administration and the parent coordinator to continue to bring workshops to families that will help them access medical, academic and social-emotional services they did not previously know they could receive. Our monthly parent association meetings continue to be well attended due to our continued outreach and daily phone calls to home. Our open door policy also messages to parents that they do not need an appointment to be seen and helped by a member of the administration, CBO or of our staff. The Community School Director has also taken charge of our school-wide website, private media channel and social media sites so that families and students are made aware of events and opportunities at PAIHS. This year, the CSD will also continue to work with the Coordinating Council to be able to support with school-wide issues and initiatives as well as to be an integral part of the governance of the school. Her role has been to serve as a representative for the students and parents and sharing data collected about student and parent preferences for workshops, classes, programs and events. She also organizes meetings based on the discussions and findings to ensure that the allocation of the community schools grant closely matches the needs of the school. Part 3 – Community School Partnerships Oversight Part 3a. Key Staff and Partners 1. Name and describe the scope of involvement of all community partners working in the school (include partners supporting ELT, counseling, enrichment, etc.) 2. Name the members of your Community School Team and how meetings will be organized and structured to engage all stakeholders and be focused on results. 3. Explain data strategies including the use of the data sorter, and steps that the school will take to ensure that the appropriate interventions are provided to the right students 2018-19 CEP-RISE 87  -Urban Arts/Community School Director - will meet with administration to determine hiring needs for ELT classes that will be supported by Teaching Artists - will supervise TAs and ensure there is adequate time for co-planning with teachers and that programs and instruction offered are aligned with the school's instructional focus and goals - will support the school staff in securing access to events and opportunities outside of the school building that help push the instructional focus (i.e. academic trips) - will meet weekly with administration to discuss and assess effectiveness of ELT program and integration classes offered. - Administration will ensure that teacher teams and committees have adequate time built into the school day to meet and engage in inquiry work. They will also participate in the Data Wise and Strategic Inquiry teams to ensure follow-through of the work. Per session opportunities will be allocated for this work to continue after school hours. - APs will directly supervise the Restorative Justice team and Programming/ELT constituents to ensure that appropriate structures are in place to support students academically and emotionally - this includes facilitating structured weekly meetings to discuss concerns/needs and assess progress - conducting rounds of observations of ELT and integration classes to calibrate alignment with CSD, teachers, and TAs - engaging in inquiry work to align support structures and strategies used to student data Part 3b. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the Community School program. -Community School Director -Social worker -Guidance counselors and Restorative Justice Coordinator -Community organizations -Parent Coordinator -Administration -Technology Specialist/Programming specialist - CBO directors Schedule adjustments 2018-19 CEP-RISE 88  - ELT classes must be programmed into student schedule, co-planning time must be programmed for all affected teachers - after school and Saturday program must be scheduled - Community School Director must meet regularly with parent coordinator and administration to discuss resources needed, must be an integral part of PAIHS Coordinating Council - Periodic assessment of program must be calendared throughout the year Part 3c. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. July 2018-June 2019 Part 3d. Mental Health Work Plan Separate from this R-CEP, schools will complete a Mental Health Work Plan that will become an addendum to this document. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 89  Section 8: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) We use a combination of data sources, including: teacher diagnostics, official lowest third identification, scholarship reports, Mock Regents, pre and post unit assessments, and other assessment data. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) All students in grades 9-12 receive tutoring opportunities after school, as well as on Saturdays, for additional support, in order to build their literacy skills and improve their ability to participate and complete homework and projects in all of their content area classes. All students receive extra academic assistance through increased individualized attention as a result of small class sizes in all core subjects. Credit Accumulation Courses (APEX)-during school dayand Saturdays support to help students earn credit by meeting required seat time and doing appropriate work. AdditionalELA Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Students’ language is developed in all content areas classes and via after-school programs, which emphasize cooperative learning and verbal interaction with peers. Classes in our Saturday Academy and during our Before/After-school programs are delivered in small group instruction. Tutoring is available during our Before and After-School programs. One-on one tutoring is provided for students in need of completing their ELAand Personal Statement Portfolio. We also provide tutoring for those students in need of homework support. Differentiated instruction When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) All students who require extra support for the ELA exam receive an ELARegents Prep class during the day. They are also programmed to come to our Saturday Academy. We also offer one-on-one tutoring during our Before/After- school programs. We also offer ELALiteracy to our SIFEstudents and those identified in need duringour Before/After-school programs and Saturday Academy. Before School Program occurs during our zero period for 1 hour every day of the week. Our After-School program is scheduled Monday - Thursday for 2 hours. Our Saturday Academy is scheduled for 4 hours. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 90  Mathematics We use a combination of data sources, including: teacher diagnostics, official lowest third identification, scholarship reports, Mock Regents, pre and post unit assessments, and other assessment data. classesand intensive writing classes have been programmed into the school day throughout a lesson in a class CUNY LINCTcourse Classes in our Saturday Academy and during our Before/After-school programs are delivered in small group instruction. Tutoring is available during our Before and After-School programs. One-on one tutoring is provided for students in need of completing their Math Portfolio. We also provide tutoring for those students in need of homework support. Differentiated instruction throughout a lesson in a class CUNYLINCTcourse Allstudents have Reading Plus accounts and are using the program in regularly programmed ENLclasses As with English, students in grades 9-12 receive tutoring opportunities before, after school, during school, and on Saturdays. All students receive extra academic assistance through increased individualized attention as a result of small class sizes in all core subjects. Credit Accumulation Courses (APEX)-during school dayand Saturdays support to help students earn credit by meeting required seat time and doing appropriate work. AdditionalMath classesand Regents prep classes have been programmed into the school day All students who require extra support for the Algebra regents receive an extra Math Class during the regular school day. They are also programmed to come to our Saturday Academy. We also offer one-on-one tutoring during our Before/After- school programs. We also offer Math Literacy to our SIFEstudents and those identified in need duringour Before/After-school programs and Saturday Academy. Before School Program occurs during our zero period for 1 hour every day of the week. Our After-School program is scheduled Monday - Thursday for 2 hours. Our Saturday Academy is scheduled for 4 hours. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 91  Science We use a combination of data sources, including: teacher diagnostics, official lowest third identification, scholarship reports,pre and post unit assessments, and other assessment data. Social Studies We use a combination of data sources, including: teacher diagnostics, official lowest third identification, scholarship reports,pre and post unit assessments, and other assessment data. All students who require extra support receive individualized instruction daily. Students who require additional preparation receiveindividualized instruction daily. The use of the program Imagine Math during tutoring and at home Students in need of additional time and support for science receive tutoring during after school and on Saturdays. All students receive extra academic assistance through increased individualized attention as a result of small class sizes in all core subjects. Credit Accumulation Courses (APEX)-during school dayand Saturdays support to help students earn credit by meeting required seat time and doing appropriate work. Students in need of additional time and support for social studies receive tutoring during after school and on Saturdays. Small group & one-on-one tutoring Differentiated programming throughout a lesson in a class. Interdisciplinary approach to Science skills are developed via co-teaching with the Special Education teacher, which emphasizes cooperative learning and verbal interaction with peers. Project-based Learning and heterogeneous grouping provides opportunities for a variety of entry points to the curriculum for students who need additional support. Small group learning & one-on-one tutoring opportunities. Differentiated instruction throughout a lesson in a class. Skills are developed via after-school programs, which emphasize cooperative learning and verbal interaction with peers. After-school and Saturday opportunities are offered for students who need additional support Small group & one-on-one tutoring 2018-19 CEP-RISE 92  At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) a) Students are identified by referrals from teachers, administrators or guidance counselors b) Leadership Class c) Advisory Class Differentiated instruction throughout a lesson in a class. a) One-to-one Students who are exhibiting at-risk behaviors or are having difficulty adjusting to school meet individually or in small groups with their counselors, or the social worker, or social worker interns. b) Leadershipclass is conducted using the restorative circles approach. 2 Teachers for 24 students. a) Guidance counselors, social worker interns and social worker provide social/emotional services to students throughout the school day, including before and after school b) This leadership class is conducted during our regular school day. c) Our Advisory class is conducted during our regular school day. c) Each Advisory class has 25 students. reinforce skills across Humanities classes Credit Accumulation Courses (APEX)-during school dayand Saturdays support to help students earn credit by meeting required seat time and doing appropriate work. a) Counseling Students who need individual or group counseling services are provided these during their elective periods, lunch, and gym. Guidance counselors, the social worker internand Social Workermeet in individual sessions with students who exhibit at-risk behaviors, while also meeting with and advising families on free options for more in-depth counseling outside of school. Counselors also meet with teachers weekly to help develop strategies to support at-risk students in class b) Leadership class is conducted by 2 teachers. Students in 11th and 12th grade are programmed in 2018-19 CEP-RISE 93  this leadership class (PGC). c) Advisory will be conducted by the guidance counselors 2018-19 CEP-RISE 94  Section 9: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) There are 75 students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending our school. 70 of them are under the Double Up category. 3 students are currently living on a Shelter and 2 students are under the category Other Temporary Living Situation. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 95  Anytime we find out that a student is in temporary housing there are several services that we provide. We immediately provide basic emergency supplies such as school supplies (notebooks, book bags, pens, pencils, erasers, etc.) books, uniforms, glasses. Along with these basic instructional materials, we also provide to these students educational services such as counseling, family therapy, etc. We also design an individualized strategic plan to help the STH students. Within this plan, we offer outside and inside intervention programs such as one-on one counseling sessions, group counseling and after school activities to involve the students in academic programs to maintain students' focus on education. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 CEP-RISE 96  Section 10: Title I Program Information Directions:  All schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. -The Principal and Assistant Principal, team leaders and a guidance counselor make up the hiring committee at Pan American International H.S. After a series of Professional Development Workshops in Spring 2016, facilitated by the Teacher Staffing Support Manager at the DOE, the Hiring Committee created a rubric and designed questions aligned to Competencies of Danielson to help them evaluate candidates, so that we hire personnel whom are committed to serving our students. - Recruitment of highly qualified teaching candidates through both the NYCDOE Open Market system and via the Internationals Network for Public Schools, a non-profit organization that oversees and coordinates activities amongst the NYCDOE’s 15 International High Schools. Through our membership in this network, we have access to resumes of the school system’s most highly qualified pedagogues with vast experience working with ELLs, who comprise all of the international High Schools’ student populations. -The administration works closely with the INPS network and Central HR point to ensure that non-HQT meet all required documentation and assessment deadlines. -Coaches and mentors are assigned to support novice, inexperienced, and teachers in need of instructional support -Administration conducts regular informal observations of teachers and provides non-evaluative feedback. -Administration provides regularly structured Common Planning Time -Administration provides support to teachers with unit plans and instructional development. -INPS professional development is provided to teachers in order to build capacity. -Teachers are provided with leadership opportunities. Data indicates that our school's percentage of HQT is below 100% because few teachers are working on their dual license. For example, we have a Social Studies teacher who is currently working on a TESOL license. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 97  We have a high percentage of retention. In order to ensure this process, we provide multiple opportunities to teachers to develop their leadership skills. We also provide ways to ensure teacher's input and voice. We have established a Coordinating Council to promote participation in school decision making. The Coordinating Council is composed of grade team leaders, discipline content team leaders, Peer Collaborative Teacher Leaders, and Administration. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the strategies and activities for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, staff, and paraprofessionals that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). 1. -An INPS Leadership Coach consults and meets regularly with administration to build their capacity and to provide high quality PD. 2. -All teachers receive specialized training in ENL strategies and working with ELLs through networkwide professional development through the Internationals Network for Public Schools, 3. -INPS PD and other research-based PD opportunities are shared with all staff. 4. -Mentors provide a minimum of 2 hours a week of individualized coaching to new teachers. 5. -We have requested assistance from the Field Support Center to provide us with a series of PD about Academic Discourse. We have started the Academic Discourse series provided by the ENL Instructional Coach from the Field Support Center. -Instructional coaches from Generation Ready and INPS provide support to teachers. -External Professional development opportunities are made available to all teachers Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/information, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments 2018-19 CEP-RISE 98  Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. We are currently utilizing the DataWise Inquiry Process for ELA and Mathematics. We have provided professional development to a teacher that led to a DataWise Champion Coach certificate. The DataWise Champion provided support to another 2 teachers assisting them in leading their department throughout the Inquiry Process. The ELA Department has engaged in this Inquiry process for 2 full years now and will continue during this upcoming year. The Math Department has completed its first full year and will continue with this Inquiry process during 2018-2019. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds enables, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (R-CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Title I Part A (Basic) Title I School Improvement 1003(a) Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funds Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 250,530.00 ___ _____ 0 Info Not available yet Info Not available yet 3,925,982 X X X X X Column B Section Reference(s) 5a, 5b, 5c, 5d, 5e, 8 5b, 5e, 8 5a, 5c, 5d, 5e, 8 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 99  Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I School Improvement 1003(a): To support implementation of school improvement activities identified through the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) reviews or a school review with district oversight and included in the DCIP/R-CEP.  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: To support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs.  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan.  Title I Priority and Focus School Parent Engagement Set-aside: Additional set-aside is to enable greater and more meaningful parent participation in the education of their children. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 100   IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process, including Title I 1003(g) SIG funds: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 101  Section 11: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current R-CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Pan American International High School (24Q296), in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students Pan American International High School (24Q296) will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy in English and in Spanish, Math and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 2018-19 CEP-RISE 102  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. The school will maintain this information. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 2018-19 CEP-RISE 103  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; It is also important to mention that Pan American International H.S has an open door policy. Parents/Guardians are welcomed at any time during our school hours and even during our After-school activities' hours. The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school's monthly newsletter and web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. PAN AMERICAN INTERNATIONAL HIGH SCHOOL School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP-RISE 104  Pan American International High School (24Q296), in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; 2018-19 CEP-RISE 105  ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; International's Night, Art Exhibition Evening Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; 2018-19 CEP-RISE 106  ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; attend after school activities if school sees the need ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 107  2018-19 CEP-RISE 108  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP-RISE 109  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information 9 3 6 Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: All of our ENL teachers are fully licensed. And all of our content area teachers receive more than 10 hours of ENL training annually through QTEL, DELLS and INPS. Most of our content area teachers are working towards an ENL extension. All classes are mix-graded and heterogeneously grouped, with students working in small, collaborative teams to support one another in English, Native Language development and content area mastery. As students move from entering to commanding levels of English language acquisition, assignments and material become increasingly more challenging while remaining linguistically and cognitively appropriate. Specific language strategies are used to assist our ELL students in their learning through paraphrasing and enhancement of first and second languages including: peer mediated instruction; language experience approach; content-based academic language learning approach (CALLA); hands on, student centered, project based curriculum and planning; semantic mapping; total physical response (TPR); and multilingual/ multilevel materials. Supplemental Title III Instructional Program: The Title III program provides English Language Learners with supplemental instruction in a Saturday Academy - Literacy Program as well as in our Before and After School programs. The instructional programs will service ELLs in mixed grades of high school students who score at the Entering, Emerging, Intermediate and Advanced levels on the NYSESLAT. All of our supplemental Title III Instructional programs will have a licensed ENL teacher working directly with the content area teachers to plan curriculum and co-teach the activity. Saturday Program Literacy/Math Enrichment Class — classes will meet a total of 30 sessions beginning in mid September through mid June, from 8:30 a.m. to 12:30 P.M. Students will be served in small group classes. Group size will be maintained at 15 - 20 students per teacher. This class will be targeted to Entering and Emerging level students based on their NYSITELL score. Each class will always have one certified fully licensed ENL teacher and one certified fully licensed content area teacher that will be rotated given the focus of the site that is being visited to provide supplemental instruction in alignment with the New York City and New York State content and performance standards. Instruction will focus on developing skills in both English and Math Literacy using English acquisition through new vocabulary learning, oral practice through discussions, learning oral and language skills through conducting interviews, writing newspaper articles, essays and presenting debates around literature. These strategies will help students achieve higher scores on the NYSESLAT and English Regents. Instructional supplies to be purchased will be notebooks, graphing calculators, general supplies, and textbooks. Through the use of literature style book clubs, students will be exposed to texts that they can relate to and will conduct a project based on those texts. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 110  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information ELA class for those students that have already achieved Transitioning and Expanding Level based on their NYSESLAT score. Students in these classes are students who have taken the Regents previously and have not passed. These classes will target the skills the students are lacking in taking the tests. PBAT (Portfolio Based Assessments) preparation/ mentoring will also be provided for those students in need of extra help. Before School Math Enrichment: Instruction will focus on developing skills in both English and Math Literacy using English acquisition through new vocabulary learning, oral practice through discussions, map skills, and problem solving. Students will use journals and other manipulatives to learn common core mathematical concepts. The students attending this class will be identified based on low scores in the Algebra Regents. Materials for this class include Algebra Common Core by Pearson, Fraction and Decimals Bingo Games, Mathematical Videos in Dropbox, and other teacher created materials according to the needs of the students. The class will be taught by a Bilingual Math Teacher. This class meets 5 days a week from 7:15 - 8:15. Before School ENL support class will meet 5 days a week from 7:15 - 8:15. This ENL class is for those students who have tested as entering or emerging on NYSESLAT/NYSITELL During this class students received support in improving all 4 skills: listening, speaking, reading and writing skills. Students spend time reading and analyzing literature. The teacher provides literacy-focused classes to this targeted group of students. In addition, the instructor provides writing instruction and tutorials. Both classes involve all 4 skills. This class will be taught by a dual license ENL/ELA teacher. Math enrichment class will be taught by a licensed Math Teacher who is currently working on his ENL extension. The ENL class will be taught by an ENL teacher. After School Instruction Program: We will be targeting enrichment in English and Math. ENL and content area teachers in Social Studies, English and Math provide support to students in all of the ENL sub-groups in small group settings for four hours per week. The targeted students are 9th - 10 th grade Entering and Emerging ENL students. The main focus of this program will be to increase the literacy skills in all of the content areas listed, Social Studies, Math, English and Science. The program will support students to increase their literacy skills across disciplines by enhancing student reading and writing through support in developing vocabulary and grammar skills as well as providing students the chance to improve their academic reading across disciplines. Finally students will have the opportunity to further develop their listening and speaking skills by practicing presentations. The program will place an emphasis on developing all literacy skills which will help to develop students college readiness. The program will consist of three classes, each class will meet twice per week with two teachers and have 20-25 students in each of the supplemental Title III classes. These classes are co-taught by one ENL certified teacher working together with one content area fully certified teacher. One class will have one ENL certified teacher working with one certified Math teacher; one class will have one ENL certified teacher working with one certified Biology teacher; and one class will have an ENL certified teacher working with one certified English teacher. The classes will meet weekly for a total of 60 sessions from mid September through early June for two hours per class. The classes will meet on Tuesdays and Thursdays from 4:00 - 6:00 pm. Instructional materials will include, teacher hand made materials, scientific calculators, graphing paper, composition notebooks, dictionaries, construction paper and graphing calculators. For all these classes, teachers will use Google sheets to record student attendance. Also administration and teachers will send letters home in the parents preferred language. As we have done in the past, teachers will be provided with previous year sample letters. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 111  Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Professional Development Program – Describe the school’s professional development program for teachers and other staff responsible for the delivery of instruction and services to limited English proficient students. Title III professional development program will focus on providing teachers with various instructional strategies for teaching English Language Learners. It will also focus on how to prepare ELLs to meet and exceed the NYC and NYS performance and learning Standards and achieve higher scores on all city and state assessments. Teachers participating in the professional development workshops will be paid in the trainee rate and teacher trainers will be paid at per session rate. These professional development sessions will be facilitated by fellow faculty members, INPS, and school administrators. We will utilize the services of Trevor Safford, elite instructional coach from INPS. He will conduct all of the sessions listed below. We strongly believe that these PD sessions will positively impact the progress of ELLS. The strategies as well as the rationale behind these professional development sessions have proven themselves to be effective in past years as well as in other Internationals Schools. In addition to our regular weekly professional development meetings held during Fridays from 2:10 to 3:30 pm. Teachers have the opportunity to attend outside professional development workshops offered throughout the year by: International Network for Public Schools (INPS), various PD options sent throughout the year by DELLS, and Field Support Center. Since Pan American is comprised of 86.2% of ELLS and 13.6 Former ELLS, all PD was created to directly impact the academic achievement of ELL students. We have already started a series of Professional Development about Academic Discourse. This series are delivered by the Field Support Center's ENL Coach. Participants in the PD will be comprised of the following: 6 Math Certified Teachers, 5 Science certified, 6 Native Language (Spanish) certified teachers, 1 Art certified teacher, 5 Social Studies certified teachers, 2 Physical Education certified teachers, 1 Special Education certified teacher, 4 ELA certified teachers and 6 ESL certified teachers. Planning Timeline: 1. One 1-hour session on promoting constructive conversation and accountable talk around all class content with ELL students. (Provided by INPS coach) on September 2018. This PD is necessary in our school since our common language is Spanish. Teachers will learn of strategies and tools to guide conversations and discussions around the content of the lesson. This PD will be attended by all teachers listed above. 2. One 1-hour session SIFE Workshop to support our ELL SIFE students. Majority of our students are SIFE. Teachers struggle with how to differentiate instruction for SIFE students. This PD provides some differentiation strategies and literacy skills for the teachers. Our students are grouped in mixed levels so all teachers have SIFE students in their classes. This PD will take place in September 2018 and will be attended by all staff. 3. One 1-hour session on strategies for language and content integration and supporting our ELL students in writing portfolio projects. (Provided by INPS coach) Language Objectives are essential to our planning. Teachers must have learning target as well as language objectives in 2018-19 CEP-RISE 112  Part C: Professional Development their lessons. This PD teaches them how to create objectives that go beyond vocabulary. This PD will take place in October and will be attended by all staff. 4. One 1-hour session on project design to support higher order thinking and writing skills with our ELL students. (Provided by INPS coach) Through observation, we have noticed a low level of RIGOR in instruction for our ELLS. Teachers are going to be given PD on how to incorporate DOK in their lessons through writing. This PD will take place in November 2018 and will be attended by all staff. 5. One 1-hour session on sharing interdisciplinary projects looking through the lens of scaffolding for our ELL's. (Provided by INPS) This PD will take place in October and will be attended by all staff. 6. One 1-hour session on promoting student discussions in class to show student understanding of content. This PD will take place in November 2018 and will be attended by all staff. 7. One 1-hour session on the use of native language in the classroom to promote English language development. (Provided by INPS Coach and Administration). This PD will take place in December 2018 and will be attended by all staff. Once again this coming year 15 schools in the Internationals Network for Public Schools (INPS) will jointly plan and coordinate after school workshops to support teachers. Staff from all fifteen schools will continue to be engaged in workshops to discuss second language acquisition, project based education, collaborative learning, thematic interdisciplinary instruction, scaffolding, and language development in the content area. Over the next year, Internationals High School will conduct workshops and staff development on curriculum sharing within the school and will work jointly with the other fourteen INPS schools to conduct curriculum sharing so that teachers and staff can benefit from shared knowledge and professional development. One all day workshop will be held on Staff Development Day, during election day in November 2018. It is also important to mention that teachers will attend the summer institute on Aug. 23rd and 24th. We have created a binder called Professional Development. In this binder we combine all agendas and attendance sheets from every single professional opportunity that we provide in our facility. We also require teachers to provide agendas of all those professional development opportunities we have asked them to attend. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Title III program will provide ELL parents/guardians with the opportunity to attend a variety of literacy, math, and homework workshops, so that they can better assist in the education and learning of their children at home. Teachers will be paid per session rate. Instructional materials will be purchased to support parent activity. Parent Workshops- A series of 2-hour workshops will be held on different topics of interest to our parents. Each year our PA assembles a list of suggested topics and the school does its utmost to accommodate these workshop requests. The parent workshops will be facilitated by teachers and guidance counselors from our school as well as from Urban Arts staff (our CBO partner) and CCNY (Child Center of New York) for Social Emotional Support. All parents are targeted for 2018-19 CEP-RISE 113  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities these workshops. The workshops are facilitated in English and Spanish as needed. This year’s topics will include: Financial Planning, College and Career Exposure, Law and Immigration, How to help your children to learn, JumpRope training, etc. Pan American International High School provides all parents including ELL parents/guardians with the opportunity to attend a variety of literacy, math, and homework workshops, so that they can better assist in the education and learning or their children at home. Parents are notified of all workshops in several ways: Letters are both mailed and backpacked home. The school also sent our telephone messages via school messenger. In addition, the parent coordinator and other school staff attempt to reach all parents directly by phone. Planned workshops are: The following supplementary parent engagement workshops are in addition to and do not include the mandated parent meetings. • One 2-hour session on the College Application process and how to deal with financial aide forms and college financial aid bureaucracy. This workshop is geared to help the parents of our ELLS navigate the college application system and to learn necessary vocabulary needed to apply for financial aid to colleges. Facilitated by Shirley Torres our licensed Guidance Counselor. • Two 2-hours session on ELL student progress towards graduation and the extra help opportunities and extra curricular activities available to support our ELL students. The focus will be on how parents of ELLS can help their Entering and Emerging students pass the ELA and Algebra Regents and do well in their classes. Facilitated by Urban Arts CBO partner and Administrators. • One 2-hour session on the communication and relationship between parents and their teenagers on how to increase parental involvement in their child's school work. Focus on sentence starters and role play to support our ELL parents deal with their teenagers. They will be given tools to help their children through the daily work load. Facilitated by school administration. These workshops will take place once a month. We have decided to coordinate the sessions around the third Wednesday of each month. We maintained records of these meetings in a binder called Parental Engagement Workshops. In these binder, we keep agendas as well as attendance sheets. We also keep a sample copy of each invitation made. These invitations are in Spanish and in English. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 114 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 2018-19 CEP-RISE 115  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 24 School Name Pan-American International High School Borough Queens School Number 296 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal George Badia Coach Luis Duany ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Kristin Donnelly Teacher/Subject Area Bernadette Coyoy/ Social Studi Teacher/Subject Area Juan Luque/ENL Related-Service Provider Joseph Indelicato Superintendent Elaine Lindsey Assistant Principal Guido Gonzalez Coach Boma Jack School Counselor Franchesca Rivera / Shirley To Parent Jacqueline Torres Parent Coordinator Juana Adames Field Support Center Staff Member Lawrence Pendergast Other (Name and Title) Fatima Morales/NLA Teacher C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 3 5 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 8 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics 2018-19 CEP-RISE 116  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 448 Total number of ELLs 389 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 86.83% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 2 4 3 K Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 0 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? 1. This year we are using the Do-it-Yourself assessment developed by the Performance Standards Consortium as an assessment tool. This data, along with data yielded from DORA in both English and Spanish, show that our students enter our program with a wide variety of prior schooling, academic skills, and literacy skills (in both English and their native languages). However, it is significant to note that this data demonstrates that a considerable number of students are significantly behind in reading level in their native language, making them SIFE students, and this reaffirms why the Native language arts program is an integral part of our school's literacy instruction. These data provide teachers with the information they need to properly differentiate their content area, project-based curricula, which is delivered to a student population that is heterogeneous on many fronts. It appears that over the course of 4 years, most students improve their literacy skills, but the majority remain at the transitioning 2018-19 CEP-RISE 117  level. This data is used to inform our curriculum, instructional approaches and interventions. Our teachers work to develop reading and writing skills through all content areas, specially the Native Language Arts class. Through this consistent reinforcement of reading and writing in their classes and in our after-school programming, students will see an improvement in their scores over time. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Grade Team and Content Team meetings that allow for teachers to engage in establishing action plans. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? The success of our program is measured through the analysis of a wide array of data sources, including: • 6 year graduation rate- 78% • Credit Accumulation for Lowest third- 52% for 1st year and 85% for 2nd year. • Regents pass rate- ELA Pass Rate 60% • Attendance rates- 92% • Learning Environment Survey – teacher results- 10% higher than city-wide average. The success of our program is determined in a variety of ways. Since students come in with different levels of proficiency in English and their own native language we need to look a variety of assessments. The NYSESLAT scores helps us to determine whether the teaching methodologies we use are effective in helping student acquire the English language. The English and Math regents are used to determine if we meet our benchmarks in a given year. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? We have established a team structure across discipline/content and across grade level. This structure helps to create an action plan based on the found data. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] N/A 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. - Our population is incredibly heterogeneous in terms of language ability. - The majority of our students who are newly arrived to the country and attend our school are entering ELLS. - Most students classified as entering and emerging are situated in the lower grades (9 th and 10 th ) while most students deemed transitioning, expanding and commanding are in the higher grades (11 th and 12 th ). - After analysis of our data with the ENL department and our AP, we have found that since the majority of entering and emerging ELLS are located in the Junior Institute Grades (9-10), we have programmed them for Electives that promote their English language acquisition. All Junior Institute students take electives in either Theater or Art which helps them with their Listening/Speaking skills so they can develop communicative competence. Another pattern we have observed is that in the Senior Institute, a considerable portion of students do not test commanding because there is a disparity between their reading/writing and their listening/speaking scores. Students in the Senior Institute need continued literacy instruction, especially in the academic content areas, so Reading/ Writing across the disciplines has been a major focus in terms of programming and instruction. Senior Institute students are programmed into electives that promote content area literacy and help them to acquire the academic literacy skills necessary to test commanding on the NYSELSAT and pass the Regents. As a result, an analysis of the data from these tests has affected instruction in that we continue to explore ways to more effectively incorporate language development in all content area curricula, which means increased professional development for all teachers in ways of doing so. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? 2018-19 CEP-RISE 118  We have a cabinet (coordinating council) meeting in which the findings are discussed. We also have a team structure that allows room for conversations around action plans that target the findings. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. The organizational model of our school is based on the Internationals Approach for ELL education, where instruction is delivered collaboratively by teams of teachers who plan instruction inter-disciplinary and in content areas to support the language needs of our students. While teachers are responsible for teaching individual classes, they plan in collaboration and co-teach classes where appropriate and able. We utilize a hybrid of program models at PAIHS. Students are blocked together into strands that move together throughout the instructional day. These strands are heterogeneously grouped, so students at different levels of English language proficiency are in the same classes together in each class. In addition, students receive 240 minutes of ENL stand alone. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? All students are carefully programmed to be certain they have the mandated number of ENL and ELA instructional minutes each year through the teachers on their team. As of right now, we have 5 teachers who are ENL certified, 1 per each instructional team. In addition, the content area teachers are trained extensively in language development and ENL methodologies through a variety of mechanisms which are outlined below. All of this helps to assure that entering and emerging students receive the mandated 540 ENL minutes per week, transitioning and expanding receive the mandated 360 ENL minutes per week and commanding students receive the mandated 180 ENL minutes and ELA minutes per week. Classes are 60 minutes in duration, so a student will meet with his or her English teacher 4 times a week and his ENL teacher at least 3 times a week, plus the additional ENL time provided by our dual certified ENL and content area teachers. HLA usage/support is included for 25% of the instructional time for all ELLs through 1 period of HLA instruction administered to all students 4 times a week. Teachers design curriculum so that all students have multiple opportunities to read, write, speak and listen in their native languages. In the International Model all students are mixed in heterogeneous group of proficiency levels. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. All students take Math, Science, Social Studies, Arts, Home Language Arts, and ENL and/or English classes each year. The Internationals Approach is premised on the idea that every content area teacher is responsible for English language instruction and as result all content area teachers are trained in ELL methodologies that are targeted to their respective subject areas. As previously stated, students are programmed into teams that travel together throughout the day which facilitates interdisciplinary Instruction by teachers of each team, who work together to develop curriculum materials that address the 2018-19 CEP-RISE 119  language needs of the students in addition to the content area understanding and skills. The primary language of instruction in content area classes is English, with the exception of Home Language Arts and Math which are conducted in Spanish in the Junior Institute. In the Senior Institute, all content area classes are in English except for Home Language Arts. Interdisciplinary teams meet weekly to plan instructional units that create cross-content connections and target specific skills that are required under the Common Core Learning Standards, especially within the STEM and Humanities disciplines. Home Language Collaboration is a major instructional focus of the Pan-American International High School. Students work in groups to complete collaborative tasks that develop both language and content knowledge simultaneously. The school makes a significant investment in professional development to make sure all of our teachers in every subject area have the necessary skills and conceptual understanding of language development to deliver the needed instruction that meets students’ needs. This professional development is ongoing and sustained from year to year. Most of the teachers are working towards their ENL license and best practices for ELLs. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Throughout the school year, students are evaluated in Spanish to assess how their Home Language Literacy is continuing to develop as a result of the Home Language Arts program that is offered at our school. As Diagnostic Assessments, we administer the Spanish LAB when students first arrive to our school and are identified as possible ELLs whose home language is Spanish. Also, we administer the DORA, Diagnostic Online Reading Assessment, in both English and Spanish to assess students reading level in Spanish. The data collected from this assessment is used to track how home language literacy is developing since their arrival to our school. After two years of Home Language Arts in Spanish, all students are placed in Advance Placement Spanish Language Class. Students have the opportunity to show proficiency through the AP Spanish Language class and after this year, students are then registered in AP Spanish Literature. Students in the AP Spanish class are eligible to take the AP Spanish Exam which is offered in our premises in May each year. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status The Internationals’ pedagogical approach to educating English language learners is based upon 5 Core Principles: • Heterogeneity and collaboration : schools and classrooms are heterogeneous and collaborative structures that build on the strengths of each member of the school community to optimize learning • Experiential learning : expansion of the 21st century schools beyond the four walls of the building motivates adolescents and enhances their capacity to successfully participate in modern society • Language and content integration : strong language skills develop most effectively in context and emerge most naturally in a purposeful, language-rich, interdisciplinary, and experiential program • Localized autonomy and responsibility : linking autonomy and responsibility at every level within a learning community allows all members to contribute to their fullest potential • One learning model for all. Every member of our school community experiences the same learning model, maximizing an environment of mutual academic support. Thus all members of our school community work in diverse, collaborative groups on hands-on projects; put another way, the model for adult learning and student learning mirror each other. a. We have found that many SIFE students tend to be under-reported or mislabeled in ATS. As a result, we rely heavily on the informal interview that is conducted during enrollment with Parents to elicit information about students' past educational history and attendance. Moreover, the process to identify SIFE students is by utilizing the Oral Interview Questionnaire as a first tool and then by testing students in their home language. We will be utilizing the LENS for identification and placement. In addition, we also utilize data from the Spanish LAB and DORA to identify students who are significantly behind grade level (more than 2 years) in their home language. In order to provide additional support in the content area classes, home language resources are made available in those classes. Furthermore, Home Language Arts is provided to all students including SIFE students to promote and develop bi-literacy in all our students. Lastly, as an additional intervention we used data from diagnostics and interviews with students to create a PM school SIFE class that targets emergent literacy in both Spanish and 2018-19 CEP-RISE 120  English. b. Newcomer ELLS who have been in US schools for less than 3 years are heterogeneously grouped in ENL and content area classes with peers of varying English Language Proficiency and academic skills. Instruction reflects the International Approach, so instruction is differentiated within heterogeneously grouped classes so that students can help each other increase their English language proficiency. Newcomers may also elect elective classes such as Theater and Chorus, which are geared towards increasing their English language proficiency. Furthermore there are various clubs such as Explorers Club, LULAC, Beginner English club where students develop their English Language Proficiency beyond the academic day. In addition, students receive HLA classes to improve their native language skills. We are creating a strong educational background for this group of students. We offer additional support to the Newcomers with one-on-one tutoring with emphasis in literacy, parental involvement, native language libraries and dictionaries, implementing alternative strategies, and the utilization of technology as an instructional tool to improve academic performance. c. Developing ELLs, receiving services for 4 to 6 years, are placed in heterogeneous ENL and content area classes with ELL peers of varying academic, linguistic, and ethnic backgrounds. Instruction in all classes is project-based and incorporates multiple strategies for the acquisition of both language and content, including: layered curriculum, leveled reading materials, jigsaw readings, collaborative group work, oral presentations, project-based assessments, scaffolding, differentiation, and QTEL strategies. d. Long-Term ELLs are placed in heterogeneous ENL and content area classes with ELL peers of varying academic, linguistic, and ethnic backgrounds. Instruction in all classes is project-based and incorporates multiple strategies for the acquisition of both language and content, including: layered curriculum, leveled reading materials, jigsaw readings, collaborative group work, oral presentations, project-based assessments, scaffolding, differentiation, and QTEL strategies. Long-term ELLs also have opportunities to maximize their proficiency through Internships outside of school or Regents Prep classes to prepare for the specific Regents examinations they have not yet passed. e. Former ELLs are a population of students who also benefit from the collaborative nature of the Internationals Model. Instruction in all classes, including those with Former ELLS, are project-based and incorporate multiple strategies for the acquisition of both language and content, including: layered curriculum, leveled reading materials, jigsaw readings, collaborative group work, oral presentations, project-based assessments, scaffolding, differentiation, and QTEL strategies. We encourage Former ELLs to choose linguistically demanding roles in collaborative tasks and help others who are less proficient in English with their language acquisition. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? ELLS-SWD are placed in heterogeneous classes with ELL peers of varying academic, linguistic and ethnic background. Furthermore, ELLS-SWD receive instruction in the form of SETSS classes or other required classes where our Special Educator, Joseph Indelicato oversees that students receive the services required as per their IEP's. In these classes, teachers make use of the following instructional strategies and grade level materials to help ELLS-SWD: - Home language support individualized and targeted curriculum and instruction - Teacher made materials - Phonics and leveled texts to help students with emerging literacy skills - Dialogue journals for low-stakes writing - Individual whiteboard and dry-erase markers - Layered curriculum with learning menu that incorporate students choice as to what skills they want to focus on - Instructional routines - Goal setting and reflection on individual students' progress. - Every classroom is set up with a smart board and laptops are provided for technology use. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? At PAIHS, there are no self-contained classes for ELLS-SWD only SETSS or Special Education Teacher Support Services; which means our students with Disabilities or Special needs are fully immersed in General Education classes. Our Special Education 2018-19 CEP-RISE 121  teacher, Joseph Indelicato, and SETSS provider meets with students individually and in small groups to provide mandated services in accordance with their IEP goals. A non-credit bearing skills building elective "Resource Room" is offered to help students with literacy and numeracy as well. Much of this service is centered upon strengthening basic skills that are vital to their academic success in their content area classes. Mr. Indelicato also coordinates related services including Speech and Hearing Therapy, as well as mandated counseling, to ensure that students receive all required services as per their stated IEP needs. Mr. Indelicato collaborates with inter-disciplinary teams to make sure that skills in Resource Room complements content from students' core classes 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. All of our targeted intervention programs are geared towards supporting all of our ELL subgroups; teachers running these programs implement the “Internationals Approach” in all of them: • Saturday Explorer’s Club – Twice monthly, 2-3 faculty members provide a small group of SIFE students with experiential learning opportunities at various NYC sites with cultural, historical or educational significance. Activity guides designed by teachers specifically for each site visit promote literacy, language development, and numeracy. These trips are conducted in English • LULAC- League of Latin American Citizens provides enrichment and extension learning opportunities for students to engage in hands-on experiential based learning projects on various subjects of the students' choosing. • Regents Prep classes – Older ELLs who have not yet passed the Living Environment, US History or ELA Regents Examinations are offered Regents preparation classes taught in English during after school or Saturday School • SIFE Literacy Class- Students who have been identified as SIFE are programmed into a "9th Period" class to receive additional instruction in both English and Spanish to help them increase both their native and English Language Literacy. • Queens College/CUNY “College Now” – Approximately 20 of our students also participate in PM program specifically designed for ELLs to provide content and language development support in ELA and Math. Students are identified for these programs by looking at Regents scores and course pass rates. • Resource Room- Students who have IEPs that mandate that they receive additional support in the form of a Resource Room receive are scheduled for a period of Resource Room daily to help them with homework, content and skills that will help them in their content area classes • Adopt-A-Senior- Each teacher at PAIHS mentors 3 seniors to help them stay on track academically towards graduation. Each teacher meets with their students individually each week. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? PAIHS has decided to expand and/or improve some of the pre-existing programs, especially with regards to academic interventions for various populations of students. PM and Saturday school was expanded to focus on the Junior and Senior cohorts, in order to help them increase their academic English and literacy skills so that they will be able to make greater gains in Regents performance. We offer PM school on Tuesdays and Thursdays in Global History, US History, Algebra, and Saturday we offer English and Living Environment Preparation. We also offered for the first time this past summer, English enrichment through Title III grant monies to help rising freshmen and other Beginner ELLS further their Academic English. Another addition to our program offerings has been a PM SIFE class that is programmed as a 9th period for students who have been identified as SIFE through their intake interview, or based on teacher observation and student data. The SIFE class is geared to aid a small group of students build literacy and numeracy skills in their own language so that they will be able to transfer these skills to their academic classes. Lastly, we expanded our Theater program this year to include a musical theater program that combines skills learned in Theater and Chorus electives. The rationale behind expanding our theater program was to help support students in building their oral (speaking and listening) skills in English, especially with regards to pronunciation and diction in English. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? N/A 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 122  Since more than 80 % of our students are ELLs and we have a strong belief in heterogeneity, all school programs - before, during and after-school - are “equal access” and open to everyone in our school. In addition to all in-school classes, programs, and support and intervention services listed previously, we have the following after-school classes: • Chess Club • Art • Dance • Explorers Club • College Now classes on-site • After-school homework help • Theater • Student Congress and Government • Yearbook • Beginner English Literacy, English Regents support, Math Numeracy, Math Regents support All of these clubs take-place after-school and are funded by Title I and Title III funds. The goal is to continue the students' development of their English language skills. While these activities may not all be “academic” in theme, all of them are designed to continue students’ language development by incorporating all four English Language components: listening, speaking, reading, and writing. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Our school offers a wide array of instructional materials and technology to help us support our diverse array of students. We utilize bilingual classroom libraries, in addition to a multitude of classroom texts in various levels and visual supports in English. Furthermore, we offer a variety of classroom technology to support our learners both inside and outside the classroom that include: Castle learning- online Regents practice Skedula/Pupilpath- grade information system Google Applications- school website, email, documents/drive Classroom technology- laptop carts, computer lab, Smartboards, and ELMO document scanners and cameras Rosetta Stone Aventa – online learning and credit accumulation Apex – online learning and credit accumulation Spanish Libraries 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? All our students participate in our Home Language Arts programs as a complement to our ENL program, where students receive literacy instruction as well as content area instruction to support humanities. Moreover, all of our classes use the native language in the content areas to support learning. As described above, we promote bi-literacy and bilingualism so we encourage students to utilize resources in both languages to help them develop their content knowledge. Some projects every year are done in the native languages and in English and students are supported in developing their native languages to the greatest extent possible. Our classroom are equipped with Spanish and English libraries. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. When materials are not available for students at both the appropriate age and grade level, teachers create materials that are appropriate for both, which is why we draw from a variety of sources to develop our curriculum. We use a wide array of resources in our school including teacher-made materials, text books on a range of levels, trade books at many reading levels, and a large variety of non-text hands-on materials. In addition, our school has wireless access in all classrooms and students use the Internet to access resources. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? 2018-19 CEP-RISE 123  Our school offers a wide array of instructional materials and technology to help us support our diverse array of students. We utilize bilingual classroom libraries, in addition to a multitude of classroom texts in various levels and visual supports in English. Furthermore, we offer a variety of classroom technology to support our learners both inside and outside the classroom that include: Castle learning- online Regents practice Skedula/Pupilpath- grade information system Google Applications- school website, email, documents/drive Classroom technology- laptop carts, computer lab, Smartboards, and ELMO document scanners and cameras Rosetta Stone Aventa – online learning and credit accumulation Apex – online learning and credit accumulation Spanish Libraries 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Prior to the start of the school year, new students are assigned to heterogeneous team of students. We want that each class has a broad cross-section of students possible, so that students with higher English proficiency and experience in school in the country can help newer students get acclimatized with the school's culture. Furthermore, all students are assigned a counselor that is available to answer any questions and assure that students are adjusting well. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? For Junior Institute students, we offer Theater and Chorus as language and Arts electives that help students with their language development. Furthermore, we offer SIFE classes after school for students who have been diagnosed as having significant gaps in education and literacy deficits. Lastly, we offer a Dance elective after school that is conducted in English where students learn about different types of world Dance. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Professional Development for all staff at Pan-American International High School is geared toward improving ELL academic achievement and language development. Professional Development will be an integral part of the preparation and continuing evaluation and improvement of the program. School Leadership receives periodic updates of DELLS Professional Development trainings relating to ELL students at the high school level. Teachers will attend staff development and planning sessions in order to learn new practices and methods. The teachers will then turn-key to the other teachers in the program. Professional Development will consist of but not be limited to: • Training provided on site by the ACHIEVE Program • Participating in SIFE/Long-term ELL Grant Demonstration Site Visits 2018-19 CEP-RISE 124  • Attendance at the: o Annual ELL Math Conference o SIFE/Long term ELL Symposium o ELL Writing 5 Day Institute o Demystifying ELL Data Two Day Workshop o Annual Dual Language Program o NYSAFLT Annual Conference o Annual Citywide LOTE (Language Other than English) Conference o Smartboard Training o BETAC Professional Development Workshops o Office of ELLS Professional Development Workshops o SIOP Conference o RTI Workshops o ELL Literacy Leadership Institute o Teaching Content to ELLs o Achieving Success for ELLs o Spatial-Temporal (ST) Math Training o Instituto Cervantes for teaching literature o The New York State Association for Bilingual Education (NYSABE) Annual Conference o Curriculum Mapping: Strategies for Successful Implementation of ELL Programs o Collaborative Strategic Reading (CSR): Research Based Approach to Reading Comprehension (Grades 9-10) o Research-Based Vocabulary Instruction for English Learners o Data Analysis and AMAO Estimator Tool Training In addition, we will have the following PD on site: PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT SCHEDULE 2017 -2018 (EVERY Friday FACULTY PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT 2:10 – 3:30) (EVERY Friday COORDINATING CABINET Council MEETING 3:30 – 5:00) 1. Aug 31 Collaborative Curriculum Planning Sessions (EVERY TUESDAY AND THURSDAY INTERDISCIPLINARY MEETING PERIOD 4 AND PERIOD 5) 1. Sept 1 Collaborative Curriculum Planning Sessions 2. Sept 2 Collaborative Curriculum Planning Sessions 3. Sept 8 Renewal Director Policy, Faculty Handbook, and Classroom Logistics 4. Sept 21 Procedures, Attendance, and Lesson Plan Template with Feedback 5. Sept 28 INPS Session One: Project-based Unit Analysis (EVERY TUESDAY AND THURSDAY INTERDISCIPLINARY MEETING PERIOD 4 AND PERIOD 5) 1. Oct 5 INPS Session One Follow-up (Team Meetings) 2. Oct 19 INPS Session Two: Components of a Rigorous Project 3. Oct 26 SKEDULA Training (EVERY TUESDAY AND THURSDAY INTERDISCIPLINARY MEETING PERIOD 4 AND PERIOD 5) 1. Nov 2 INPS Session Two Follow-up (Team Meetings) 2. Nov 9 INPS Session Three: Disciplinary Thinking & Practices 2018-19 CEP-RISE 125  3. Nov 16 INPS Session Three Follow-up (Team Meetings) 4. Nov 23 INPS Session Four: Rigor through Higher-Order Thinking (HOT) Part I 5. Nov 30 INPS Session Four Follow-up (Team Meetings) (EVERY TUESDAY AND THURSDAY INTERDISCIPLINARY MEETING PERIOD 4 AND PERIOD 5) 1. Dec 7 INPS Session Five: Rigor through Higher-Order Thinking (HOT) Part II 2. Dec 14 INPS Session Five Follow-up (Team Meetings) 3. Dec 21 INPS Session Six: Identifying unit objectives/outcomes (EVERY TUESDAY AND THURSDAY INTERDISCIPLINARY MEETING PERIOD 4 AND PERIOD 5) 1. Jan 4 INPS Session Six Follow-up (Team Meetings) 2. Jan 11 INPS Session Seven: Micro-level Scaffolding Cycle Part I 3. Jan 25 INPS Session Seven Follow-up (Team Meetings) (EVERY TUESDAY AND THURSDAY INTERDISCIPLINARY MEETING PERIOD 4 AND PERIOD 5) 1. Feb 1 INPS Session Eight: Micro-level Scaffolding Cycle Part II 2. Feb 22 INPS Session Eight Follow-up (Team Meetings) 3. Feb 29 INPS Session Nine and Ten: Formative Assessment (EVERY TUESDAY AND THURSDAY INTERDISCIPLINARY MEETING PERIOD 4 AND PERIOD 5) 1. March 7 INPS Session Nine Follow-up (Team Meetings) 2. March 14 3. March 21 4. March 28 (EVERY TUESDAY AND THURSDAY INTERDISCIPLINARY MEETING PERIOD 4 AND PERIOD 5) Professional development for all staff at The Pan-American International High School is geared toward improving ELL academic achievement and language development. Since we are all teachers of ELLs, even though not all teachers are ENL certified, we build teacher capacity in these areas by a variety of means: • Collaborative Team Meetings – groups of subject area teachers engage in collaborative inquiry work throughout the year in order to learn more about specific ENL methodologies and strategies that will enhance student achievement; all faculty present findings and recommendations to the rest of the staff so that all may benefit from the work of the rest. This year, each content area group of teachers is focusing on different aspects of language development, specifically related to writing, and the Common Core Standards. Each group of discipline teachers is engaged in a Common Core Task, use it to diagnose student learning needs, collaboratively plan instructional strategies to meet these needs, and an analysis of the success of this instructional implementation. • Weekly professional development meetings for all pedagogues, which include the following activities: • Analysis of student work in order to improve instruction/design interventions • Analysis of student assessments (project-based learning) • Social-emotional progress of a teaching team’s shared students • Peer critiques of teacher-generated curricula • Peer observations/Inter-visitations – all pedagogues observe each other teach using a protocol to tune-into instructional foci and goals for the year. The broad focus of these peer observations is on how teachers can most effectively support students’ language development in all classes and subjects. • Participation in Internationals Network for Public Schools Professional Development workshops – at three different points in the school year, our entire staff will meet with their peers from our sister International High Schools and attend workshops designed specifically for educators of recent immigrant ELL students. Topics will include scaffolding instruction, differentiation of instruction, ENL methodologies, SIFE students, meeting the affective needs of immigrant children, and language 2018-19 CEP-RISE 126  development. All-day workshops are provided for APs, pedagogues, ELL coordinators, paraprofessionals, therapists, parent coordinators, and counselors. • International High Schools Inter-visitations – in order to promote more intra-network dialogue, and sharing of best practices and curriculum, groups of IHS teachers from across the network meet monthly at different IHSs across the city in order to learn from their best practices. • QTEL/DELLS trainings – Our classroom teachers are encouraged to complete workshops with QTEL and other DELLS offerings, which highlight best practices, like scaffolding and differentiation, for working with ELLs in the content areas. Teachers are attending QTEL Literacy PD series in development academic strategies and SIFE PD. • CFB 106 Cycles of Support with Content-Area Coaches- Coaches from the CFN Network are conducting instructional support cycles with content area teams to support the development of collaborative tasks in curriculum and developing instructional routines that can be used both vertically and horizontally throughout the school. This is to help us better implement the Internationals' model and promote academic language use in English through creating opportunities for authentic collaboration in the classroom. • Conferences – faculty attend a variety of external conferences each year in order to keep abreast of new trends in ESL and their content areas. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. All professional development at our school is focused on building capacity in all teachers to support students' language development in all classes by employing ENL methodologies since most of our students (and all of our newly admitted students) are ELLs. The Professional Development program described in #1 above provides multi-year, on-going professional development for all members of the faculty. Even if teachers participated only in the in-school professional development (the bare minimum for our teachers), they would be participating in a minimum of forty hours of professional development a year. In addition, our school participates in Professional Development organized by Internationals Network for Public Schools, including inter-visitations, summer and Election Day Professional Development, and a variety of inter-school project-based learning opportunities. This year the focus is supporting ELLs with the Common Core Standards and incorporating collaborative tasks into classroom instruction. School districts are required to ensure that a prescribed percentage of Professional Development hours be specific to the needs of ELLs, co-teaching strategies, and integrating language and content instruction: 15% total hours ELL-specific PD for All Teachers and 50% total hours ELL-specific PD for Bilingual Education and ENL/ESL teachers. All PD is documented with Agenda, Attendance and Observations of these strategies being implemented in all content area classes. Since all staff participates in the above-mentioned Professional Development on site throughout the course of the school year, everyone receives many more hours than the minimum requirements. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? We have 4 Parental Engagement meetings a year. In which, parents are introduced to the goals of our school program. Parents are also presented with Data that shows them the different language proficiency. We will also have training sessions for parents on pupil path and on technology. We will have a translator on site in case there is the need of one. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 127  Since our entire school is targeted for ELLs, all the parents involved are parents of ELLs or former ELLs. Over 50% of our students’ families regularly attend Parent Teacher Conferences Night. We also have monthly Parent Association meetings that are coordinated by Juana Adames, our Parent Coordinator. We also have significant engagement with parents and families at the individual student and interdisciplinary team level through our teaching teams as teams meet regularly with parents and guardians of our students. We currently have 3-5 parents who are regular participants in our School's Leadership Team. For all meetings and activities we always have in-house bilingual staff or translators available. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 2018-19 CEP-RISE 128 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, George Badia, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 129  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Pan American International HS School DBN: 24Q296 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) George Badia Title Principal Guido Gonzalez Assistant Principal Juana Adames Parent Coordinator Kristin Donnely ENL/Bilingual Teacher Jacqueline Torres Parent Bernadette Coyoy / Social Stud Teacher/Subject Area Juan Luque / ENL Teacher/Subject Area Boma Jack Luis Duany Coach Coach Franchesca Rivera School Counselor Elaine Lindsey Lawrence Pendergast Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Queens North Joseph Indelicato Other Related- Service Pro Shirley Torres Other Guidance Counselor Fatima Morales Other ENL Teacher Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 9/30/17 9/30/17 9/30/17 9/30/17 9/30/17 9/30/17 9/30/17 9/30/17 9/30/17 9/30/17 9/30/17 9/30/17 9/30/17 9/30/17 9/30/17 2018-19 CEP-RISE 130  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 24Q296 School Name: Pan American International HS Superintendent: Elaine Lindsay The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this (*Primary) conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. The data used to access our school’s written translation and oral interpretation needs include data found from a variety of sources. The parent surveys and parent selection forms gathered from student permanent records and from those filled out by parents when students entering the NYC schools for the first time. We also utilize information gathered from Part III of the Home Language Survey (HLIS), ATS reports, Student Emergency Contact cards, Language Allocation Policy, the School Parent Compact, and the School Parent Involvement Policy. The policy of International High School is to provide all parents with written translation and oral interpretations through all means available to us. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 131  Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Spanish (written and oral communication). 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency How do you Distributed to plan to Families translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. New parent handbook-June-September Parent-teacher conference announcements-Early September, Mid-October, Early March, Mid-April. New York State Regents testing dates-Early January, Early June. PTA announcements-Monthly. Orientation letter to new students-Early July and early August. March credit letter and summer dates-March Notification letter for first day of school Notification letter for new parent orientation-September and February PTA parent newsletter 2018-19 CEP-RISE 132  2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? Parent Teacher Conference-9/30/15, 11/18/15, 11/19/15, 3/9/16, 3/10/16. Family night-5/13/16. PTA meetings-Monthly Early College Meeting-December Individual meetings with parents of all ENL students-Throughout the year New Parent Orientation-August and February 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) 2018-19 CEP-RISE 133  Pan American International High School takes the responsibility of providing each parent with written translation and oral interpretation services extremely seriously. Every effort is made to ensure that parents whose primary language is a covered language and who require language assistance services with written notification of their rights regarding translation and interpretation services in the appropriate covered receive those services as well as instructions on how to obtain such services. -When a parent enters the school they are greated by a parent welcome poster conspicuously posted outside the main office. -When a parent enters the main office a language ID guide is clearly posted at the security desk as well as in the main office. -At the new parent orientation meetings in August and February parents are provided with the Parents' Guide to Language Access. Copes of the guide are also distributed to parents at the four parent conferences throughout the school year. In addition, copies of the guide are posted in the main office where translations are made available as needed. -Notification to our parents is made in a variety of ways. Our parent coordinator provides monthly newsletters in all the covered languages as well as in a variety of primary languages providing notification of their rights. This information is also provided to parents at several points throughout the year. The Parent Coordinator and Guidance Counselors hold an orientation for new parents twice a year in August and in February through the Parent Association which informs parents of their rights in terms of translation and interpretation services. Translators are provided at each of these meetings. The information is also provided to parents through our telephone messenger system which sends out the messages in a variety of languages. Parents are also informed of the translation and translation services at all four parent teacher conferences held in September, November, March and in May. • The information is to be posted in a conspicuous location near the primary entrance to the high school in the covered languages. This notification indicates that a copy of the written notification of the parent’s Bill of Rights regarding language assistance services and translation services are available from the Parent Coordinator in the main office, room 325. • Pan American International High School’s safety plan will contain procedures in order to ensure that parents in need of language assistance services are not prevented from reaching the school’s administrative offices solely due to language barriers. • “Each school at which the parents of more than 10% of the children at such school speak a primary language that is neither English nor a covered language shall obtain from the Translation and interpretation Unit a translation into such language of the signage and forms required pursuant to this section and shall post and provide such forms in accordance with this section.” At Pan AmericanInternational High School the only language spoken by all the student body is Spanish. • Pan American International High School will provide information in Spanish concerning the rights of parents to translation and interpretation services and how to access such services on its school website. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? In order to gather feedback from parents on the quality and availability of services the school will assess the answers parents provide in the school survey about whether or not the school is communicating with the parent in their native language. Parents who attend monthly PTA meetings will be asked to provide feedback on how well the school is 2018-19 CEP-RISE 134  providing parents with both written and oral translation services. In addition, whenever our parent coordinator communicates with parents she will request feedback on ways to improve communication and availability of translation services. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 135 
