 
 

 

 
 

  

 
 
 
 
 
 

2018-19 

SCHOOL COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN 

(SCEP) 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 

DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 

17K092 

School Name: 

P.S. 092 ADRIAN HEGEMAN 

Principal: 

JOHN SAMERSON 

 
 

2018-19 SCEP-FF                                                                                                                                         

 

 

 1 

 

School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Outline 

 
 
Section 1: School Information Page 
 
 
Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page 
 
 
Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) 
 
 
Section 4: SCEP Overview 
 
 
Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  

  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction 
  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment 
  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers 
  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership 
  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties  

 
 
Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) 
 
 
Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH)   
 
 
Section 8: Title I Program Information  
 
 
Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 
 

 

2018-19 SCEP-FF                                                                                                                                                                                          2 

Section 1: School Information Page 

 

School Information 

 

Adrian Hegeman Elementary School 

17K092 

 

 

 
School Name: 

BEDS Code: 

Grades Served: 

School Address:  

Phone Number: 

 

 
331700010092 

 
Pre-K – 5th 

 
601 Parkside Avenue 

 
(718) 462-8449 

School Number (DBN): 

 

(718) 284-8289 

Fax: 

 

John Samerson 

jsamers@schools.nyc.gov 

School Contact Person:  

 

Principal: 

UFT Chapter Leader: 

John Samerson 

 
Gilbert Rimple 

 
Marisa Warner 

Email Address: 

 

Parents’ Association President: 

 
Co-chairs: John SamersonandCaroline McNeal 

SLT Chairperson: 

 

Title I Parent Representative (or 
Parent Advisory Council 
Chairperson): 

Student Representative(s): 

 

CBO Representative: 
 

LakeishaMoffat 

 
NA 

 

 
NA 

 

 

District Information 

 

Geographical District: 

17 

 

Mr. Clarence Ellis 

Superintendent: 
1224 Park Place, Brooklyn, New York 11213 

 

Superintendent’s Office Address: 

 
cellis@schools.nyc.gov 

Superintendent’s Email Address: 

 

(718) 221-4372 

Phone Number: 

 

(718) 221-4326 

Fax: 

 

 
 

Brooklyn South 

FSC: 

 

Field Support Center (FSC)  

Executive 
Director: 

 

Mauricierede Govia 

 

2018-19 SCEP-FF                                                                                                                                                                                          3 

 

 

Executive Director’s Office 
Address: 

415 89th Street, Brooklyn, NY 11209 

 
Mdegovi@schools.nyc.gov 

Executive Director’s Email Address: 

 

(718) 759-4934 

Phone Number: 

 

(718 ) 630-1634 

Fax: 

 

2018-19 SCEP-FF                                                                                                                                                                                          4 

 

Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page 

 

All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this School 
Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to 
support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention 
Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal 
number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with 
Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. 
 
Directions: 

1.  List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 
2.  Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization 
(CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an 
asterisk*. 

3.  SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member 

does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, 
which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT 
member indicates participation in the development of the SCEP, not approval.   

4.  The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file 

in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. 

 

Name 

Position and Constituent Group 

Represented 

Signature 
(Blue Ink) 

Dr.John Samerson 

 
Mr. Gilbert Rimple 

 
Ms. Marisa Warner 

 

 

Ms. LakeishaMoffat 

 

NA 

 

NA 

 

NA 

*Principal or Designee 

*UFT Chapter Leader or Designee 

*PA/PTA President or Designated Co-
President 

DC 37 Representative (staff), if 
applicable 

Title I Parent Representative or 
Parent Advisory Council Chairperson  

Student Representative  
(optional for elementary and middle 
schools; a minimum of two members 
required for high schools) 

Student Representative  
(optional for elementary and middle 
schools; a minimum of two members 
required for high schools) 

CBO Representative, if applicable 

 
Ms. Lillie Clarke 

 
Ms. ShandelSudlow 

 
Mr. David Mack 

 

 
Member/ UFT 

 
Member/ UFT 

 
Member/UFT  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

2018-19 SCEP-FF                                                                                                                                                                                          5 

 

Name 

Ms. Hazel Caleb 

 
Ms. Jennifer Ramsey 

 
Ms. KeshiaHilliman 

 
NA 

 
NA 

 
NA 

 
NA 

 
NA 

 
NA 

 

 

Position and Constituent Group 

Represented 

Signature 
(Blue Ink) 

Member/ Parent 

 
Member/Parent  

 
Member/ Parent 

 
Member/ Parent 

 
Member/  

 
Member/  

 
Member/  

 
Member/  

 
Member/  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

2018-19 SCEP-FF                                                                                                                                                                                          6 

 

Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan  

The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) is a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support 
schools in engaging their staff, parents, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, 
setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring 
progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community.  

The process of developing and implementing the SCEP is aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. This section will 
provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding SCEP development aligned with the school’s state 
accountability and informed by New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, 
Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. 

Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools 

The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect 
the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms 
where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity 
and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and 
classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more 
attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and 
Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our 
families and students. 

Strong Schools, Strong Communities  

The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, 
educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school 
prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult.  

The Department has established programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers 
and students supports to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools 
centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school 
leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. 
Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to 
Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students.  

The Framework for Great Schools and SCEP Development 

The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and 
external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase 
learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently 
ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The School Comprehensive Educational 
Plan (SCEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint for continuous 
improvement that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis 
of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies 
that improve outcomes for students. 
 

Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to increase 
student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework 
for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members 
concrete ways to improve. 

In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in 
consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to 
participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a 

2018-19 SCEP-FF                                                                                                                                                                                          7 

 
comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five (5) goals and action plans that align with 
the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all 
the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements 
work together to support student achievement. 

The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools  

Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards 
are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical 
thinking skills. 
Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, 
and challenged by their teachers and peers. 
Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. 
They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous 
improvement. 
Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, 
developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. 
Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by 
welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. 
Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school 
and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value 
each other. 

 
Accountability Tools and the Framework for Great Schools 

In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in 
improvement planning that is informed by the New York State Education Department’s (NYSED) Diagnostic Tool for 
School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) Tenets,  the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Rubric, School Quality Guide and other 
quantitative and qualitative data tools. 
 
NYSED’s Six DTSDE Tenets 

To strengthen the existing system, the NYSED has developed a tool that captures the best practices from each of the 
current tools called the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness. This new tool encompasses multiple 
instruments such as interviews, classroom observations and surveys. The protocol will begin with a clear and cogent 
statement of the optimal conditions of an effective school and the instruments comprising the protocol will measure 
how close or far away a particular school is to the optimal conditions identified. Once reviewed, the school and district 
will create a strategic plan to address the areas in need of improvement. All current Priority and Focus Schools and Focus 
Districts must use the tool; districts that are required to submit District Comprehensive Improvement Plans and 
Comprehensive Educational Plans also will use the tool.  
 
The DTSDE protocol includes a rubric, which identifies clear and coherent expectations of the optimal conditions of an 
effective school and school district across the following six tenets: 

  Tenet 1: District Leadership and Capacity 
  Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions 
  Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support 
  Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions 
  Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health, and 
  Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement 
 
 
NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) 

The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by 
coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality 
2018-19 SCEP-FF                                                                                                                                                                                          8 

 
Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 
2017-18 Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below:  
Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) 

I. 
II.  School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4)  
III.  Structures for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and 
Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) 

 
School Quality Guide  

The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to 
set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to 
accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also 
available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s 
practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. 
For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. 
The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of 
similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set 
based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. 

 
Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 

a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; 
a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) 

Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, 
professional development, and parent and family engagement. 
 
To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in 
improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will 
serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the 
administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish: 
 
 
 
It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School 
Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the 
joint development of the SCEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 
1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% 
budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent 
and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the SCEP. For additional guidance 
on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. 
 
Next Steps for SCEP Development 

School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  

  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the 

requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655. 

  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability 

status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year. 

  Step 3: In Part 1A of the Section 5: Needs Assessment indicate the Statement of Practice (SOP) from the DTSDE 

Tenets that will be addressed in the action plan. Schools that received an Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) 
School Review should use the recommendations from the review to select their SOPs. Schools that did not 
undergo an IIT review should select SOPs informed by the major findings/recommendations from your most 
recent Quality Review (QR) or Central-led Review (CLR), and other qualitative and quantitative data. 

2018-19 SCEP-FF                                                                                                                                                                                          9 

 

  Step 4: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed 
by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART 
– Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you 
monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school 
community know when you’ve reached your goal. 

  Step 5: Build consensus around activities, strategies and programs to address students’ needs in each action 
plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement. 

  Step 6: Implement at least one USDE Turnaround Principle (e.g., redesign the school day, week, or year; modify 

the instructional program to ensure it is Evidence-based, rigorous, and aligned with State academic content 
standards; provide time for collaboration on the use of) beginning no later than the 2018-19 school year. 

  Step 7: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I 

schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). 

  Step 8: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall 

cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action 
plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. 

 

Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful 
implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to 
accomplishing desired results. 

2018-19 SCEP-FF                                                                                                                                                                                          10 

 

1.  What is your school’s mission statement? 
With the collaborative efforts of the staff, our school's mission statement is: 

Section 4: SCEP Overview 

 

 

The mission of Public School 92 is to cultivate the potential in every student to thrive as a global citizen by creating an 
environment that harbors tolerance and respect for each other, and challenges and supports each child to meet the 
goals of the NYS Learning Standards through rigorous instruction. Through the provision of a standards-based 
curriculum, our students will thrive academically and socially as they progressively become college and career ready 
for the future. We will continue to partner with our community-based organizations to promote family engagement 
and the general well-being and academic success of all students. 

 

 

 
2.  Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including 

a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. 

Public School 92, also known as Adrian Hegeman Elementary School, is located in the Flatbush section of Brooklyn, 
New York. We are in close proximity to many cultural and educational institutions such as the Brooklyn Botanic 
Gardens, Brooklyn Museum, New York City Parks Department (e.g.Prospect Park, Prospect Park Zoo, St. John's 
Recreation Center), Grand Army Plaza Public Library, Medgar Evers College, Brooklyn College, and the Brooklyn 
Children’s Museum. Throughout the school year, our staff utilizes the resources of these facilities to enhance the 
academic and social emotional experiences and needs of our children.  

 

We currently service 468 students in grades Pre kindergarten to Grade 5, who are largely of Caribbean descent, with a 
growing influx of students of Middle Eastern and the Hispanic families. Of the 468 students, 86.2% are Title 1 eligible, 
where approximately 81 students reside in shelter facilities. Our instructional staff consists of 28 classroom teachers, 
an art, music, physical education/health, library/literacy skills, and computer skills teacher, 1 guidance counselor, 2 
ENL state certified teachers, 1 SETTS/IEP teacher, 1 assistant principal, 1 literacy coach for Grades K-2 and a number 
of support staff such as the school psychologist, social worker, whole class and one to one para-professionals, school-
aides and the parent coordinator. 

 

We work with New York Cares on a yearly basis to organize structured programs that include academic activities as 
well as including provisions for improving the social well-being of the various members of the school community. Our 
specific projects include our Fall New York Cares Day Event in October, our Holiday Winter Wishes and letter-writing 
academic program in December, the MLK Day academic initiatives in January as well as other joint school-wide 
revitalization programs with community partners such as Target and Bank of America. The primary goals are aimed at 
meeting the diverse needs of the school community. In addition, through a collaborative partnership with our after-
school partner, CAMBA, we are able to extend support for our children’s social emotional well-being, and utilize the 
agency’s outside family support center for referrals (e.g. crisis intervention, counseling) and family advocacy (e.g. food 
pantry, adult education, housing).  

 

Also, this year, we were the recipient of the NYCDOE Arts Partnership Grant as well as a CASA Grant from the Office of 
Councilman for the DIstrict. This grant allowed the students to get engaged in cultural arts performances with a focus 

2018-19 SCEP-FF                                                                                                                                                                                          11 

 

on African Dance and Drumming as well as playing the Steel pan. We extended our partnership with our sister school, 
Middle School 2 as a means of bridging our learning expectations and creating a cultural pipeline for our learners. We 
partnered with Ifetayo Cultural Academy who fully embraced our program and supported our vision for the students' 
involvement and service in the Arts. This project was completed in three cycles. Each group of students were able to 
showcase their experiences for the community and parents as culminating activities to highlight what they have 
learned.  

 

We look forward to continuing our social- emotional development program known as The Girl Empowerment 
Movement (G.E.M) for our senior girls. This initiative aids in empowering our girls to grow through understanding 
their knowledge of self, community and the world. G.E.M. also help girls identify their rights as young leaders and 
through sharing their stories help them become confident, courageous and resilient young women. The process 
follows the theme of the documentary group “Girl Rising." G.E.M. connects and becomes part of a worldwide 
campaign that promotes and works towards shaping a future where every girl has the right to receive a good 
education and reach for success. This initiative follows the theme of “Empower one girl who will empower a 
community.” 
 
In addition, we embraced a series of STEM initiatives to ensure that our students become more science and math-
oriented and tech savvy as well as to get an opportunity to enhance their creativity and technical skills. Our students 
got grossly involved in the "Hour of Code" whereby they become actively engaged in writing computer programs for 
various games that they created. They then showcased their projects as part of a School Fair to promote greater use 
of technology across the school. Also, select group of students were able to participate in a Robotics Program. They 
built robots using the given directions and guidance from the teacher and then program them to follow specific 
commands. Also, select groups of students were taught how to play Chess through a partnership with New York Chess 
and Games.  
 

As a recipient of the LIU Sanford Harmony Social Emotional Grant, the members of staff have been trained in the 
utilizing elements of the program to meet the needs of the students. Our continuing objective is to address the needs 
of our children through a systemic approach to behavior modification and building a positive learning environment 
that is shared by all stakeholders. As an added piece to the PBIS Program which is already in place, our students will 
be well on the way for receiving major support and developing coping strategies for the many challenges they face 
within the community. As a result of the integration of the tenets of both programs, we have seen a decline in the 
number of school-wide incidents and an increase in students' collaboration and support for each other. 

 

As part of our initiative to also support our parents in the educational process, we have partnered with Cornell 
University to provide them with an 8-week training in a health and nutrition program. The program teaches them how 
to make healthy choices as part of their daily eating habits and food and nutrition choices that they make for their 
families. This was also integrated with a similar program for a group of Grade 3 students. The premise is that they will 
make healthier eating choices and share their experiences with their peers and colleagues as a means of improving 
their welfare and life style. For the Fall, we are also looking into partnering with NYU Langone Medical Center for 
launching an on-site dental program for our students as supported by the parents. This should promote the climate of 
better dental hygiene for the school community. 

 

Under the leadership of our assistant principal, parent coordinator, and other staff, we have been able to continue 
supporting our students through many extra-curricular activities such as the Student Council, the Drama Club and the 
Performing Arts Club. In conjunction with the the Office of Assembly-woman for the 43rd District, we implemented a 
basketball program for the students. This program was geared to serve as an incentive to help students foster both 

2018-19 SCEP-FF                                                                                                                                                                                          12 

 

their academic and social skills. The parent coordinator also works collaboratively with the support staff (i.e. Guidance 
Counselor & STH social worker), administrative staff and Parent Association President to plan and facilitate an on-
going series of parent workshops (CCLS, ELA/Math Testing support, financial resources, job skills, community 
resources, computer literacy, fire safety, child abuse & neglect etc.) to support our families. Other collaborations 
include Penny Harvest, New York Food bank, and local agencies (e.g. Senior Homes) who are yearly recipients of 
goods received through our annual food drive.  

 

We were also selected to participate in the NYCDOE Teacher Effectiveness Program. Teachers across the grade levels 
received ongoing professional development in instructional planning, questioning and discussion, and student 
engagement. Also, being part of the Pre-K for all Program, we have been provided with substantial and ongoing 
support to our pre-K and kindergarten teachers to bolster their best practices, curriculum development, and 
vocabulary building. This opportunity will continue in the 2018-2019 school year.  

 
3.  Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. 

The student body includes 99 English Language Learners, 82 students with IEPs and 26 students across the grade 
levels, receiving SETTS support. We also have 5 ICT classes and 3 self-contained special education classes. The ENL 
program currently provides a combination of pull out and push-in instructional support.  The needs of both our 
students with IEPs and ELLS include the use of scaffolds and supports, visual learning aides, hands on learning 
opportunities, videos, and computer assisted resources to meet their varying needs and learning styles. Our ELL 
population also requires an intensive focus on improving their speaking and listening skills, both of which are 
necessary to support their English language acquisition. 

 
4.  Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the 

past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. 

Our most recent 2017 Quality Review Report identified that the school leaders have made strategic organizational 
decisions to support the school's instructional goals and meet the students' learning needs as evidenced by 
meaningful students' work products as a strength and area of celebration. We have demonstrated our strong 
commitment to providing our students with opportunities for enhancing their learning experiences. The use of 
resources, community-based partnerships and the structures to program students throughout the day, including 
academic intervention, shows alignment with the school's achievement goals. Thus the following considerations are in 
place: 

1) Supplemental resources and other materials have been purchased to increase the literacy and math rates across 
the school. The school leaders have increased the number of interactive whiteboards and laptops per class. These 
materials have increased students' usage of online reading and math programs, including specialized support for 
English as a New Language (ENL) students. In addition, the resources supplement the content of the Wonders 
Program (Grades K-2) and Ready Gen (Grades 3-5) curricula, which currently serves as the school's main literacy 
program, including additional classroom libraries and leveled books for guided reading that were purchased. 
Furthermore, we are providing additional professional learning opportunities to support teachers' understanding of 
problem solving methodologies and fluency development. 

(2) The school leaders have formed several partnerships to support school culture and promote positive behaviors. 
This year, an African Dance Company was brought in to bring awareness of the culture and engage in instructional 
activities with the students. In addition, a robotics program is implemented to allow the students to explore complex, 
strategic science concepts and facilitate students' understanding of how to design and program their own robots. 
Through another partnership with Long Island University, the Sanford Harmony Program supports social social-
emotional development by engaging in discussions on certain critical issues. Engagement in school partnerships and 
other programs has led to a decrease in the infraction rate as per the Online Occurrence Reporting System (OORS). 

2018-19 SCEP-FF                                                                                                                                                                                          13 

 

(3) At-risk student programming and teacher assignments are part of the thought process when formulating 
interventions and classes per year. Although classes are heterogeneously grouped, planning for push-in ENL supports 
and co-teaching in certain classes is considered. There are various programs instituted for at-risk supplemental 
support via small group, academic intervention during the day and after school. Enrichment opportunities for all 
students are also provided to develop strategic , critical thinking skills. Increased supportive structures, hiring and 
teacher placement, and student programming has increased students' progress in literacy and math based on school-
level assessments. 

 

Using the 2017 Quality Review Report, we will continue to look at the following as areas for growth: 

Quality Review Indicator 3.4: The school leaders and the teachers have established policies and practices that 
consistently support a culture for learning that communicates high expectations to the staff, students, and families 
and provides support to achieve these expectations. However, this still remains an area of focus. This will be 
enhanced through the on-going hosting of parent workshops facilitated by school staff and other contracted 
providers. These opportunities will help parents gain knowledge of what their children are learning through the 
sharing of curriculum map, technology support, summaries of learning materials for the core content areas, parent 
newsletters, and Meet the Teachers' Nights and Monthly Open School (every 4th Friday). Workshops will also be 
presented on topics identified by parents through a survey. Special events, such as Family Day, student performances, 
and Parent Association activities encourage parents to interact with their children and school staff in a social setting. 
Our parents of ENL students will participate in workshops facilitated by our ENL teachers, and be given regular 
updates in their first language via phone calls, notices and progress reports.  

Quality Review Indicator 1.2: Although, teacher practices are aligned to the curricula and are informed by the 
Danielson Framework and the CCLS Instructional Shifts to demonstrate how students' learn best, the teacher 
strategies have yet to serve as ongoing and consistent entry points present in discussions and work products across all 
classrooms. There is still a need to continue enhancing the students' levels of engagement and higher level critical 
thinking by using appropriately challenging tasks as demonstrated in their work and discussions. 

Quality Review Indicator 2.2: Although the use of rubric and other assessments tools are evident and are aligned to 
the school's curricula, yet the checks for understanding and students' self-assessment are inconsistent across the 
school. The assessment practices did not fully demonstrate how the teachers consistently reflect effective 
adjustments and offer the students actionable feedback that leads to meeting students' learning needs across the 
school.  

Quality Review Indicator 5.1: Although, the school leaders have some structures in place for monitoring and 
evaluating school-level decisions and making adjustments accordingly, this has yet to be consistently used by 
following a process. It is expected that the school leaders will have a more structured approach that they follow to 
make adjustments as needed to increase coherence of policies and practices across the school with particular 
attention on the CCLS. 

 

 

5.  Identify at least one USDE Turnaround Principle (e.g., redesign the school day, week, or year; modify the 

instructional program to ensure it is Evidence-based, rigorous, and aligned with State academic content standards; 
provide time for collaboration on the use of data) to be implemented in the 2018-19 school year. 

One of our primary goal was to provide students with more structured skills practice for mastery of the standards by 
grouping them as per their reading levels to increase individual achievement. As a result, the school leaders 
redesigned the schedule in December, 2017 to include Response to Intervention (RTI) whereby cluster teachers 
pushed into classrooms on grades 3-5 for about two to three periods per week to work with small groups of students. 
The cluster teachers conferred with students during independent reading, in addition to facilitating a skills station 
intervention in math. This allowed for the classroom teacher to provide targeted instruction to groups of students 

2018-19 SCEP-FF                                                                                                                                                                                          14 

 

based on skills needed. School leaders also implemented a Targeted Enrichment to Attain Mastery of the Standards 
after-school program (TEAMS Project) that utilized close reading strategies as the primary strategy for addressing 
students' needs. The students were group based on their reading levels in spite of their grade levels. The teachers 
provided instruction on the students' reading level catering for their needs and allowing them to attain mastery of the 
carefully selected tasks. At the same time, they were challenged in order to build more critical thinking skills that 
forced them to aspire to the next level. By all indications on the benchmarks and interim assessments, the students 
have made progress beyond the expectations for their grade levels.  

 

 

 

2018-19 SCEP-FF                                                                                                                                                                                          15 

 

 

School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 17K092 

School Configuration (2018-19) 

Grade Configuration 

PK,0K,01,02,03,04,
05 

Total Enrollment (2017-
18) 
English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 

424 

SIG Recipient (Y/N) 

Transitional Bilingual 

N/A 

Dual Language 

N/A 

Self-Contained English as a Second 
Language 

Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) 

# Special Classes (ELA) 
# Special Classes (Math) 

# Visual Arts 
# Foreign Language 

% Title I Population 
% Free Lunch 
% Limited English Proficient 

23 
22 

4 
 

% American Indian or Alaska Native 
% Hispanic or Latino 
% White 

# SETSS (ELA) 
# SETSS (Math) 
Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) 
# Music 
# Drama 
# CTE 
# Dance 

30 
26 

11 
 

# Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) 
# Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) 

School Composition (2017-18) 

92.0%  % Attendance Rate 
88.7%  % Reduced Lunch 
21.5%  % Students with Disabilities 

Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) 

% Black or African American 

0.7% 
13.9%  % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 
1.7% 

% Multi-Racial 

Personnel (2015-16) 

Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) 
% of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate 
% Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 

3.26 
0% 
6% 

# of Assistant Principals (2016-17) 
% Teaching Out of Certification 
Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) 

Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) 

ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 

28.3%  Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 

Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 

67% 

Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-
17) 

Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) 

ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 
Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 
4 Year Graduation Rate 

Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 

N/A 
N/A 
N/A 

N/A 

Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 
US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 
6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) 
% ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures 
(2015-16) 

Reward 
In Good Standing 
Focus District 

Priority School 

Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) 

No 
No 
Yes 

Recognition 
Local Assistance Plan 
Focus School Identified by a Focus District 

No 

Focus Subgroups 

Black, ED 

Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) 

Elementary/Middle School 

Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) 

American Indian or Alaska Native 
Hispanic or Latino 
White 
Students with Disabilities 
Economically Disadvantaged 

American Indian or Alaska Native 
Hispanic or Latino 
White 
Students with Disabilities 
Economically Disadvantaged 

American Indian or Alaska Native 
Hispanic or Latino 
White 
Students with Disabilities 
Economically Disadvantaged 

American Indian or Alaska Native 
Hispanic or Latino 
White 
Students with Disabilities 
Economically Disadvantaged 

American Indian or Alaska Native 
Hispanic or Latino 
White 
Students with Disabilities 
Economically Disadvantaged 

American Indian or Alaska Native 
Hispanic or Latino 
White 
Students with Disabilities 
Economically Disadvantaged 

N/A 
YSH 
N/A 
NO 
NO 

Black or African American 
Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander 
Multi-Racial 
Limited English Proficient 
ALL STUDENTS 

Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) 
Black or African American 
Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander 
Multi-Racial 
Limited English Proficient 
ALL STUDENTS 

N/A 
NO 
N/A 
YES 
NO 

Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) 

N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
NO 
High School 

Black or African American 
Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander 
Multi-Racial 
Limited English Proficient 
ALL STUDENTS 

Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) 

N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 

Black or African American 
Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander 
Multi-Racial 
Limited English Proficient 
ALL STUDENTS 

Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) 
Black or African American 
Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander 
Multi-Racial 
Limited English Proficient 
ALL STUDENTS 

N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 

Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) 
Black or African American 
Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander 
Multi-Racial 
Limited English Proficient 
ALL STUDENTS 

N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 

No 

N/A 

49 
49 

 
 

90.0% 
2.6% 
18.9% 

71.2% 
12.3% 
0.9% 

4 
6% 
6.6 

26.4% 

N/A 

N/A 
N/A 
N/A 

N/A 

N/A 
No 
Yes 

NO 
N/A 
N/A 
YSH 
NO 

NO 
N/A 
N/A 
NO 
NO 

YES 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
NO 

N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 

N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 

N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 

2018-19 SCEP-FF                                                                                                                                                                                          16 

 

 

 

 

2018-19 SCEP-FF                                                                                                                                                                                          17 

 

Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans 

 

Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, 
and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious 
intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support) 
 
Part 1 – Needs Assessment   

Part 1a.  Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice 
Tenet 3 Statement of Practice 
Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one.  Place an “X” in the 
appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 
3.2 

The school leader ensures and supports the quality implementation of a systematic plan of 
rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning 
Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of students. 
Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction 
(DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and 
address student achievement needs. 
The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner 
within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the 
arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. 
Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative 
assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student 
reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. 

3.3 

3.4 

3.5 

SOP(s) 

Addressed 

x 

 

 

 

 

Part 1b.  Needs/Areas of Focus: 
Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the 
most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources 
should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, 
NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School 
Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 
 

1.  What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element?  Indicate the data trends, source and 

year. 

2.  What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? 

Indicate the data trends, source and year. 

 

According to the most recent 2017 Quality Review Report, all curricula are purposefully aligned to the Common Core 
Learning Standards (CCLS), and there is some consistent emphasis on promoting higher-order thinking skills across 
grades and subject areas for all learners. Most teachers incorporate rigorous and challenging academics tasks into 
lessons so that students have opportunities to demonstrate their thinking and understanding. In addition, teaching 
practices are aligned to the curricula and are informed by the Danielson's Framework for Teaching, the Common Core 
Learning Standards (CCLS) and instructional shifts to demonstrate how students learn best. Also, the current practices 
are aimed at promoting college & career readiness for all students. In most cases, teaching strategies provide multiple 
entry points, differentiation of instruction, and grouping that has resulted in higher-order thinking skills as evident in the 
students' work products for all students, including English New (ELLs) and students with disabilities (SWDs). 

 

Though the above-mentioned practices were areas of strength, according to the results of our most recent Quality 
Review, which was conducted in May 2017, the school needs to improve its ability to "develop teacher pedagogy from a 
set of beliefs about how students learn best that is informed by the instructional shifts and Danielson Framework, 
aligned to the curricula, engaging, and meets the needs of all learners so that all students produce meaningful work 

2018-19 SCEP-FF                                                                                                                                                                                          18 

 

products. In addition, the school needs to improve its ability to align assessments to the curriculum, use on-going 
assessment and grading practices, and analyze information on student learning outcomes to adjust instructional 
decisions at the team and classroom levels. In addition to these findings, though our school experienced slight growth in 
both ELA and Math, the results of our most recent State exams revealed that only 19.8% and 17.9% of all students 
performed at proficiency on the ELA and Math exams, respectively. It is for these reasons, that we have identified SOP 
3.3 as the priority need this school year. 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Part 2 – Annual Goal 

Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this 
element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified 
priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-
bound.  
 

By June 2019, we will strengthen and increase instructional rigor and the use of data to support learning as evidenced 
by at least 10% improvement in students' performance in mathematics and literacy formative and/or summative 
assessments.  

 

2018-19 SCEP-FF                                                                                                                                                                                          19 

Target Group(s) 
Who will be targeted? 

Timeline 
What is the 
start and 
end date? 

Key Personnel 
Who is responsible 
for implementing 
and overseeing the 
activity/strategy? 
(include school, 
educational 
consultants and/or 
CBO staff) 

All instructional staff, including 
Paraprofessionals 

Every 
month 
October 
2018-May 
2019 

School leaders, 
teacher leaders, 
selected teachers 
and professional 
development 
specialists 

 
Part 3a – Action Plan 

Activities/Strategies: Detail below the 
activities and strategies your school will 
implement to achieve the identified goal 
for this Framework for Great Schools 
element, including: 

  Evidence-based instructional 

 

programs, professional 
development, and/or systems and 
structures needed to impact 
change. 
Strategies to address the needs of 
students with disabilities, English 
language learners, and other high-
need student subgroups (e.g., 
overage/under-credited, SIFE, 
STH). 

Teachers will engage in activities geared to 
building their professional practice and 
learning by engaging in professional reading 
and discussion of research literature; doing 
inter-visitations across the grade levels and 
to better performing schools within District 
17. As result of their professional learning 
teachers will utilize the following strategies 
to address the needs of all students: 

 

  The staff will continue to provide 

students with opportunities to 
reinforce higher order thinking by 
using various instructional 
strategies. We will provide 
supplemental reading for students 
in the form of short literary essays 
and other writing projects. This 
would be helpful for all students 
but may show the greatest impact 
in moving students performing at 
lower levels. We will consider using 
the TC Writing Program and The 
Wonders Reading Resources as a 
good complement to Ready Gen. 
Since increasing students’ writing 
competency in all genres across all 
grade levels is a school priority, we 
will continue to provide students 
with additional opportunities for 
writing within each lesson. A 

 

2018-19 SCEP-FF                                                                                                                                                                                          20 

 

 

 

greater number of instructional 
charts, rubrics charts, and student 
writing samples will be displayed in 
all classrooms to support students 
in the writing process. 
School leaders will continue to build 
teachers’ capacity to monitor and 
adjust their lessons in order to 
support the needs of all students 
and increase the levels of student 
engagement by incorporating the 
use of students' data in their 
planning.  
School leaders will continue to 
support teachers and students with 
the implementation of the S.L.A.M. 
(Sustained Literacy to Attain 
Mastery) writing initiative across 
the grades in order to support 
student writing and help emergent 
writers grow and master the writing 
process.  

  We will infuse elements of building 

a STEM Program as part of the 
ongoing initiatives for fostering 
students' success.  

  All content and specialty area 

teachers will be assigned as 
members of Teacher Teams across 
the grade levels as part of the 
school-wide integration of best 
practices to bolster the sharing of 
content knowledge and 
instructional strategies. This 
practice will be closely monitored 
by school leaders during the 
planning and implementation 
process. An extended cabinet will 
be in place as a form of support in 
implementing and monitoring the 
various initiatives that will be in 
place. 

  This will be facilitated by the school 
leaders and teacher teams actively 
engaging in on-going professional 
development, reflections, inter-
visitations across the grade levels, 
external inter-visitations with 
partner schools and modification of 
the curriculum maps to ensure 
appropriate alignment with the 
relevant standards. 

2018-19 SCEP-FF                                                                                                                                                                                          21 

 

Bi-weekly teacher team meetings to plan 
and implement expectations for the 
standards and performance tasks for all 
students, including ENL and SWD students. 
ENL and IEP teachers will work closely with 
teacher teams and PD providers to ensure 
the inclusion of ENL and differentiated 
instructional strategies are incorporated in 
planning for instruction and academic 
support. the extended cabinet will discuss, 
enforce implementation, monitor and 
adjust initiatives where necessary. 

 

In addition, a number of technology-related 
devices (e.g. laptops, document cameras, 
smart boards etc.) will be purchased and 
used in tandem with various technology-
based programs to supplement the efficient 
teaching of the various aligned Standards. 
The goal is to give all students (ENLs, SWDs 
etc.) equal access to opportunities for 
academic success. Programs such as MYoN, 
Compass Pathblazers, Mathletics & Imagine 
Learning will be used to achieve such goals. 

Curriculum maps will reflect instructional 
activities/resources that infuse the visual 
and performance arts, as well as  

research based instructional software that 
aid students in understanding connections 
across the core content areas. 

In addition, the increased need for 
interdisciplinary curricula infusing the arts, 
technology, and other enrichment 
opportunities will be addressed through the 
use of teacher leaders or grade 
coordinators in each area to provide PD for 
the staff.  

Host Parent Orientations at the beginning 
of the year to share out expectations, the 
instructional program across the grade 
levels, and standards. Special sessions will 
be held for the parents of ENL students. 
Meet the teacher nights and monthly open 
school will be scheduled to allow parents 
the opportunity to meet the teacher(s), visit 
classrooms, review student work/progress, 
participate in classroom activities and 
expectations for performance. This will be 

Every 
month 
September 
2018-June 
2019 

School leaders, 
teachers, and PD 
specialists & 
providers. 

All instructional staff, including 
Paraprofessionals 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Every month September 2018- June 
2019 

School 
leaders and 
selected 
teachers 

 

School community members 

Every 
month 
Sept. 2018- 
May 2019 

School leaders, 
parent 
coordinator, PA 
Executive board, 
outside community 
liaisons 

 

2018-19 SCEP-FF                                                                                                                                                                                          22 

 

conducted in addition to the increased 
parent conference nights scheduled by the 
Chancellor's Office. Because we will include 
all stakeholders in the planning and 
implementation of the activities, in 
particular the Parent Association, it will 
increase the level of transparency and 
support from parents. 

  
 
3b – Parent and Family Engagement 

How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York 
State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible 
for implementation and oversight. 
The families will be invited to attend a series of workshops based on their availability outside of the activities that are 
conducted during the regular scheduled parent teachers' conferences. Sessions will be scheduled at various points in 
the day to accommodate their needs (i.e. morning & evening). The focus will be on boosting their understanding of 
the requirements for meeting the expectations of the standards, NYS Testing protocols, accessing various support 
systems via the Internet, extending the use of in-school on-line resources with the home connections, and building 
their computer literacy skills etc. These sessions will begin at the end of September, 2018 and continue through the 
end of April, 2019. These will be conducted by the school leaders, various members of the school's instructional team 
(e.g. literacy coach, computer teacher) and external providers where necessary.  
 

 
Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 

Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including 
human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 
All stakeholders will be involved in the process. The school leaders, grade leaders or coordinators, teachers, parents, 
members of the extended cabinet, literacy coach and parent coordinator will collaborate to ensure that the various 
dimensions are in place to facilitate students' success. Where necessary, time adjustments (i.e. per session activities) 
and scheduling (i.e. periods for academic intervention) for personnel will be made to accommodate the process. All 
relevant materials and learning resources (i.e. laptops, general supplies) will be purchased for distribution to the staff 
in order to facilitate the process for achieving the required goals. 

 

 
Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 

X 

X 

Tax Levy 

Title I 
1003(a) 

X 

X 

Title I 
SWP 

Title III 

 

 

Title I TA 

X 

PTA 

Funded 

 

P/F Set-
aside 

SIG 
Grant 

X 

 

21st Century 

School 

Achievement 

Funding 

X 

 

C4E 

Other 

 
Part 5 – Progress Monitoring  

Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement 
planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 
By February 2019, we will strengthen and increase instructional rigor and the use of data to support learning as 
evidenced by at least 5% improvement in students' performance in mathematics and literacy formative and/or 
summative assessments.  

 
Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 

2018-19 SCEP-FF                                                                                                                                                                                          23 

The instruments of measure that will be used to see if we are on track to achieving our goals will be the most recent 
ELA and Math NY Ready exam results. 

 

Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action 
plan, if applicable. 

 

 

2018-19 SCEP-FF                                                                                                                                                                                          24 

 

Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans 

 
Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and 
school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 
5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health) 

Part 1 – Needs Assessment   

Part 1a.  Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice 
Tenet 5 Statement of Practice 
Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one.  Place an “X” in the 
appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 
5.2  The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and 

sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. 

5.3  The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional 

developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning 
experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students.  

5.4  All school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance 

of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and 
fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health 
supports tied to the school’s vision. 

5.5  The school leader and student support staff work together with teachers to establish structures 

to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental health 
needs.  

x 

SOP(s) 

Addressed 

 

 

 

 

Part 1b.  Needs/Areas of Focus: 
Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the 
most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources 
should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, 
NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School 
Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 
 

1.  What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element?  Indicate the data trends, source and 

year. 

2.  What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? 

Indicate the data trends, source and year. 

3.  What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? 

 

According to our 2017 Quality Review Report, on of our strengths is that it is evident that there are systems and 
partnerships in place to identify and support students’ social and emotional developmental health. The school 
specifically partners with local organizations (e.g. CAMBA, New York Cares), colleges (i.e. Medgar Evers College, Long 
Island University, Cornell University), and other agencies to address and support students' and family needs. As 
highlighted: 

  The school leaders articulate and promote a vision for fostering the school-wide social and emotional 

 

developmental health that is manifested through learning experiences and a safe school environment for 
children, teachers, and families. 
School stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance of their contribution 
in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and fosters a sense of ownership for 
providing social and emotional health supports tied to the school’s vision and mission. 

  Data (i.e. Number of principal & superintendent suspensions, teacher removals etc.) is used to establish 

structures to support student social and emotional health. This is particularly analyzed through the members of 
the school's Technical Assistance Center on Disproportionality (TAC-D) & Culturally Responsive Education (CRE) 

2018-19 SCEP-FF                                                                                                                                                                                          25 

 

Program in order to provide relevant support for the students. The staff is also supported with strategies of best 
practices to foster students' development.  

Although the Quality Review process indicated that our practices relative to promoting a safe and supportive 
environment for all students (Indicator 1.4) is proficient, this is still an area of priority for the school, as we have 
observed that there is still a need to provide our students with on-going support to accelerate their success. 
Additionally, according to our OORS, we have had a decline in our incidents, however, we have to ensure that there is 
continuity of expectations for all students across all grades. To that end, we have identified SOP 5.3 as the priority area 
in need of improvement at our school. We will continue to ensure that we support the development of the whole child 
through the various partnership and expertise of the support staff. We will tap into the various aspects of the students' 
strength in an effort to foster same while we seek to build on their areas of weaknesses on a day to day basis. The focus 
is not only on the academics but directed to all the other skill sets of the children's individuality. 

 

 

 
Part 2 – Annual Goal 

Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this 
element of the Framework for Great Schools –Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified 
priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-
bound.  
By June 2019, there will be a 10% reduction in the number of school-wide discipline infractions and occurrences 
reported, as measured by the Online Occurrence Reporting System. 

 

 

2018-19 SCEP-FF                                                                                                                                                                                          26 

 
Part 3a – Action Plan 

Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your 
school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this 
Framework for Great Schools element, including: 

Target 
Group(s) 
Who will be 
targeted? 

Timeline 
What is the 
start and 
end date? 

Key Personnel 
Who is responsible 
for implementing 
and overseeing the 
activity/strategy? 
(include school, 
educational 
consultants and/or 
CBO staff) 

  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional 

 

development, and/or systems and structures needed to 
impact change. 
Strategies to address the needs of students with 
disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need 
student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, 
STH). 

All teachers will continue to use the various dimensions of the LIU 
Sanford Harmony Program to enact greater changes in their 
classroom. They will also involve the parents in the process to 
ensure that the requirements are reinforced at home. They will use 
the grade appropriate materials to do so. In addition, the LIU field 
program coordinator will continue to support the staff and follow-
up to monitor the program success. All strategies used will include 
the needs of our SWDs and ENLs as needed. 

The PBIS team will continue to plan and implement a series of 
character building lesson plans for use throughout the school year, 
with school wide lessons to be conducted once a month. 
Additionally, a monthly schedule of PBIS based assemblies will be 
conducted for each grade level as well as monthly schedule for 
students to redeem incentives from the PBIS store. All strategies 
used will include the needs of our SWDs and ENLs as needed. The 
implementation of the bi-weekly school-wide community circle will 
also serve an asset for building character education for the students. 

Implementation of extra-curricular activities/clubs/advisory 
programs: Steel-pan program, Basketball program, Student council, 
Drama Club, Performance Arts club, and active participation in 
District wide competitions such as the Math completion, spelling 
bee, science fair, etc. These programs will be tailored to meet the 
needs of our SWD and ENL populations. 

 

In the Fall, the expectations of the LIU Sanford Harmony Social 
Emotional Program will be further extended in the classrooms with 
a focus on the literary aspects of the students' learning to reinforce 
ways of dealing with challenging issues and providing strategies for 
greater cooperation among them. This will be infused with the PBIS 
Program which has being implemented in the prior school year to 
enhance students' social-emotional growth. For both programs, 
more work will be done to ensure that the entire school community 
continue to maximize on the benefits from their use. 

The school will provide in-school and after-school intervention 
counseling for at risk students and their families. These programs 
will be tailored to meet the needs of our SWD and ENL populations. 

School 
stakeholders 
and students 

Every month 

Sept. 2018 – 
June 2019 

Teachers, support 
staff, External 
Program 
Coordinator, School 
Leaders 

School 
stakeholders 
and students 

Every month 

Sept. 2018 – 
June 2019 

PBIS Team Leaders 
and school leaders, 
teachers & students 

Grades K – 5 
as applicable 

Every month 

Sept. 2018 – 
June 2019 

School leaders, 
teachers, parent 
coordinator 

Grades K-5 

Every month  School guidance 

counselor, parents, 

2018-19 SCEP-FF                                                                                                                                                                                          27 

 

Parents will be involved in follow-up informational sessions 
regarding the LIU Sanford Harmony Program and PBIS as part of the 
PA Meetings and other events organized for them as part of the 
Community-building School Programs (e.g workshops, advisory 
programs). 

All parents 

Every month 

Oct. 2018 to 
June 2019 

School leaders, 
teachers, parent 
coordinator, external 
partners 

Sept. 2018-
June 2019 

students, Teachers 
(where necessary) 

In addition, parents will have the opportunity to participate in 
academic-based workshops (e.g. NYS Learning Standards, curriculum 
expectations, testing requirements, building computer skills, STEM 
etc.) as a form of support for parents to ensure continuity of the 
school’s academic program at home. These workshops will be 
organized by the school’s curriculum team, grade team leaders and 
administrators in conjunction with the PA and SLT. 

  
 
3b – Parent and Family Engagement 

How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to 
support  the  whole  child?  Include  the  timeline  and  identify  key  personnel  and  stakeholders  responsible  for 
implementation and oversight. 
The parents will be informed of the various support structures that are in place for the students. They will be 
informed through usual mail notifications(i.e. notices, monthly school calendar, grade newsletters) as well as 
scheduled sessions during events such as PTA, other scheduled workshops and school-wide events. They will be given 
strategies which can be used as part of their "tool-kit" for strengthening the expectations that the students learn at 
school. This will go into effect at the beginning of October, 2108 and extend to the beginning of June, 2019. Members 
of the SBST Team, school leaders as well as school team leaders (e.g. PBIS coordinator) will be charged with these 
responsibilities.  
 

 
Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 

Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including 
human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 
The teachers who are grade leaders, PBIS team leaders and guidance counselor will work on per session basis during 
extended time sessions on Wednesdays and Thursdays to ensure the effective implementation of all aspect of the 
program.  

In addition, the parent coordinator will incorporate the various dimensions of each program as part of the school-
wide family engagement events (Mornings, Evenings, weekends). 

Selected members of staff (i.e.teachers & support staff) with expertise on subject content will be utilized as part of 
the daily programming or during after-school per session activities to accommodate the processes. 

 

 
Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 

X 

X 

Tax Levy 

X 

Title I 
SWP 

Title I 
1003(a) 

 

Title III 

 

 

Title I TA 

X 

PTA 

Funded 

 

P/F Set-
aside 

SIG 
Grant 

 

 

21st Century 

School 

Achievement 

Funding 

X 

X 

C4E 

Other 

2018-19 SCEP-FF                                                                                                                                                                                          28 

 
 
Part 5 – Progress Monitoring  

Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement 
planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 
By February 2019 , we will review the number of incidents reported in OORS to see if there has been at least a 
minimum of 5% reduction in the reports, as compared to the same time for the last school year. 

 
Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 
The instruments used to measure our progress will be the school-wide OORS data reports. 

 

Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action 
plan, if applicable. 

2018-19 SCEP-FF                                                                                                                                                                                          29 

 

Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans 

Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success 
and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional 
development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 4: Teacher Practices 
and Decisions) 
 
Part 1 – Needs Assessment   

Part 1a.  Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice 
Tenet 4 Statement of Practice 
Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one.  Place an “X” in the 
appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 
4.2  School and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized 

around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. 

4.3  Teachers provide coherent, and appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards 

(CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. 

4.4  Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning 

environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences and tailored to the strengths 
and needs of all students. 

x 

SOP(s) 

Addressed 

 

 

 

4.5  Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by 
using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, 
and progress monitoring). 
Part 1b.  Needs/Areas of Focus: 
Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the 
most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources 
should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, 
NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School 
Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 
 

 

1.  What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element?  Indicate the data trends, source and 

year. 

2.  What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? 

Indicate the data trends, source and year. 

According to the 2017 Quality Review Report, the majority of the teachers are engaged in structured, inquiry-based 
grade level teams. Also, distributive leadership structures to advise on instructional decisions are in place. The teacher 
teams promote student performance goals in meeting the standards and strengthen the school-wide instructional 
capacity. The teachers have a voice on school-level decisions which foster leadership capacity and lead to meeting 
students' learning needs. The grade teams meet on a consistent basis to analyze assessment data and students' work 
products and to share teaching strategies. Teacher leaders work collaboratively with school leaders to make curricula 
and instructional revisions. The work of the teacher teams has led to increased teacher collaboration and the sharing of 
best practices. Teachers’ involvement in key decisions around curriculum and instruction has encouraged engagement in 
learning opportunities for all students. In addition, teachers use strategic comprehensive assessment systems and 
multiple measures of data structures and protocols to assess students' progress. This results in data-based instruction 
being timely and purposeful thus leading to higher levels of student achievement. 

Nonetheless, there is still room for growth towards the targeted outcomes. In order to effectively consolidate school-
wide practices in these areas: 

 

Although the Quality Review process indicated that our practices relative to teacher collaboration for promoting 
students' success (Indicator 4.2) is proficient, this is still an area of priority for the school, as we have observed that 
there is still a need for teachers and students to work together to implement classroom structures to create a learning 

2018-19 SCEP-FF                                                                                                                                                                                          30 

 

environment that is responsive to students varied experiences and tailored to the strengths and needs of all students. 
Additionally, though our school experienced slight growth in both ELA and Math, the results of our most recent State 
exams revealed that only 19.8% and 17.9% of all students performed at proficiency on the ELA and Math exams, 
respectively. It is for these reasons, that we have identified SOP 4.3 as the priority need this school year to ensure 
increased collaboration among all stakeholders geared at achieving greater gains with our students' success. We will 
continue to expand the work that we are doing in this area to foster consistency across the classes and facilitate 
increases success among the students. 

 

 

 
Part 2 – Annual Goal  

Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this 
element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified 
priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-
bound. 
By June 2019, teachers will strengthen and increase instructional rigor and the use of data to support learning within 
their teacher teams as evidenced by 10% improvement in students' performance in mathematics and literacy formative 
and/or summative assessments.  

 

 

2018-19 SCEP-FF                                                                                                                                                                                          31 

Key Personnel 
Who is responsible 
for implementing 
and overseeing the 
activity/strategy? 
(include school, 
educational 
consultants and/or 
CBO staff) 

Teachers and 
paras 

Every month 
Sept. 2018- 
June 2019 

School Leaders, 
Teachers, 
Paraprofessionals 
Technology-based 
PD Providers 

 
Part 3a – Action Plan 

Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your 
school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this 
Framework for Great Schools element, including: 

Target 
Group(s) 
Who will be 
targeted? 

Timeline 
What is the 
start and 
end date? 

  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional 

 

development, and/or systems and structures needed to 
impact change. 
Strategies to address the needs of students with 
disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need 
student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, 
STH). 

The school leaders will continue to enhance the opportunities that 
teachers have to meet with their colleagues in order to develop and 
share strategic data-based plans that are designed to promote 
student success and monitor students' progress. As such, 
considerations will be given to such requirements during school-
wide scheduling of teacher programs. The priority need for this 
school year will be to: provide opportunities to increase alignment 
between (a) teacher practice, the curriculum expectations and 
outcomes and students' success; (b) teacher planning and use of the 
relevant curriculum materials with the current data; and (c) teacher 
practice, use of data and assessment techniques and tracking to 
increase the levels of students' achievement. This will be afforded 
through more structured teacher team meetings, development of a 
structured data-wise team, differentiated PD and curriculum 
planning sessions geared towards enhancing teacher practice with 
specific embedded support for the less effective teachers. In 
addition, there will be increased opportunities for teachers of arts 
and technology to work with teacher teams to plan for 
interdisciplinary curricula integrating technology and the arts. Also, 
the school leaders will ensure that the teachers engage in a 
distributive leadership model by means of the vertical team 
meetings, participation in the Principal's Advisory Team, the 
extended cabinet, and the Teacher Leaders/coordinator Team 
Approach.  

The school leaders and staff will continue to utilize common 
planning time and professional development sessions to develop 
common assessments, monitor student outcomes, and adjust 
curricula and instruction based on data trends. 

 

The school leaders and staff will continue to utilize formative 
assessments during instruction to monitor progress and include 
activities geared to achieve instructional outcomes. 

The staff will be provided with multiple opportunities to 
collaboratively review students' data and identify trends for tracking 
students' progress by using a school-created tracking sheet for 
identifying skills mastery. This includes reviewing the Item Skills 

Teachers, 
Students 

Every month 
Sept. 2018- 
June 2019 

School Leaders, 
Teachers, PD team 
Leaders, Literacy 
Coach 

2018-19 SCEP-FF                                                                                                                                                                                          32 

Teachers and 
paras 

Every month 

Sept. 2018- 
June 2019 

P.D. Team Leaders, 
Coaches School 
Leaders 

Teachers and 
paras 

Every month 

School leaders & 
selected staff 

Oct. 2018-
May 2019 

Parents & 
Students 

Every month 

School leaders and 
teachers 

October 
2018 – May 
2019 

 

Analysis Report for the 2017-18 NYS ELA, math & Science Exams, 
School-wide Benchmarks for mastery of content,Measures of 
Student Learning (MOSLs), etc. The results will be used to make 
curricular and instructional modifications and decisions to facilitate 
students' success. 

The school-wide professional development team will develop a 
calendar of support for the entire staff, groups of teachers, and 
individuals identified based upon their areas of need. Needs will be 
identified through the use of a staff survey as well as using data 
from the teachers' 2017-18 observation reports. Teacher leaders or 
grade coordinators will be trained or allowed to attend off-site PD in 
areas of need and be expected to turn-key training to staff in the 
teacher team setting and differentiated PD. In addition, external 
providers such as National Training Network (NTN), ELevate, 
Curriculum Associates will be utilized in the process. Also, the 
Teacher Development as well as the Literacy Coach will be utilized in 
the process to facilitate embedded PD for targeted outcomes. 

The school leaders will provide opportunities for teachers to engage 
in collaborative team teaching and conducting inter-visitations. They 
will also visit partner schools within the District to observe best 
practices in order to bolster their practices for accommodating 
students' success. 

The school leaders will ensure the facilitation of professional 
development sessions for parents in vocabulary skills building, 
strategies/technigues for teaching reading, ELA content readiness, 
mathematics content readiness, and familiarity with technology-
based resources used on a school-wide level. This will be conducted 
during the weekday after-school sessions, weekends and P.A. 
meetings. 

 

The school leaders will expand the involvement of the staff through 
and extended cabinet as a means of assisting with monitoring 
students' progress and with helping students self-assess their 
understanding of a concept. 

 

The work of the Principal Advisory Team will continue on a broader 
scale to closely work with the strategic members of the school 
community (e.g. literacy coach) to monitor the effectiveness of 
various school-wide programs.  

  
 
3b – Parent and Family Engagement 

How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies 
to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and 
identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. 
The members of staff will be utilized to mobilize the parents on a class or school-wide level to be part of the teaching 
and learning process. The staff will be encouraged to conduct in-class learning activities for the parents apart from the 

2018-19 SCEP-FF                                                                                                                                                                                          33 

 

school-level events such as shows, assemblies, parent conferences etc. to engage parents accordingly. This process 
will begin at the end of September, 2018 and continues to May, 2019. The members of Principal Advisory Team will 
spearhead the implementation of schedules and dates when such events will be organized for various grade bands. 
However, teachers are responsible for organizing classroom-based events on a continuous basis.  
 

 
Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 

Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including 
human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 
 

The relevant funding will be set aside for (a) the purchase of resources (i.e. supplemental curricular materials-
students’ workbook, teachers’ guides and content support materials), (b) securing technology equipment and 
relevant learning intervention software, (c) procuring materials (e.g. relevant parents’ informational handbook, pens, 
paper etc.) to facilitate the training of the staff and parents alike, (d) professional development of the staff with 
relevant learning systems (e.g. smart board training), and (e) payment for per session services for the staff to do the 
extra work with the students after school or on the weekend. Additional grants will be written to secure funds from 
the appropriate sources (e.g. donors choose) as well as from political representatives to make the relevant tools and 
resources accessible and available to everyone on a school-wide level. 

 
Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 

X 

X 

Tax Levy 

Title I 
1003(a) 

X 

X 

Title I 
SWP 

Title III 

 

 

Title I TA 

X 

PTA 

Funded 

 

P/F Set-
aside 

SIG 
Grant 

 

 

21st Century 

School 

Achievement 

Funding 

X 

X 

C4E 

Other 

 
Part 5 – Progress Monitoring  

Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement 
planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 
By February 2019, teachers will strengthen and increase instructional rigor and the use of data to support learning 
within their teacher teams, as evidenced by 5% improvement in students' performance in mathematics and literacy 
formative and/or summative assessments.  

 
Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 
The instruments of measure that will be used to see if we are on track to achieving our goals will be the most recent 
ELA and Math NY Ready exam results. 

 

Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action 
plan, if applicable. 

2018-19 SCEP-FF                                                                                                                                                                                          34 

 

Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans 

 

Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and 
nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional 
support that drives student achievement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions) 
 
Part 1 – Needs Assessment   

Part 1a.  Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice 
Tenet 2 Statement of Practice 
Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one.  Place an “X” in the 
appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 
2.2  The school leader ensures that the school community shares the Specific, Measurable, 

Ambitious, Results-oriented, and Timely (SMART) goals/mission and long-term vision inclusive 
of core values that address the priorities outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational 
Plan (SCEP). 
Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital 
resources. 

2.3 

2.4  The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district's Annual 

Professional Performance Review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and 
track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. 

2.5  Leaders effectively use evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve 

critical individual and school-wide practices as defined in the SCEP (student achievement, 
curriculum and teacher practices; leadership development; community/family engagement; 
and student social and emotional developmental health). 

x 

x 

SOP(s) 

Addressed 

 

 

 

 

Part 1b.  Needs/Areas of Focus: 
Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the 
most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources 
should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, 
NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School 
Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 
 

1.  What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element?  Indicate the data trends, source and 

year. 

2.  What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? 

Indicate the data trends, source and year. 

According to the most recent 2017 Quality Review and 2018 Measures of Leadership Practice (MOLP) Report, the school 
leaders have functional systems and structures in place to leverage resources as aligned to the Common Core Learning 
Standards (CCLS) and School District expectations. The school leaders have made use of available resources, especially 
community-based partnerships, and the structures to program students throughout the day, including academic 
interventions as aligned with the school's academic goals. As a result, the learning opportunities provided for the 
students lead to college and career readiness which is evident in the students' work products and the increase of 
effective personal behaviors. In addition, systems have been established for promoting the progress of teachers' 
practices as aligned to students’ data and providing relevant feedback for facilitating academic as well as social-
emotional growth. This include: 

 

 

School leaders effectively using evidence-based systems and structures to monitor and foster the improvement 
of lower performing teachers as well as bolstering relevant school wide practices as defined in the SCEP. Thus, a 
series of partnerships and support structures are in place to enhance the desired outcomes on all levels 
especially for yielding greater students' success.  
School leaders are making strategic decisions that support the social and academic development of all students, 
thus, resulting in an environment that is more conducive to teaching and learning as well as continuous and 
sustainable school improvement. The school's approach to culture building, discipline, and social emotional 
support results in a safe and inclusive culture; students and adult treat treat each other respectfully and 

2018-19 SCEP-FF                                                                                                                                                                                          35 

 

students' voice is welcome and valued. Additionally, structures are in to ensure that each student is known well 
by at least one adult who coordinates social-emotional learning, child/youth development, and guidance 
supports that align with students' learning needs. For example, the school embraces the Positive Behaviors 
Interventions and Supports (PBIS) Program in which students receive Badger bucks for modelling good 
citizenship and appropriate behaviors. Additionally, there is a student government in which students' voice their 
thoughts and concerns with the administrative team. 
School leaders ensure that the use of resources and other organizational decisions (e.g. programming) are 
aligned to and support the school's instructional goals and college and career readiness. Additionally, students' 
program groupings and interventions including those for the ELLs and SWDs, effectively support access to 
learning opportunities that lead to college and career readiness.  

 

Although the Quality Review process indicated that our practices relative to school leadership for nurturing professional 
growth of the staff and ensuring school-wide success (Indicator 3.4) is proficient, this is still an area of priority for the 
school, as we have observed that the school leadership must continue to ensure that there are functional systems in 
place to conduct targeted and frequent observations and track progress of teachers' practices based on student data 
and feedback. Additionally, we have a number of new members of staff who have joined our team and It is for these 
reasons, that we have identified SOP 3.4 as the priority need for this school year to ensure that all members of staff get 
the relevant support which will ultimately yield students' success.. 

 

 
Part 2 – Annual Goal 

Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this 
element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the 
identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART– Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, 
and Time-bound.  
 

By June 2019, the school leaders will strengthen the staff's instructional and data driven practices to support teacher 
effectiveness as evidenced by 10% improvement in the students' performance in mathematics and literacy formative 
and/or summative assessments. 

 

 

2018-19 SCEP-FF                                                                                                                                                                                          36 

 
Part 3a – Action Plan 

Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your 
school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this 
Framework for Great Schools element, including: 

Target 
Group(s) 
Who will be 
targeted? 

Timeline 
What is the 
start and 
end date? 

Key Personnel 
Who is responsible 
for implementing 
and overseeing the 
activity/strategy? 
(include school, 
educational 
consultants and/or 
CBO staff) 

The school 
community 

Every month 

School leaders, team 
leaders 

Sept. 2018 – 
June 2019 

The school 
staff, parents 

Every month 

School leaders, 
collaborative teams 

Sept. 2018 – 
June 2019 

  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional 

 

development, and/or systems and structures needed to 
impact change. 
Strategies to address the needs of students with 
disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need 
student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, 
STH). 

The principal will define school goals as articulated in improvement 
plans to increase a shared understanding of what the school should 
look like and what needs to be done to get there, as well as high 
expectations for all students, including ENLs and SWDs. School 
improvement teams (e.g. the extended cabinet, the principal 
advisory team, grade coordinators) will meet on regularly scheduled 
basis to promote collaborative problem solving, decision-making 
and communication using relevant data from various sources to 
make recommendations for school improvement. 
Recommendations will be articulated by team leaders to various 
constituencies as a means of sharing information and feedback. All 
teams will maintain agendas and notes as a means of documenting 
the decisions that are made for facilitating the school-wide plans. 
Additionally, parents and families will be educated on the school's 
goals and improvement plans during parent association meetings, 
SLT meetings and other parent events such as orientations, Open 
House etc. 

School leaders in conjunction with the school's data teams will 
engage in the analysis of formative and summative assessment data 
to identify and make recommendations for changes in the 
instructional program and other academic initiatives. Grade level 
data will be recorded and made available to the staff and teacher 
teams for analysis and to modify instructional plans, including 
curriculum maps/unit plans. Also structures will be embedded to 
promote students' self-assessment and monitoring of their progress. 
Parents will be educated on how to understand and prepare their 
children for formative exams during parent workshop or other 
scheduled activities. 

In this area, the school leadership will continue to ensure that there 
is growth in the area of assessment, enhancement of teacher 
pedagogy and the implementation of more structured systems for 
monitoring school-wide progress. The leaders will have structures in 
place to ensure that across all classrooms, teachers use or create 
assessments, rubrics and consistent grading policies that are aligned 
to the school's curricula, thus providing actionable feedback to 
students and teachers regarding students' achievement. 
Additionally, the school will continue to use common assessments 

2018-19 SCEP-FF                                                                                                                                                                                          37 

 

to determine progress across grades and subjects where the results 
will be used to adjust curricula and instruction.  

School leaders will engage in the alignment of all resources to 
maximize attainment of school improvement goals. Resources will 
include budget allocations, staff assignments, calendar of 
professional development, purchasing of relevant equipment and 
seeking support from the District 17 support staff as well as the FSC 
support staff to reinforce the elements of the school's improvement 
plans . 

School leaders will collaborate with the SBST to implement support 
structures for fostering students' social-emotional development.  

The school leaders will participate in professional development to 
strengthen their skills in modeling of instruction; implementation of 
ADVANCE; conferencing effectively with teachers to improve their 
pedagogy; to promote an in depth understanding of the standards; 
and, analysis of student data to inform instructional planning. 

School 
leaders 

  
 
3b – Parent and Family Engagement 

The school 

Every month 

School leaders 

staff 

Sept. 2018 – 
June 2019 

The school 
leaders, SBST 
team 

Every month 

School leaders, SBST 
members 

Sept. 2018 – 
June 2019 

Every month 

school leaders  

Sept. 2018 – 
June 2019 

How  will  your  school  engage  parents/families  and  support  their  understanding  of  Effective  School  Leadership  and 
strategies  to  promote  parent  leadership  and  engagement  in  order  to  support  their  children  at  home?  Include  the 
timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. 
The school leaders will plan, coordinate and spearhead the relevant information program for the families. This include 
sending notifications to the parents in the respective languages, engaging parents at various events, or scheduling 
special conferences as necessary. In all cases, the parent coordinator becomes a critical partner in the process to 
ensure that the parents feel welcome as part of the school community and decision-making process. This process will 
commence at the beginning of September, 2018 and culminate at the end of June, 2019.  

 

 
Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 

Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including 
human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 
 

The school leadership will incorporate the support of District 17's instructional support team, FSC instructional 
support team, Office of teacher Effectiveness to ensure the successful implementation of the various structures to 
facilitate success. When necessary teachers will be encouraged to participate in after school or weekend per session 
activities that will support the process. Also, the members of staff will be scheduled as necessary to attend relevant 
sessions during the regular school hours and to turn-key the information thereafter to the staff. 

 
Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 

X 

Tax Levy 

 

Title I 
1003(a) 

X 

X 

Title I 
SWP 

Title III 

 

 

Title I TA 

X 

PTA 

Funded 

 

P/F Set-
aside 

SIG 
Grant 

 

 

21st Century 

School 

Achievement 

Funding 

X 

X 

C4E 

Other 

 
Part 5 – Progress Monitoring  

2018-19 SCEP-FF                                                                                                                                                                                          38 

 

Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement 
planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 
By February 2019, school leaders will strengthen the staff's instructional and data driven practices to support teacher 
effectiveness as evidenced by 5% improvement in students' performance in mathematics and literacy formative 
and/or summative assessments. 

 

 
Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 
The instruments that will be used to measure our progress towards achieving our annual goal is the Advance rating 
system and the most recent ELA and Math NY Ready exam results.. 

 

Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action 
plan, if applicable. 
 

2018-19 SCEP-FF                                                                                                                                                                                          39 

 

Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans 

 
Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a 
welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. 
(Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement) 
 
Part 1 – Needs Assessment   

Part 1a.  Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice 
Tenet 6 Statement of Practice 
Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one.  Place an “X” in the 
appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 
6.2  The school leader ensures that regular communication with students and families fosters their 

high expectations for student academic achievement.  

6.3  The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and 
community stakeholders so that student strength and needs are identified and used to 
augment learning. 

6.4  The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide 
training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to support 
student success. 

x 

6.5  The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school 

community members centered on student learning and success and encourages and empowers 
families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their 
children. 

SOP(s) 

Addressed 

 

 

 

 

Part 1b.  Needs/Areas of Focus: 
Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the 
most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources 
should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, 
NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School 
Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 
 

1.  What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element?  Indicate the data trends, source and 

year. 

2.  What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? 

Indicate the data trends, source and year. 

According to the 2017 Quality Review Report, the school leaders and teachers have established policies and practices 
that consistently support a culture for learning and communicates high expectations to staff, students and families. The 
school staff is encouraged to have a policy of open and frequent communication with students, parents, and the 
community. This structure fosters a welcoming, trusting, and respectful environment for all stakeholders. As a result, 
the school community actively participates in supporting students’ academic progress and personal growth. The school 
leader ensures that regular communication with students and families fosters their high expectations for student 
academic achievement. The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide 
training and resources across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental & mental health) to support 
student success. The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and community 
members centered on student learning and success and encourages and empowers families to understand and use data 
to advocate for appropriate support services for their children. 

In addition, we focus on ensuring that we provide greater support for families whose primary language is not English. 
This include ensuring that all notices, messages, letters and other relevant information sent home to the families are 
translated in five other languages especially Spanish, Haitian Creole and Arabic since we have a growing population of 
students from these communities. In addition, we provide families with in-house translation services as provided by 
members of the staff primarily by the ENL teachers who are the first point of language support for the families. This is 

2018-19 SCEP-FF                                                                                                                                                                                          40 

 

also extended to major school-wide events such as Family Night, PA Meetings, workshops as well as other general 
school business.  

Although the above-mentioned areas of the Quality Review process indicated that our practices relative to family 
engagement (Indicator 3.1) is proficient, this is still an area of priority for the school, as we have observed that we must 
continue to partner with more community-based organizations to provide our families with the support structures that 
will help to facilitate students' success . Additionally, as the dynamics of the community continues to change, It is for 
these reasons, that we have identified SOP 6.4 as the priority need for this school year.  

 

 
Part 2 – Annual Goal 

Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this 
element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the 
identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, 
and Time-bound.  
By June 2019, family and community engagement will increase by a minimum of 5-8% as evidenced by sign in sheets for 
monthly Parent Association meetings, scheduled workshops and other school-wide events. 

 

 

2018-19 SCEP-FF                                                                                                                                                                                          41 

 
Part 3a – Action Plan 

Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your 
school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this 
Framework for Great Schools element, including: 

Target 
Group(s) 
Who will be 
targeted? 

Timeline 
What is the 
start and 
end date? 

  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional 

 

development, and/or systems and structures needed to 
impact change. 
Strategies to address the needs of students with 
disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need 
student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, 
STH). 

Key Personnel 
Who is responsible 
for implementing 
and overseeing the 
activity/strategy? 
(include school, 
educational 
consultants and/or 
CBO staff) 

The school Parent Association and parent coordinator will plan a 
calendar of professional development and activities for parents on a 
monthly basis. Workshops will address school related topics and the 
personal needs of our families (housing, employment, immigration, 
social services, etc.) 

Parents, 
community 
partners 

Every month 
Sept. 2018– 
June 2019 

P.A. President, 
parent coordinator, 
school 
leaders,teachers 

 

The school leaders, the SLT, and Parent Association will continue to 
provide parents with opportunities to engage with the school and 
participate in workshops and events that help to prepare their 
children to be college and career ready. In addition, we should 
further develop plans for outreach and communication to parents 
who are not involved in the school community or the Parent 
Association. 

 

School leaders will continue to identify the needs of parents and 
maximize opportunities to include them as partners in their 
children’s education. 

 

The school leader will explore alternative ways of communicating 
with the families by using other communicative mediums such as 
Facebook, Twitter, SchoolNXT, school messenger etc. This will help 
to further target the parents who usually do not use the traditional 
means of communicating with the school. 

Parent Handbook for incoming and over the counter registrants will 
be used as a resource guide for understanding school policies and 
procedures. This will complement the ongoing distribution of the 
NYCDOE and community agencies informational packets, and the 
Principal's monthly update to the parents. All information will be 
translated in English, Haitian Creole, and Spanish, Arabic & French as 
necessary.  

Parents 

Every month 

School leaders and 
support staff 

Sept. 2018 – 
June 2019 

We are now partnering with community organizations such as NYU 
Medical Center, Cornell University, NYC Dept. of Health and New 

Parents, 
families 

Every month  School Leaders 

2018-19 SCEP-FF                                                                                                                                                                                          42 

 

York Cares, Ifetayo Cultural Academy to implement school-wide 
programs and projects to enhance the lives of our families. 

Oct. 2018- 
June 2019 

Student recognition ceremonies will be held at parent association 
meetings, our newly established bi-weekly community circles as well 
as during the school day as part of special assemblies. Celebration of 
students will be in the areas of academics, attendance, and 
community service. We are continuing to work on providing a 
parent-friendly mechanism for parents to be able to view weekly 
homework and special assignments for each class, (i.e. school 
website, grade newsletters) 

The planning and the implementation of more school wide events 
for parents, including but not limited to the Annual Family Field Day, 
The International Festival, Book Fair for parents, meet the teacher 
nights, student progress reports in addition to report cards, 
volunteer training through Learning Leaders, and conferences are in 
place. 

  
 
3b – Parent and Family Engagement 

The school 

Every month 

community 

October 
2018– June 
2019 

School leaders, P.A., 
parent coordinator, 
teachers 

The school 
community 

Every month 

School leaders, P.A., 
parent coordinator 

October 
2018 – June 
2019 

If  any,  list  the  Community  Based  Organizations  or  other  partnerships  that  support  parent/family  and  community 
engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. 
CAMBA, New York Cares, Cornell University, Medgar Evers College, NYC Dept. of Health, NYU Langone Medical Center 

 

 
Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 

Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including 
human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 
The relevant parent engagement funds will be used to ensure the provision of these services such as the procurement 
of services from appropriate consultants or providers. Also, supplement funds will be secured to offset some of the 
related cost associated with the implementation of some family engagement activities such as movie nights, family 
nights, field trips etc. Also, members of staff will be encouraged to volunteer to support the various programs. Staff 
will be compensated where possible in the form of per session activities to accommodate the process. 

 
Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 

X 

Tax Levy 

 

Title I 
SWP 

 

Title I 
1003(a) 

X 

Title III 

 

 

Title I TA 

X 

PTA 

Funded 

 

P/F Set-
aside 

SIG 
Grant 

 

 

21st Century 

 

C4E 

School 

Achievement 

X 

Other 

Funding 

 
Part 5 – Progress Monitoring  

Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement 
planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 
 

By February, 2019, there will be a a minimum of 5% increase of participation in family engagement events, as 
evidenced by sign in sheets. 

 
Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 

2018-19 SCEP-FF                                                                                                                                                                                          43 

 

 

The instrument of measure for our annual goal will be parent sign-in sheets verifying their attendance to these 
events. 

 

Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action 
plan, if applicable. 

2018-19 SCEP-FF                                                                                                                                                                                          44 

 

Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS)  

(Required for All Schools) 

Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services 
(AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records 
need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area 
listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. 
 

Type of Academic 
Intervention 
Service (AIS) 

English Language 
Arts (ELA) 

Criteria for 
determining AIS 
services (For 
additional guidance, 
refer to NYSED’s 
memo.) 
All students, 
including ENL and 
SWD subgroups, who 
are performing 
below grade level as 
evidenced by data 
derived from 
formative and 
summative 
assessments as well 
as teacher 
recommendations. 

 

When the service is 
provided (e.g. during 
the school day, 
before or after 
school, etc.) 

During the school 
day, Wednesdays 
and Thursdays, 2:40 
– 4:40 p.m. 
andSaturdays9am-12 
pm 

 

Type of program or 
strategy (e.g. repeated 
readings, interactive 
writings, etc.) 

Method for delivery 
of service (e.g. small 
group, one-to-one, 
tutoring, etc.) 

Extended time: 
Wednesdays and 
Thursdays, from 
2:40 – 4:40 p.m., 
and Saturdays9am-
12 pm; class size will 
average 10-15 
students per group 
on the 1 st – 2 nd 
grades, and 15-20 
on grades 3-5. 

 

The extended time 
program provides 
additional support to all 
students, grades K – 5, 
including ENL and SWD 
cohorts, who have been 
identified as performing 
below grade level. 
Students will receive 
four hours of additional 
weekly and 3 hours 
weekend support in 
literacy and 
mathematics. We use, 
for grades 1-2 , the 
“Focus” reading 
intervention series, and 
“Write”. Grades 3-5 use 
the “Ready” N.Y. CCLS 
aligned reading series. 
Both programs provide 
CCLS aligned 
intervention and 
enrichment instruction. 
ENL students are taught 
by state certified ENL 
teachers. During 
scheduled blocks of the 
day program, teachers 
of grades K-1 implement 
the “Wonders” phonics 
based program. All 
grades will implement 
Guided Reading to 
target specific skills 
based on reading levels. 

 

2018-19 SCEP-FF                                                                                                                                                                                          45 

 

Mathematics 

Science 

All students, 
including ENL and 
SWD subgroups, who 
are performing 
below grade level as 
evidenced by data 
derived from 
formative and 
summative 
assessments. 

 

Grade 3 students 
performing at levels 
1 and 2 on the 2017-
2018ELA state exam 
and a level 2 or 
lower on baseline 
and benchmark 
assessments in the 
content area. They 
will become 
thetarget group for 
support to ensure 
that they meet the 
science 
requirements 

 

Social Studies 

Students achieving 
below level 3 on 
benchmark 
assessments. 

 

During the daily 
math block, 
teachers use whole 
class, guided 
practice, 
independent 
practice, small 
group, and 
conferencing to 
support all students. 
During the extended 
time after-school 
program and 
Saturday Programs, 
students are 
grouped according 
to ability levels. 

 
Instruction is 
delivered using 
whole class, small 
group, and 
individualized 
models. 

 

Day School – all 
grades programmed 
for a daily 90 block 
of instruction in 
mathematics. After 
school is scheduled 
for Weds. And 
Thurs., 2:40 – 4:40 
pm 
andSaturdays9am-12 
pm 

 

Students are 
programmed for 
science 3xs per week 
with their classroom 
teacher. Grades 4 
and 5 are 
programmed for 
science with the 
Science Cluster 
Teacher 3xs a week. 
The infusion of 
content based 
literature during the 
literacy block occurs 
weekly. The after-
school science 
program will offer an 
additional 2 hours of 
direct instruction. 

 

Whole class and 
small group models. 

 

2 -3 xs per week with 
the classroom 
teacher.  

 

All students receive 90 
minutes of dedicated 
math instruction, five 
days per week, using the 
GoMath program. This 
program incorporates 
whole class, small group, 
and 
intervention/enrichment 
support for ENL and 
SWD students. The 
after-school program 
uses the Ready math 
intervention/test prep 
program and is in 
alignment with the 
CCLS. 

 
We use the inquiry 
based the new Amplify 
Science program on all 
grade levels. We have 
infused content based 
literature and writing in 
the 90 minute literacy 
block. Pending funding, 
we will commence the 
science after-school 
program for fourth 
grade students in Feb. 
2018 – May 2018. The 
instructional approach is 
inquiry based with 
hands on 
experimentation and 
writing in response to 
literature. Instruction 
will also focus on 
developing content level 
vocabulary and 
increasing 
comprehension skills. 

 
The school will 
implement the new NYC 
Scope and Sequence 
model. Using our 
Wonders and Ready Gen 
series, we are able to 
infuse additional social 
studies content through 
the use of non-fiction 
and fiction literature, to 

2018-19 SCEP-FF                                                                                                                                                                                          46 

provide additional 
support in the areas of 
writing in response to 
informational text and 
comprehension of 
documents and 
historical information. 
Teachers use unit 
assessment data to 
inform their 
instructional planning 
for whole class and 
small groups. Students 
engage in small group 
and independent 
projects. 

 
IEP mandated; crisis 
intervention; one to 
one; small group; family 

 

 

 

At-risk services 
(e.g. provided by 
the Guidance 
Counselor, School 
Psychologist, Social 
Worker, etc.) 

Students receiving 
AIS services are 
identified in October 
and November, with 
periodic review of 
late over the counter 
registrants. The 
guidance staff and 
SBST work closely to 
identify students in 
need of academic 
and social support. 
At risk needs would 
include attendance 
issues, behavioral 
problems, hold over 
status, and failure to 
show academic 
progress on 
formative and 
summative 
assessments. 
Teachers submit 
referrals to the 
LRE/PPT/SIT team for 
review and 
recommendations of 
support. Parents in 
consultation with 
guidance staff and 
school leaders may 
also submit requests 
for additional 
support services. 

 

One to one; small 
group; family 

 

As scheduled by the 
counselor during the 
day program 

After-school sessions 
are by appointment 
scheduled by the 
counselor and 
family. 

 

2018-19 SCEP-FF                                                                                                                                                                                          47 

 

Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH)  

 

Directions: 
-  All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. 
-  All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. 
 
Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) 
As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the 
federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and 
report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support 
your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: 
http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf   

Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 

 

1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your 
school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE 
systems and may change over the course of the year.) 

2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. 

81 
students  

 

The attendance of the students are carefully monitored by the attendance team. Any student whose attendance 
shows any trend that may affect their success is addressed by members of the team, the STH social worker and the 
guidance counselor. In cases where the issues may be beyond the students' scope of responsibility, the parent is 
contacted for a conference with the primary objective of providing support for the family. This may be in the form of 
referrals to relevant city agencies etc. In addition, the students are provided with school-related packages (i.e. book 
bags, notebooks, pencils, uniforms etc.) after consultation and approval of the family. Students are also included in all 
school-related activities to ensure that their learning experiences are enhanced like any other students. Exceptions 
are made where necessary to take into account restrictions related to the residents' policies for their temporary 
homes. In addition, students are given preferences as necessary for incentives such as tickets to special shows, games 
etc.  

 

Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 

1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school 
(please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). 

NA 

 

2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 

2018-19 SCEP-FF                                                                                                                                                                                          48 

 

NA 

 

3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary 
housing.  If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation 
Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question.  If your school did not receive an allocation 
and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. 

NA 

 

 

2018-19 SCEP-FF                                                                                                                                                                                          49 

 

 

Section 8: Title I Program Information 

Directions: 
  All schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1 
  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2 
  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3 
  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4  
 

If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can 
be found 

  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage 
 
Part 1: Title I Status 

Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. 

X 

Schoolwide Program (SWP) 

 

Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools  

 

Non-Title I 

 
Part 2: All Title I Schools 

2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) 

Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support 
including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. 
 

-Recommendations from DOE teacher recruitment initiatives 

-Attendance at District /DOE teacher fairs to screen effective candidates 

-Using highly qualified mentors for first/second year teachers 

-Ensuring in class support through modeling and conferencing with new teacher. This will also be supported by inter-
visitations and conducting non-threatening peer feedback 

-Identifying suitable professional development for members of staff 

-Making provisions with effective scheduling for teachers to observe partner teachers. This will be bolstered with 
inter-visitations to partner schools within the new school year. 

 

 
2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development 

Describe the strategies and activities for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, staff, and 
paraprofessionals that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS).  
 

-School based inter-visitations and observations of effective instruction by peer teachers. 

-Teachers engage in professional development facilitated on and off site by school leaders, teacher leads, District 
instructional specialist, Teacher Effectiveness Office, and FSC Staff 

-Each grade will have 5 common planning periods per week to facilitate collaborative instructional planning, engage in 
professional development, and participate in grade level and teacher team meetings. 

2018-19 SCEP-FF                                                                                                                                                                                          50 

 

-Select teachers will participate in visitations to District high performance schools to observe instructional programs 
and highly effective teachers. Learned strategies and practices will be turn keyed to staff. 

-Regularly scheduled professional development, as identified by the school professional development team, will be 
implemented on Mondays, 2:40 pm – 4:00 pm. 

-Attending District-sponsored conferences, retreats or workshops that serve as a form of support 

-Partnering with other Lead Principals as a form of support and guidance 

 

 
Part 3: TA Schools Only 

3a. Use of Program Resources 

Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. 
NA 

 

 
3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program 

Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., 
providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from 
the regular classroom during regular school day). 
NA 

 

 
Part 4: SWP Schools Only 

4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only)  

Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary 
school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/information, 
early intervention services, etc.). 
All pre-K teachers and paras participate in the Monday professional development sessions and are assigned to 
Teacher Teams. Teachers work closely with kindergarten teachers to ensure scaffolding of instruction and sharing of 
records at the end of the school year. Pre-K students attend Kindergarten events and parents of pre-K students have 
the opportunity to meet K teachers in late spring to discuss the course of study and preparation of their children over 
the summer for entry into kindergarten. Classroom visits to familiarize students with the expectations are also 
scheduled for the families. A series of joint sessions are scheduled for the parents to participate and share 
experiences related to the students' learning experiences. 

 

 
4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments 

Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate 
multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to 
improve instruction.    
We have a School Professional Development Team (members identified by UFT and school leader) that is responsible 
for conducting a needs assessment, developing a calendar of activities, and implementing benchmark and summative 
analysis of the overall effectiveness of the program in June. The MOSL team is responsible for the selection of multiple 
assessment measures of student progress. This is augmented by the selection of formative and summative materials 
by the teachers in collaboration with the grade-supervisor and testing coordinator. The Principal's Advisory 

2018-19 SCEP-FF                                                                                                                                                                                          51 

 

Team/curriculum Team/Extended Cabinet is also another medium for ensuring that different members of the staff 
play a vital role in the decision-making process and development of school-wide initiatives. 

 

 
4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools 

Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and 
Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible 
for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds enables, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its 
Schoolwide plan (SCEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program 
contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the 
intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, 
State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the 
amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met 
the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. 
Program Name 

Fund Source 
(i.e. Federal, 
State or Local) 

Funding Amount 
Indicate the amount 
contributed to 
Schoolwide pool. 
(Refer to Galaxy for 
school allocation 
amounts) 

Place an (X) in Column A below to verify 
that the school has met the intent and 
purposes of each program whose funds are 
consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section 
references where a related program activity 
has been described in this plan. 

Column A 

Verify with an (X) 

Column B 

Section Reference(s) 
5A-Parts 1b & 3, 5C-
Part 1b & 3, 5D-
Parts 1b & 3, 5E-
Parts 1b & 3. 

 
5A-Parts 1b & 3, 5B-
Parts 1b & 3,5C-Part 
1b & 3, 5D-Parts 1b 
& 3 

 
5A-Parts 1b & 3,5C-
Part 1b & 3, 5E-Parts 
1b & 3. 

 
5D-Parts 1b & 3,5E-
Parts 1b & 3. 

 
5A-Parts 1b & 3,5E-
Parts 1b & 3. 

 
 

5A-Parts 1b & 3,5B-
Parts 1b & 3,5C-Part 
1b & 3, 5D-Parts 1b 
& 3,5E-Parts 1b & 3. 

 

Title I Part A (Basic) 

Federal 

Title I School Improvement 
1003(a) 

Federal 

$ 317,442.00 

 

$ 16,979.00 

 

$ 108,077.00 

Title I Priority and Focus 
School Improvement Funds 

Federal 

 

Title II, Part A 

Federal 

 

$ 110,581.00 

Title III, Part A 

Federal 

Title III, Immigrant 

Federal 

Tax Levy (FSF) 

Local 

$ 12,366.00 

 

0  

$ 2,494,841.00 

 

 

x 

 

x  

x 

 

x 

 

x 

 

 

x 

 

1Explanation/Background: 
Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and 
programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and 
2018-19 SCEP-FF                                                                                                                                                                                          52 

 
advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools 
may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, 
State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This 
gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students.   
 
Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a 
single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual 
identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool 
to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds 
used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from 
which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to 
combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used 
conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the 
dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds.  
 
Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages: 

  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program 

separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different 
sources when accounting for their use. 

  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the 

statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., 
semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent 
and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended 
beneficiaries are met. 

 
2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as 
follows: 

  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to 
improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes 
provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH). 

  Title I School Improvement 1003(a): To support implementation of school improvement activities identified 

through the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) reviews or a school review with 
district oversight and included in the DCIP/SCEP.  

  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: To support implementation of school improvement 

plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs.  

  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in 

grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not 
available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional 
program. 

  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, 
develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and 
achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another 
purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-
quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in 
effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the 
participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language 
instruction programs. 

  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of 

English language acquisition and content area achievement. 

 
Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated: 

  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and 
programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent 

2018-19 SCEP-FF                                                                                                                                                                                          53 

 

 

representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities 
funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with 
student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. 

  Title I Priority and Focus School Parent Engagement Set-aside: Additional set-aside is to enable greater and 

 

more meaningful parent participation in the education of their children. 
IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education 
designed to meet their individual needs. 

  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process, including Title I 1003(g) SIG funds: These funds must be 

used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 

2018-19 SCEP-FF                                                                                                                                                                                          54 

 

Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)  

 (Required for All Title I Schools) 

 

Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and 
representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will 
participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I 
program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson 
that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the 
parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school 
will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic 
achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family 
Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. 
 
The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current 
S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent 
Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent 
involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen 
family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy.  
 
Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample 
Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) 
as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. 
 
 

Parent and Family Engagement Policy 

Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. 
The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of 
parents and community in the school. Public School 92-Adrian Hegeman Elementary School, in compliance Every 
Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen 
the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is 
designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the 
education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent 
Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. 

 

Public School 92-Adrian Hegeman Elementary School will support parents and families of Title I students by: 

Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students 

 

● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., 
literacy, math and use of technology; 

● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision 
making in support of the education of their children; 

● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor 
their child’s progress; 

● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 

● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in 
languages that parents can understand; 

2018-19 SCEP-FF                                                                                                                                                                                          55 

 

● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve 
outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other 
members of the school community; 

 

 

 

Parental Involvement and School Quality 

The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all 
parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The 
school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement 
policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school 
surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and 
enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school.  

 

In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the 
school’s Parent Association, as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the 
proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and 
improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: 

● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I 
program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title 
I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; 

● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated 
directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; 

● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as 
described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; 

● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent 
Association and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional 
development, especially in developing leadership skills;  

● maintain a Parent Coordinator to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator will 
provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will 
work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also 
maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; 

● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability 
grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and 
technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home;  

● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State 
accountability system, student proficiency levels, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment 
Survey Report; 

● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of 
children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 

2018-19 SCEP-FF                                                                                                                                                                                          56 

 

the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable 
sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); 

● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning 
or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and 
allow parents to provide suggestions; 

● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed;  

● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and 
workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; 

 

 

The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: 

Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement 

 

● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; 

● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; 

● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association and Title I Parent 
Committee; 

● supporting or hosting Family Day events; 

● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; 

● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; 

● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their 
children’s progress; 

● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school 
activities and student progress; 

● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, 
and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. 

 

 

School-Parent Compact (SPC)  

 

School-Parent Compact (SPC) 

Public School 92-Adrian Hegeman Elementary School, in compliance with Elementary and Secondary Education Act 
(ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement 
between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by 
Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for 

2018-19 SCEP-FF                                                                                                                                                                                          57 

 

improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure 
that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. 

 

 

I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum 

Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to 
meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: 

 

● using academic learning time efficiently; 

● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; 

● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; 

● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; 

● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the 
Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); 

 

 

I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships 

Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: 

 

● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be 
discussed as well as how this Compact is related; 

● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students 
participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to 
be involved; 

● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds 
are available) child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; 

● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation 
services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education;  

● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of 
participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; 

● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent 
Involvement Policy and this Compact; 

● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results 
for each child and other pertinent individual school information;  

2018-19 SCEP-FF                                                                                                                                                                                          58 

 

● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents 
each year; 

 

 

I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff 

Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: 

 

● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited 
English speaking parents;  

● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff 
member; 

● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to 
observe classroom activities; 

● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences;  

 

 

I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents 

Provide general support to parents by: 

 

● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment 
for parents and guardians; 

● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their 
child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of 
parents can attend); 

● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all 
members of the school community; 

● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents;  

● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in 
this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; 

● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and 
consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; 

 

 

 

II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities 

2018-19 SCEP-FF                                                                                                                                                                                          59 

 

● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate 
procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; 

● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and 
his/her age; 

● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; 

● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes);  

● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; 

● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports 
and/or quality family time; 

● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; 

● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; 

● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education;  

● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by 
prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; 

● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; 

● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy 
and this Compact; 

● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn 
more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; 

● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on 
advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams;  

● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; 

 

 

Student Responsibilities: 

 

III. Student Responsibilities 

● attend school regularly and arrive on time; 

● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; 

● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; 

● show respect for myself, other people and property; 

2018-19 SCEP-FF                                                                                                                                                                                          60 

 

 
 

● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; 

● always try my best to learn. 

 

 

2018-19 SCEP-FF                                                                                                                                                                                          61 

 

Division of English Language Learners and Student Support 
Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 
52 Chambers Street, Room 209  
New York, New York 10007 
Phone:  212-374-6072 
http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY 
Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components: 

 

 

  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high 

academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas.  

o  The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need 
o  These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154.  
o  Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. 
o  Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.   

  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on 

the teachers’ performance in classrooms.”  

o  Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term 

workshops and conferences.  

  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet 

community needs.   

o  These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process.  

 
NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional 
development, and 20% to OTPS.   
  
For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and 
Performance Specialist.  Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30.   
 

Part A: School Information 
Name of School:            
This school is (check 
one): 
 

DBN:            

conceptually consolidated (skip part E below)                
NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below)     

 

Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information  
The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): 

Before school                After school             

Saturday academy        

Total # of ELLs to be served:            
Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply):  

1       
7       

2       
8       

K       
6       

4         
10       
Total # of teachers in this program:            
# of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers:            
# of content area teachers:            

3       
9       

5 
11       

12 

2018-19 SCEP-FF                                                                                                                                                                                          62 

 

 

Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information  
2 
2 
0 

Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the 

rationale 

 
  subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  
  schedule and duration 
 
language of instruction 
  # and types of certified teachers 
 

types of materials  

Begin description here:            
PS 92 is located in the Lefferts Gardens-Flatbush area of Brooklyn, NY. It is a Pre-K through 5 
school. There are 436 students attending PS 92. Out of the 436 students, 97 of those students are 
English language learners. Our ELL students from grades 3-5 participate in our Title III after-
school programs. The programs are geared to meet the needs of our ELL population by 
supporting language development and achieving academic success. 
 
For the 2018-2019 school year, we will offer after-school instruction for entitled ELL students in 
grades three through five. The target populations for the after-school program will be the ELL 
students who scored levels one or two on the city/state exams and/or students scoring at the 
entering, emerging and transitioning levels of the NYSESLAT.  For students that scored levels 3 
or 4 on the city/state exams and/or students scoring at the expanding and commanding levels of 
the NYSESLAT will be invited to be part of an accelerated  program called TEAMS 
(Targeted Enrichment to Attain Mastery of the Standards). This year, we will invite  fifty three 
ELL students to participate in these programs. These students will receive intensified English 
language acquisition instruction by two highly qualified NYS certified ENL teachers who have 
many years of experience in the field. These programs will develop and enhance literacy and 
math skills. In addition one program will  also provide supplemental instruction that will further 
develop proficiency in English. The other program will also target instruction to attain mastery 
of the standards.   After-school classes will be scheduled for Wednesdays and Thursdays, from 
2:40 p.m. - 4:40 p.m. The after-school program will commence on November 7th 2018, and 
continue for approximately 40 sessions. Each after-school session will offer one hour of 
English literacy and one hour of enrichment in math. On both days, class size is limited to fifteen 
students.  Elements of the balanced literacy model will be implemented to include independent 
reading and writing activities, as well as guided group and whole class instruction.  We will use 
Finish Line New York ELA for 3rd – 5th grades as well as Finish Line New York Math 3rd – 5th 
grades. These resources are based on research designed to meet the needs of struggling students, 
and they will help students prepare for state tests that assess their skills and knowledge. Finish 
Line is designed to meet Common Core Learning Standards.  
 
Materials used for ELL students are different from those used in the day instruction.  ENL and 
classroom teachers utilize the same materials during the day session with interventions and 
language acquisition infused into the instruction.  In After-school, various home language 
support is given to students designated to attend in the form of small group and one on one 
instruction using technology.   
 
   

2018-19 SCEP-FF                                                                                                                                                                                          63 

 

Part C: Professional Development  
Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as 
other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs.   

rationale 
teachers to receive training  

 
 
  schedule and duration 
 
  name of provider 

topics to be covered 

Begin description here:            
Professional development is critical in order to keep our educators up-to-date on state-of-the-art 
educational methodology and resources.  To ensure the success of our Title III program, 
educators attend professional development seminars in which they communicate with other 
professionals and experts in their field, learn how best to implement teaching tools and methods 
with our ELLs, and share their successes and failures with their peers in order to streamline 
classroom enforcement of available resources.  At the beginning of each workshop/orientation, 
sign-in sheets are utilized to track participation. The sign-in sheet and a copy of the agenda are 
maintained in the ENL office for future usage.  ngjlfejrerueoriouir   
 
Two ENL teachers from our school will engage in professional development. All professional 
development focuses on the implementation of ENL methodology in reading and math. Some 
professional development will be based on the Finish Line educational resources. Providers of 
professional development are state-certified teachers, ELL/ENL instructional specialists, and 
Finish Line  specialists. In addition, the ENL teachers will attend a series of workshops on a 
variety of topics that include differentiated instruction, analyzing data, vocabulary development, 
common core standards, assessments, and Response to Intervention (RTI). Teachers who attend 
these workshops turnkey the information they receive to other staff during regular school hours 
at teacher team meetings and grade conferences, sharing with them the latest strategies and 
techniques used to increase the retention, skills, and test scores of the students in the Title III 
program.  
 
Professional Development Topic 1: 12 Ways to Support ELL Students in an After-school 
Classroom 
Rationale: To give strategies for working with students using a variety of alternative strategies to 
help students prepare for state testing in literacy and math. 
http://www.cultofpedagogy.com/supporting-esl-students-mainstream-classroom/ and 
https://www.teachingchannel.org/blog/2013/10/25/strategies-for-ell-instruction/ 
Date: October 26, 2018                                  Time: 2:40 – 3:40 (Per Session for the participant 
and presenter) 
Presenter: TBD 
Participants: Mr. Savitt and Ms. Sterling      
 
Professional Development Topic 2 and 3: Close Reading with ELL Students 
Rationale: To give teachers strategies, lesson plans, and guiding questions for helping ELL 
students gain deeper understanding when reading complex text. 
Resource: Falling in Love with Close Reading by Christopher Lehman & Kate Roberts 
Date: November 9, 2018 and January 11, 2019       Time: 2:40 – 3:40 (Per Session for the 
participant and presenter) 
Presenter: TBD 
Participants: Mr. Savitt, Ms. Sterling      
 

2018-19 SCEP-FF                                                                                                                                                                                          64 

 

 

Part C: Professional Development  
Professional Development Topic 4 and 5 : How to Use Test Preparation Materials in an Effective 
Way: Math and Literacy 
Rationale: To give teachers strategies for effectively planning, questioning, and assessing 
students using test preparation materials.   
Resources: Finish Line New York ELA and Math 
Date: December 7, 2018 and February 1, 2019     Time: 2:40 – 3:40 (Per Session for participants) 
Presenter: TBD 
Participants: Mr. Savitt, Ms. Sterling      
 
Professional Development Topic 6 and 7:  6+1 Traits: Creating Better ELL Writers 
Rationale: To give teachers strategies for enhancing the writing skills of ELL students when 
organizing their writing, creating voice, and the mechanics of writing 
Resource:  Power Point presentation and Ready – Writing Instruction 
Date: March 1, 2019 and March 15, 2019                Time: 2:40 – 3:40 (Per Session for 
participants) 
Presenter: TBD 
Participants: Mr. Savitt , Ms. Sterling      
 
Professional Development Topic 8: Understanding How to Use Data to Move Instruction 
Rationale: To teach teachers how to using data from assessments in an effective way to: move 
instruction, remediate areas of concern, and create strategies/next steps for improving student 
performance.   
Date: April 5, 2019                           Time: 2:40 – 3:40  (Per Session for participants and 
presenter) 
Presenter: TBD 
Participants: Mr. Savitt, Ms. Sterling 
 
 
 
 

Part D: Parental Engagement Activities   
Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher 
achievement for ELLs.  NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during 
ELL identification process.   

rationale 

 
  schedule and duration 
 
  name of provider 
  how parents will be notified of these activities 

topics to be covered 

Begin description here:            
 
A key factor in the success of our Title III students is the involvement of their parents in our educational 
interventions.  We wish to build a positive and lasting relationship between our school and the families of our 
ELLs because a strong partnership between parents and teachers will better support our students' academic 
and extracurricular endeavors.  In addition, many of our Title III students' parents would benefit from English 
literacy intervention. Also, some of the Title lll funds will be used to provide programs for the parents of our 
ELL students. An orientation facilitated by the ENL teachers introduces them to the Title lll after-school ENL 
program. The orientation is held in the evening and lasts approximately two hours. It includes an oral 
presentation and interactive activities. The school provides interpreters for parents who speak other 

2018-19 SCEP-FF                                                                                                                                                                                          65 

 

 

Part D: Parental Engagement Activities   
languages. The orientation is also used to recruit parents to participate in after-school programs and to talk 
about community resources that are available to parents of ELLs through CAMBA, a community-based 
organization that provides a variety of adult classes.  In addition, ENL teachers along with other school staff 
will be hosting a variety of workshops that will allow parents to get involved in their children's 
education.  Before a workshop/orientation is held, letters of invitation are sent to the home in English and 
parent preferred language. At the beginning of each workshop/orientation, a sign in sheet is circulated to keep 
a record of parent participation.  The sign in sheet and the agenda are maintained in the ENL office for future 
usage.  Technology and intense ENL classes are offered for our limited English speaking parents. Each class 
will offer English survival skills. As a result of these classes, parents will be better equipped with the 
necessary tools to assist their children with homework assignments, communicate with teachers, function in 
society, and express their needs. Please refer to the table below for the dates and subjects of these classes.  At 
the end of the school year, there will be a multicultural culminating activity in which parents will have an 
opportunity to socialize with each other and the teachers. Culturally appropriate refreshments will be 
provided. 
 
ENL teachers stay in contact with parents throughout the school year. All major notifications that are sent to 
parents will be sent home in English and in the parents' native language. Workshops are offered to parents in 
the content areas of reading and math throughout the school year. They are taught strategies that will help 
them to better assist their children with homework and preparation for standardized tests. Parents are 
encouraged to participate in the after-school program as a means of working directly with their children and 
to acquire skills and strategies that can be effectively implemented in the home environment.  
Date                 Topic                                                        Hours                                             Provider                  
           
10/15/18         After-School Orientation                  4:00 - 6:00 PM                 Ms. Sterling / Mr. Savitt 
1/08/19          Reading and Math Strategies         9:00 - 10:30 AM              Ms. Jamison 
2/4/19           Test Strategies to Help ELLs            5:30 - 7:30 PM                 Ms. Sterling / Mr. Savitt 
2/12/19          Common Core Review                      9:00 -10:30 AM                Ms. Jamison 
3/11/19           English Survival Skills Part 1            4:00 - 6:00 PM                Ms. Sterling / Mr. Savitt         
3/18/19          English Survival Skills Part 2            4:00 - 6:00 PM                Ms. Sterling  / Mr.Savitt
                                                               
  

Part E: Budget  
FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY.  Ensure that your 
Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. 
Allocation Amount: $           
Budget Category 

Budgeted Amount 

Explanation of expenditures in this 
category as it relates to the 
program narrative for this title. 
           
           

Professional salaries 
(schools must account for 
fringe benefits) 

           
           

  Per session 
  Per diem 

Purchased services 

  High quality staff 

and curriculum 
development 
contracts. 

           
           

           
           

Supplies and materials 

           

           

2018-19 SCEP-FF                                                                                                                                                                                          66 

Part E: Budget  
FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY.  Ensure that your 
Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. 
Allocation Amount: $           
Budget Category 

Budgeted Amount 

Explanation of expenditures in this 
category as it relates to the 
program narrative for this title. 
           

 

 
 
 
 

  Must be 

supplemental. 

  Additional 

curricula, 
instructional 
materials. 

  Must be clearly 

listed. 

Educational Software 
(Object Code 199) 
Travel 

Other 

TOTAL 

           

           
           
           
           
           
           
           
           

 

           
           
           
           
           
           
           
           

2018-19 SCEP-FF                                                                                                                                                                                          67 

 

DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT 

GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY 

SUBMISSION FORM 

2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR 

 

DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information 

necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English 

language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a 

part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the 

services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should 

be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily 

available on file in the school.  When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces.  For 

additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. 

Part I: School ELL Profile 

 

 

 
 

A. School Information 

District  17 
School Name   Adrian Hegeman Elementary 

Borough  Brooklyn 

School Number   092 

 
B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant 

principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. 
 

Principal   Dr. John Samerson 
Coach  Kara Jamison 
ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher  
 Ms. Sterling/ Mr.Savitt 
Teacher/Subject Area Ms. Annmarie Green/ 
4th Grade 
Teacher/Subject Area Ms. Beverly Thenor/ 5th 
Grade 
Related-Service Provider Ms. Elisheva Gantz 
Superintendent Mr.Clarence Ellis 

 

Assistant Principal  Ms. Sherise Michael-Coleman 
Coach N/A 
School Counselor  
Ms. Carla Dewgard 

Parent  N/A 

Parent Coordinator Ms. Dawn Mc.Leod 

Field Support Center Staff Member type here  
Other (Name and Title) type here 

C. Teacher Qualifications  
Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section.  Press TAB after each number entered to calculate 
sums and percentages.  
     
Number of certified 
ENL teachers currently teaching in the 
ENL program 

Number of teachers who hold both content 
area/common branch and TESOL certification 

1 

0 

0 

Number of teachers who hold both a 
bilingual extension and TESOL 
certification 

Number of special education teachers 
with bilingual extensions 

0 

0 

2 

0 

Number of certified 
bilingual teachers not currently 
teaching in a bilingual program  
Number of certified foreign 
language/world language teachers 
providing home language arts 
(HLA) to students in bilingual 
programs [applicable to grades 7–
12] 
Number of teachers currently 
teaching a self-contained ENL class 
who hold both a common branch 
license and TESOL certification 
[applicable to grades K–6] 

Number of certified 
bilingual teachers currently 
teaching in a bilingual program 

Number of certified ENL teachers 
not currently  teaching in the ENL 
program  

 

0 

1 

D. Student Demographics  

2018-19 SCEP-FF                                                                                                                                                                                          68 

 
Total number of students in 
school (excluding pre-K) 

434 

Total number of ELLs 

100 

ELLs as share of total student population 
(%) 

23.04% 

 
 
 
Part II: ELL Demographics 
 
 
 
 
 
A. ELL Programs 

This school serves the following grades (includes 
ELLs and non-ELLs) 
Check all that apply 

 
 
This school offers (check all that apply): 

K

    1

    2

     3

     4

     5

 

6

   7

     8

    9

     10

     11

    12

 

Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) 

Yes

             No

Dual language program (DL) 

Freestanding ENL 

Yes

             No

Yes

             No

 

 

 

If yes, indicate language(s):            

If yes, indicate language(s):            

 

 
Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a 
separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. 
 

Bilingual Program Breakdown 

School 
Year 
Opene

d 
(e.g., 

2013-14) 

0 

Pr
og
ra
m 
TB
E 

Lang. 

0 

T
o
t 
# 

6
2
2 

K 
Our 

school 
uses 
Imagi
ne 
Learni
ng, 

which 

is a 
web 
based 
progra
ms to 
track 
and 
monit
or ELL 
stude
nts' pr
ogress 
using 

a 

series 
of pre-
deter
mined 
bench
marks. 
Instru
ction 
in the 
progra

1 

After 
each 
asses
smen
t is 
admi
nister
ed, 
the 
ENL 
teach
ers, 
the 
Unive
rsal 
Litera
cy 
Coac
h, 
and 
the 
assist
ant 
princi
pal 
analy
ze 
data 
result

s. 

They 
identi

2 
We 

analyze 

the 

NYSESLAT 

scores 

from year 

to year 
and chart 

the 

results. 
We use Fo
untas and 
Pinnell ass
essment 

tool, 

baseline 
assessmen

ts 

in ReadyG
en, as well 
the end of 
unit and 
module 
Performan
ce Based 
Assessmen

ts 

in ReadyG

en to 

assess our 
students. 
Finally, 

3 
Aft
er 
eac
h 
ass
ess
me
nt 
is 
ad
mi
nis
ter
ed, 
the 
EN
L 
tea
che
rs, 
the 
Uni
ver
sal 
Lit
era
cy 
Co
ach
, 
an
d 

4 
This 
year, 
we 
will 
contin
ue to 
use 
Ready
Gen 
and 
GoMa
th.  Bo

th 
progr
ams 
have 
ELL 
comp
onent
s built 
into 
their 
instru
ction 
that 
can 
be 
imple
mente

d 

either 

in 

5 
The 
majo
rity 
of 
our 
ELLs 
fall 
into 
the 
Tran
sitio
ning 
and 
Expa
ndin
g 
level
s of 
ENL 
profi
cien
cy.  
Of 
the 
stud
ents 
who 
fell 
into 
the 
ente
ring 

6 

At the 
beginnin
g of the 
year, an 
analysis 
is done 
of the 
NYSESLA
T and 

NYSITELL 
assessm
ent. This 
informat
ion is 
then 
broken 
down to 
represen
t each of 
the ELL 
subgrou
ps.  Onc

e 

students 

are 

identifie
d by ELL 
subgrou

p, 

parents 
are sent 
letters 

7 
The 
instruc
tion 
for 

ELLs is 
deliver

ed 

using 
the 
stand-
alone 
and 
integra

ted 

models
.  Durin
g the 
integra
ted co-
teachin

g 

model, 

the 
ENL 
teache
rs work 
in the 
mainst
ream 
classro
om in 
collabo

8 

9 

Pa
ste 
res
po
ns
e 
to 
qu
est
ion
s 
he
re: 
  N
/A 

Past
e 
resp
onse 

to 
ques
tion
s 

here
:  N/
A  

10 
 At 
our 
sch
ool, 
the 
org
aniz
atio
nal 
mo
dels 
use
d 
are 
inte
grat
ed 
and 
stan
d-
alo
ne 
ENL
. 

For 
the 
stan
d-
alo
ne 
mo
del, 

11 

All ENL 
classes 

are 

taught 

in 

English. 

A 

variety 
of ENL 
strategi
es are 
applied 

to 

content 

area 

lessons 

to 

enable 
ELLs to 
underst
and the 
lessons 
taught. 
Some 
of these 
strategi

es 

include, 
but are 

not 

limited 
to the 

12 

 At the 
beginn
ing of 
the 

school 
year, 

all 

eligibl

e 

Spanis

h-

speaki

ng 

studen
ts are 
admini
stered 

the 
Spanis
h LAB 

in 

order 

to 
deter
mine 
their 
home 
langua

ge 

profici
ency.  
Moreo

2018-19 SCEP-FF                                                                                                                                                                                          69 

 

m 

adjust

s 

accord
ing to 

a 

stude
nts 
succes
s or 

failure 

on 

these 
bench
marks. 
Next, 
we 
use 
Fount
as and 
Pinnel

l 

assess
ment 
tool, a
s well 
the 
the 
Forma
tive 
Assess
ments 
used 

in 

every 
2 to 3 
lesson
s in 
Ready
Gen to 
evalua

te 
stude
nt 

progre
ss on 
a skill 
and 
Quick 
Check
s in 
each 
GoMa

th 

lesson 

to 
deter
mine 
differe
ntiate

d 

activiti

es. 
Finally

, 

teach
er 

create

d 

assess
ments 

are 
admin

fy 

areas 

of 

needs 
and 
next 
steps 
for 
impro
veme
nt. 
Teach
ers 
are 
provi
ded 
with 
tools 
and 
resou
rces 
which 
can 
be 
utilize
d for 
stude
nt 

impro
veme
nt in 
the 
identi
fied 
areas. 
Next 
steps 
are al
so 

discus
sed 
with t
eache
rs in 
both 
profe
ssion
al 

devel
opme

nt 

works
hops 
and 
in 

small 
group 
activit
ies as 

an 
additi
onal 
meth
od for 
differ
entiat
ing 
how 
teach
ers 
are 
supp
orted 

teacher 
created 
assessmen

ts are 

administer

ed 

throughou

t the 
school 

year in all 
content 

area 

subjects.  

All of 
these 

assessmen
ts give us 

insight 

into which 
areas of 
literacy 

(comprehe

nsion, 

listening, 
writing, 
etc.) are 
problemati

c for 

the ELLs.  
Once we 
receive the 
results of 

these 

assessmen
t tools, we 
develop 
our lesson 
plans to 
provide 
individuali

zed 

interventio
ns to each 
student. 

  

ELL 

students 
also take 
the NYC Pe

riodic 

Assessmen

ts and 
Ready 
practice 
tests sever
al times 
throughou

t the 
school 
year to 

give 

teachers 
additional 
informatio
n about 

what 

students 

have 

learned. 
Teachers 
use these 
assessmen

ts to 

the 
ass
ista
nt 
pri
nci
pal 
an
aly
ze 
dat
a 
res
ult
s. 
Th
ese 
res
ult
s 
are 
dis
trib
ute
d 
to 
sta
ff 
in 
the 
for
m 
of 
cha
rts 
an
d 
gra
phs 
ind
ica
tin
g 
gro
wt
h 
fro
m 
cla
ss 
to 
cla
ss, 
gra
de 
to 
gra
de. 
In 
the 
an
aly
sis, 
the 
tea
m 
ide
ntif
ies 
are
as 
of 
ne

whole 
class 
instru
ction 
or in 
small 
group 
instru
ction. 
 Throu
ghout 

the 
lesson
, the 
teach
er 

assess

es 
stude
nt 
progr
ess 
and 
under
standi
ng of 
the 

lesson 
with 
target
ed 

questi
ons.  
Depen
ding 
on 
how 
the 
stude
nts 
respo
nd to 
these 
questi
ons, 
they 
are 
place
d in 
group

s: 

Enrich
, Tier 
2, or 
Tier 3 
instru
ctiona

l 

group
s.  Stu
dents 
in the 
Enrich 
group 
have 
show

n 

maste
ry of 
the 
conte
nt or 
task 

and 
eme
rging 
level
s on 
the 
NYSI
TELL,
most 
are 
new 
to 
our 
scho
ol or 
the 
coun
try 
and 
have 
not 
had 
the 
bene
fit of 
our 
ENL 
instr
uctio
n. 
The 
data 
also 
reve
als 
that 
stud
ents 
in 
Kind
erga
rten 
thro
ugh 
Fifth 
grad
e 

tend 

to 
scor
e 
high
er 
on 
the 
liste
ning 
and 
spea
king 
porti
on 
of 
the 
NYSE
SLAT 
and 
lowe
r on 
the 
readi
ng 
and 

indicatin
g their 
child's 

ELL 

perform
ance lev
el.  Class
room 

teachers 

are 

given a 
list indic
ating 
each 

students

ration 
with 
conten
t area 
teache
rs to 
develo

p 

collabo
rative 
partne
rships 
and 
suppor

t 

' ELL 

inclusiv

perform
ance 
level. W
e then 
meet 
with 

teachers 

to 

discuss 
how we 

will 
group 

students 
for the 
purpose 

of 

establish
ing small 

group 
stand 
alone 
and 

integrat

ed 

instructi
on.  This 
informat
ion helps 
the ENL 
teachers 

also 

determi
ne which 
teacher 
would 
most 
benefit 
from 
direct 
support 
and ENL 
strategie
s based 
on the 
number 
of ELL 

students 

in a 
given 
class. 
Through
out the 
year, we 
give out 
progress 
reports 
and at 

e 

practic
es to 
accom
modat
e the 
needs 

of 

diverse 
English 
Langua

ge 

Learne

rs. 

Studen
ts are 
hetero
geneo
usly 
groupe
d to 
provid

e 

Enterin
g and 
Emergi

ng 

studen
ts with 
exposu
re to 
langua

ge 
skills 
from 
higher 
perfor
ming 
studen
ts. As 
per CR 
Part 
154 
Studen

ts 

scoring 

at 

the  Co
mman
ding 
level 

receive 

90 

minute

s of 
ENL/EL
A integ

the 
stu
den
ts 
that 
scor
e at 
Ent
erin
g 

and 
Em
ergi
ng 
leve
ls 
are 
pull
ed 
fro
m 
thei
r 
clas
sro
oms 
and 
rec
eive 
one 
unit 
of 
stu
dy 
(18
0 
min
ute
s) 
of 
ENL 
inst
ruct
ion. 
The
se 
stu
den
ts 
also 
rec
eive 
one 
unit 
of 
stu
dy 
in 
an 
inte
grat
ed 
clas
sro
om 
wh
ere 
Mr. 
Savi
tt 
or 
Ms. 
Ster

followin

g: 
-

Differen
tiated 
Instruct

ion 
-

Modeli

ng 

-Realia 
-TPR 
(Total 
Physical 
Respon

se) 
-

ver, 
studen
ts who 
are in 

an 
Englis

h 

langua

ge 

school 

for 
less 
than 
two 
years 
and 
are 

Scaffold

fluent 

ing 
-

Cooper
ative 
Learnin

g 

in 

their 
home 
langua
ge, are 
offere

Activitie

d 

conten
t area 
state 
and 
citywi
de 

exams 

in 

their 
home 
langua
ge, if 
availa
ble. 

s 

-Multi-
modalit

y 

learning 
experie
nces 
(offerin
g visual, 
tactile, 

and 
kinesth
etic 

activitie

s 

to  allo
w for 

multiply 
opportu
nities 

for 

concept
ualizati

on) 

-Use of 
technol

ogy 

-

Imagine 
Learnin

g - 

providi

ng 

instruct
ion in 
both 
home 
languag
e and 
English 

-

Offerin
g real 
life 

experie
nces 
that 

connect 

2018-19 SCEP-FF                                                                                                                                                                                          70 

 

to aid 
stude
nts in 
their 
growt
h and 
progr
ess.  

identify 
areas in 
which 

students 

need 

assistance 

and  to 

plan 

targeted 
instruction 

that will 
meet the 
need of 
every 

student. 

istere

d 

throug
hout 
the 

school 
year 
in all 
conte
nt 
area 
subjec
ts.  All 

of 

these 
assess
ments 
give 
us 

insight 

into 
which 
areas 

of 

literac

y 

(comp
rehen
sion, 
listeni
ng, 
writin

g, 

etc.) 
are 
proble
matic 

for 
the 
ELLs.  
Once 
we 
receiv
e the 
results 

of 

these 
assess
ment 
tools, 

we 

develo
p our 
lesson 
plans 

to 

provid

e 

individ
ualize

d 

interv
ention
s to 
each 
stude
nt. 
  
 

writi
ng 
secti
ons. 
Alth
ough 
the 
majo
rity 
of 
our 
ELLs 
scor
ed in 
the 
Expa
ndin
g 
level
s on 
the 
NYSE
SLAT

, 

they 
are 
still 
lacki
ng 
the 
readi
ng 
com
preh
ensi
on 
skills 
need
ed 
to 
achi
eve 
the 
com
man
ding 
level
.   

for 
the 
day.  
Accor
ding 
to 

these 
progr
ams,  
stude
nts in 
Tier 2 
need 
mode
rate 
suppo
rt,and 
stude
nts in 
Tier 3 
need 
one-
to-

one or 
2:1  in
structi
on. 
ELL 
stude
nts 
are 
classif
ied 
into 
group

s 

accor
ding 
to 
how 
well 
they 
maste
r the 
differ
ent 
tasks 
assign
ed to 
them. 

   

the 

beginnin
g of the 
year, we 
give out 
letters 

of 

release 

to 

parents 
based 
on their 
child's 
progress
.  After 
analyzin
g that 

we had a 
significa

nt 

increase 
in Arabic 
speaking 
students
/Newco
mers, 

we 

added 

the 

program

s of 

Imagine 
Learning 

and 

Languag
e Power 

to aid 

students 
in their 
language 
acquisiti
on of 

English. 
Addition

ally, 

Newcom
ers are 
pulled 
more 

often to 
provide 
addition

al 

support 

in 

language 
acquisiti

on.  

rated 
service
s. ELL 
studen

ts 

scoring 
at the 
Enterin

g, 

Emergi

ng, 

Transit
ioning, 

and 

Expand

ing 

levels 
receive 

180 
minute

s of 
integra

ted 

ENL/EL
A servi
ces. 
Enterin
g and 
Emergi

ng 

studen

ts 

are als

o 

pulled 
for sta

nd-
alone 
instruc
tion. 
They 
receive 

180 
minute

s of 
stand-
alone 
service
s.  ENL 

is 

taught 
throug
h the 
use of 
specifi
c ENL 
instruc
tional 
strateg

ies 

empha
sizing 
English 
langua

ge 

acquisi
tion. 

  

eds 
an
d 
nex
t 
ste
ps 
for 
im
pro
ve
me
nt. 
Te
ach
ers 
are 
pro
vid
ed 
wit
h 
too
ls 
an
d 
res
our
ces 
wh
ich 
can 
be 
util
ize
d 
for 
stu
de
nt 
im
pro
ve
me
nt 
in 
the 
ide
ntif
ied 
are
as. 
Ne
xt 
ste
ps 
are
 als
o 
dis
cus
sed 
wit
h t
eac
her
s in 
bot
h 
pro
fes
sio
nal 

ling 
co-
teac
hes 
wit
h 
the 
clas
sro
om 
teac
her, 
thu
s 
the
y 
rec
eive 

a 
tota
l of 
360 
min
ute
s of 
ENL 
inst
ruct
ion 
per 
wee
k.  T
he 
ENL 
teac
her
s 
wor
k in 
the 
mai
nstr
ea
m 
clas
sro
om, 
in 
coll
abo
rati
on 
wit
h 
con
tent 
are
a 
teac
her
s, to 
dev
elo
p 
coll
abo
rati
ve 
part
ner
ship
s 

and 

to the 
curricul

um 

(trips, 
guest 
speaker
s, and 
perfor
mances

). 
Our 

instruct
ion for 
all of 
our 

ELLs is 
aligned 

with 
the 
CCLS. 
MyOn a

nd 

ReadTh
eory ar
e techn
ology 
reading 
progra
m. The 
initial 
assess
ments 
in these 
progra

ms 

determi
nes the 
student
s' lexile 
level. 
Student
s then 
have an 
option 
to read 
choosin
g from 

a 

variety 

of 

genres 
at their 
lexile 
levels. 
After 
each 
book 
there is 
a short 
assess
ment 
for 

compre
hension
. ELLs 
benefit 
from 
this 
progra

m 

becaus
e there 

are 

2018-19 SCEP-FF                                                                                                                                                                                          71 

 

de
vel
op
me
nt 
wo
rks
ho
ps 
an
d 
in 
sm
all 
gro
up 
act
ivit
ies 
as 
an 
ad
diti
on
al 
me
tho
d 
for 
diff
ere
nti
ati
ng 
ho
w 
tea
che
rs 
are 
sup
por
ted 
to 
aid 
stu
de
nts 
in 
the
ir 
gro
wt
h 
an
d 
pro
gre
ss.  

sup
port 
incl
usiv
e 
pra
ctic
es 
to 
acc
om
mo
dat
e 
the 
nee
ds 
of 
our 
dive
rse 
ELLs

. 

The 
ENL 
teac
her
s 
atte
nd 
wee
kly 
co
mm
on 
pre
p 
pla
nni
ng 
sess
ions 
in 
ord
er 
to 
insu
re 
that 
all 
teac
her
s 
are 
wor
king 
tow
ard
s 
achi
evin
g 
the 
sam
e 
goal
s 
for 
ELL 
stu
den
ts. 
  

options 

to 

search 
for the 
meanin

g of 

unfamili

ar 

words, 
they 
can 

highligh
t new 
words, 
read 
the 

story in 
Spanish
, and 
low 
level 

readers 

can 

listen to 

the 
story 
read to 
them. 
The 
progra

ms 

GoMat
h and 
ReadyG
en are 
aligned 

with 
the 
CCLS 

and are 
being 
used 

with an 

ELL 

compon

ent. 
We 

support 
home 
languag

e 

instruct

ion 

through 
the use 

of 

bilingua

l 

dictiona
ries and 
multicul
tural 
books 
that are 
in the 
student
s native 
languag
es and 

in 

English. 
In the 
stand 

2018-19 SCEP-FF                                                                                                                                                                                          72 

 

Stu
den
ts 
that 
scor
e at 

a 
Tra
nsiti
oni
ng 
and 
Exp
and
ing 
leve
l 
rec
eive 
one 
unit 
of 
stu
dy 
of 
ENL 
inst
ruct
ion 
in 
an 
inte
grat
ed 
clas
sro
om 
wh
ere 
our 
ENL 
teac
her
s 
co-
teac
h 
wit
h 
the 
clas
sro
om 
teac
her
s.  
  
 Stu
den
ts 
that 
scor
e at 

a 
Co
mm
and
ing 
leve
l 
rec
eive 

a 

alone 
model, 

we 

provide 
instruct
ion to 
develop 

the 

English 
languag

e 

needed 

for 

academ

ic 

success. 
Student
s are 
support
ed and 
guided 

to 

become 
college 

and 

career 
ready.  
ENL is 
taught 
through 
the use 

of 

specific 

ENL 

instruct
ional 
strategi

es 

emphas
izing 

English 
languag

e 

acquisit

ion. 

During 

the 

integrat
ed co-
teachin

g 

model, 
the ENL 
teacher
s work 
in the 
mainstr
eam 

classroo

m in 

collabor
ation 
with 

content 

area 
teacher

s to 

develop 
collabor
ative 
partner
ships 
and 

2018-19 SCEP-FF                                                                                                                                                                                          73 

 

TB
E 

support 
inclusiv

e 

practice

s to 
accom
modate 

the 

needs 

of 

diverse 
English 
languag

e 

learners

.  

half 
unit 
of 
stu
dy 
per 
wee
k of 
inte
grat
ed 
ENL 
in 
ELA
/co
nte
nt 
are
a. 

Lan
gua
ge 
elec
tive
s 
are 
not 
an 
app
lica
ble 
pro
cess 
in 
our 
sch
ool.
  

We do 

not 

have a 
dual 
languag

e 

progra
m at 
this 
time.  

The 
ENL 
teache

rs 

attend 
month

ly 

meeti
ngs 
and 
works
hops 
set-up 
by the 

city 
and 
the 

district 

to 

learn 
any 
new 
initiati
ves 
and 
criteri
a for 
ELL 
studen

ts. 

These 
P.D's 
are  de
signed 
to tell 
strate
gies 
for 
enhan
cing 
learnin

g 

using 
scienc

e, 

math 
and 
techno
logy; 
suppo
rt ELLs
 literac

y 

develo

2
0
0
4 

  

a- Once 

a 

student 

is 

identifie

d as 

SIFE we 
assess 

the 

student 
using 1. 
NYSED O

ral 

Intervie

w 

Questio
nnaire 
2.NYSED
 Multilin

gual 

Literacy 
SIFE Scr
eener 3. 
Writing 
Screener
. Based 
on the 
results 
of the 
SIFE ass
essment
s, differe
ntiated 
instructi
on is 
provide
d. When 

we 

service 
our SIFE 
students

, we 
make 
use of a 
broad 
range of 
instructi

onal 

practice

s. In 

order to 
impleme

nt a 

We 
use 
the 
same 
resou
rces 
provi
ded 
in the 
stude
nts' 
classe
s as 
all of 
these 
progr
ams 
have 
ELL 
comp
onent
s for 
sugge
sted 
instru
ction: 
Read
yGen, 
GoM
ath, 
Foss, 
and 
Houg
hton 
Miffli
n for 
social 
studi
es. 
We 
suppl
emen
t our 
instru
ction 
with 
the 
books
, NY 
Read

y 

Englis

h 

Langu

 The 
ENL 
teach
ers 
use 
both 
stand 
alone 
and 
integr
ated 
co-

teachi
ng to 
assist 
stude
nts in 
their 
instru
ctiona

l 

needs 
depen
ding 
on 
their 
NYSES
LAT 
profici
ency 
level.  

In 

both 
the 
stand 
alone 
and  in
tegrat
ed co-
teachi

ng 

model 
stude
nts 
are 
taken 

in 

small 
group
s to 
target 
instru
ction 
per 

The 
target
ed 
interv
entio

n 

progr
ams 
for 
ELLs 
in 
ELA, 
math, 
and 
other 
conte
nt 

areas 
consis
ts of: 

1. 

Stand 
Alone 
instru
ction 
is for 
new 
come

rs 
and 
enteri
ng 
stude
nts. 
The 
servic
es 

offere
d in 
this 
progr
am is 
inten
se 

work 

in 
readi
ng, 
writin
g, and 
vocab
ulary 
using 
text/

Next 

year,  the 
school will 
continue 
utilizing 

the 

MYOn and 

Imagine 
Learning, 

two 

computeri

zed 

programs 

which 
adjust 

instruction 
according 

to 

students 
instruction
al needs. 

These 

along with 
Language 
Power, a 
program 
used for 
language 
fluency in 
reading 

and 

writing is 
used  for 

all 

students 
to aid in 
reading 
comprehe
nsion and 
writing.   

Ou
r sc
ho
ol 
has 
not 
ha
d a 
bili
ng
ual 
pro
gra
m 
in 
mo
re 
tha
n 
10 
yea
rs 
bec
aus
e 
par
ent
s 
hav
e 
req
ues
ted 
EN
L 
ser
vic
es 
ins
tea
d.  

We do 

not 
exclud
e any 
stude
nt 

from 
any 
progr
am or 
servic

e 

offere

d. 

Curre
ntly, 
we 
have 
CAMB

A, 

After-
school
,  and 

a 

numb
er of 
clubs: 
roboti
cs, 
codin

g, 

chess, 
dance

, 

drama

, 

recycli
ng, 
and 
choru
s that 
all ELL 
stude
nts 
are 
welco
me to 
partici
pate 
in.  EL

L 

stude
nts 
are 

This 
year 
we 
intro
duce
d Im
agin
e 
Lear
ning 
and 
conti
nued 

to 
use 
the 
MYO

n 
prog
ram 
as 
alter
nate 
path
ways 
for 
unde
rstan
ding 
the 
cont
ent.  
In 
addi
tion 
to 
this, 
we 
will 
use 
the 
Ten 
Mar
ks 
prog
ram, 
Read
Theo
ry fo
r our 
Tran
sitio
ning 
and 

DL- Not 
used at 

our 

school 
TBE - 

Not used 

at our 
school 
ENL - 

Children 
are not 
assessed 
specifica

lly in 
their 
home 
language

. 

However
, they 
are 

supporte
d and 

assessed 

in 

English 
for the 
ELA. For 

math 
and 

science , 
they are 
given a 
choice of 

taking 

the 

assessm
ent in 
their 
native 
language

..  

We 

ensure 

that 
studen
ts are 
regular

ly 

evaluat
ed to 
provid
e the 
service
s they 
need.  
The 
ENL 
teache
rs are 
part of 
SBST 
team 

to 

ensure 
studen
ts are 
getting 
require

d 

service
s and 

to 

have 
service

s 

provid
ed that 
may be 
neede
d in 
the 

future. 

All 

materi
als, 
peer 
pairing
, and 
lessons 
corres
pond 
to the 
age, 
grade, 

and 

In 
th
e 
pa
st, 
wit
h a 
for
me
r 
co-
loc
ati
on 
sch
ool
,  
we 
did 
no
t 
me
et 
wit
h 
th
e 
co-
loc
ate
d 
sch
ool 
to 
sh
are 
res
ou
rce
s 
for 
ELL 
stu
de
nts
. 
Ea
ch 
sch
ool 
sta
nd
s 
on 

In 
the 
past 
we 
did 
not 
hav
e a 
spec
ific 
prog
ram 
for 
our 
new
ly 
enro
lled 
ELL 
stud
ents 
and 
their 
pare
nts 
prio
r to 
the 
adv
ent 
of 
the 
scho
ol 
year

, 

how
ever

, 

this 
year 
we 
are 
cons
ideri
ng 
invit
ing 
new
ly 
enro
lled 
stud
ents 

2018-19 SCEP-FF                                                                                                                                                                                          74 

 

program 

that 

simultan
eously 
teaches 
these 

students 

social 
and 

academi
c English 

skills, 
ENL 

instructi

on 

focuses 
on both 
English 
for basic 
commun
ication, 
English 
literacy 
skills, as 
well as 

the 

introduc
tion of 
grade-
appropri

ate 

content 

and 

concept
s , using 
specific 
vocabul
ary that 

is 

necessar

y to 

access 

this 

curriculu
m.  A 
variety 
of ENL 
strategie

s are 
used 

such as 
modelin

g, 

repetitio

n, 

graphic 
organize

rs, 

buddy 
system 
(pairing 
an ELL 
student 
with a 
student 

with 

stronger 
comman

d of 

English), 

and 

technolo
gy  to 

age 
Arts a
nd NY 
Read

y 

Math 

 to 
prepa

re 
stude
nts 
for 
state 
testin

g. 
Finall
y, the 
ENL 
teach
ers 
use 
MyO
n, 
Ten 
Mark
s, and 
Mathl
etics, 
comp
uter 
based 
readi
ng 
and 
math 
progr
ams, 
and 
Langu
age 
Powe
r as 
part 
of the 
day 
instru
ction. 

All 
ELLs 
have 
acces
s to 
biling
ual 

books 
and 
dictio
narie
s. 

These 
resou
rces 
accel
erate 
stude
nt 

learni
ng by 
provi
ding 
ELL 
stude
nts 

each 
stude
nt's 
individ
ual 

needs 
using 
the 
90, 
180, 
or 360 
minut

es 

model
.  Stud
ents 
requiri
ng 360 
minut
es, 
gener
ally 
Newc
omers
, are 
pulled 
out by 

the 
ENL 
teach
ers 
with 
180 
minut

es 

stand 
alone 
instru
ction 
and 
180 
integr
ated 
instru
ction, 
where

as 
stude
nts 
requiri
ng 90 
and 
180 
minut

es 

gener
ally 
remai
n in 
their 
class 
and 
the 
ENL 
teach
ers 
push-
in, co-
teachi

ng 
with 
the 
classr

pictur

e 

supp
ort 
for 
the 
Enteri
ng  an

d 

Emer
ging 
stude
nts.  
2. 

Integr
ated 
co-
teach
ing 
for 
stude
nts 
needi
ng 90 
and 
180 
minut

es 
instru
ction. 
ICT 

offers 
stude
nts 
the 
benef
it of 
two 
teach
ers 
who 
can 
work 

in 

small 
group 
instru
ction 

to 

focus 

on 
the 
stude
nts'  i
nstru
ction
al 

needs 
3. Aft

er-

schoo

l 

Acad
emic 
Interv
entio
n is 
desig
ned 
to 
give 
additi
onal 

encou
raged 
to try 
out 
for 

these 
clubs 

as 
well 
as 

partici
pate 
in any 
progr
am 
offeri
ng 
acade
mic 
interv
ention 

and 
enrich
ment. 

  

Expa
ndin
g 
stud
ents 
to 
chall
enge 
the
m. 
Our 
New
com
ers 
and 
Eme
rgen
t ELL 
stud
ents 
use 
Starf
all  t
o 
supp
leme
nt 
instr
uctio

n 
and 
prov
ide 
hand
s on 
learn
ing 
on 
vario
us 
cont
ent 
in 
mat
h, 
liter
acy, 
and 
writi
ng. 
This 
year, 
we 
have 
tried 

to 
expa
nd 
our 
class
roo
m 
libra
ries 
to 
inclu
de 
book
s, 
dicti
onar
ies, 
and 

it's 
ow
n.  

social 
level of 
the ELL 
studen

t. 

Additio
nally, 
the 

NYSITE
LL is ad
ministe
red to 
studen

ts 

upon 
entry 

to 

determ

ine 

studen

t 

profici
ency.  
The 

NYSESL
AT is 
admini
stered 
throug
hout 
their 

time as 

ELL 
studen
ts as a 
tool 
for 

monito
ring 
their 
langua

ge 

acquisi
tion pr
oficien
cy. The 
inform
ation 
gather

ed 
from 

all 

source
s are 
used 

to 

determ

ine 

studen

t 

progre
ss and 

to 

develo
p the 
best 

plan of 
instruc
tion.  

and 
their 
pare
nts 
to 
the 
ann
ual 
fami
ly 
eve
nt, 
whic
h 
we 
con
duct 
at 
the 
end 
of 

each 
scho
ol 

year 
and 
at 
whic
h 
ther
e is 
food 

, 

gam
es 
and 
ente
rtain
men
t. At 
this 
eve
nt, 
the 
new 
pare
nts 
will 
get 
to 
mee

t 

othe

r 

pare
nts 
and 
staff 
me
mbe
rs in 
an 
infor
mal 
setti
ng, 
whe
re 
they 
can 
talk 
abo
ut 

pment 
with 
concre

te 

strate
gies in 
compr
ehensi
on and 
langua

ge 

acquisi
tion;  t
each 
us 
how 
to 

utilize 
RTI an 
interv
ention 
protoc
ol for 
aiding 
Tier 3 
studen
ts who 
are EL
Ls; and 
explai

n 

variou
s co-
teachi

ng 

model
s that 
aid the 

ENL 
teache

rs 

in  effe
ctively 
workin
g with 
anoth

er 

teache
r in a 
collab
orativ

e 

setting
.   In 
order 

to 

meet 
the 

needs 
of our 

ELL 

popula
tion, it 

is 

imper
ative 
that 
our 
two 
state 
certifi
ed ENL 
teache

2018-19 SCEP-FF                                                                                                                                                                                          75 

supp
ort, 
outsi
de of 
the 
daily 
ELL 
instru
ction, 
to the 
Emer
ging 
and 
Transi
tionin

g 

stude
nts.   
All of 
the 
progr
ams 
offere

d 

above 

are 
offere
d in 
Englis

h 

only.  

 

increase 

their 

level of 
proficien

cy in 

reading, 
writing, 
listening
, and 

speaking

. 

b-For 
those 

students 
who are 
in the 

US 

school 
system 
for less 

than 
three 
years 
and are 
required 
to take 
the ELA 
exam, 
different

iated 
instructi

onal 

strategie
s, such 

as 

station 
teaching
, shared 
writing 
activities

, 

coopera

tive 

poster 
creation
, 'jigsaw 
strategy' 

for 

reading 
complex 

text, 

etc.,  are 
used to 
strength
en the 

skill 

areas in 
speaking

, 

listening

, 

reading, 

and 

writing. 

The 

strategie
s used 
to teach 
students 

vary 

dependi
ng on 
English 

with 
multi
ple 
entry 
point
s in 
to 
the 
skill 
or 

strate
gy.  A
dditio
nally, 
these 
resou
rces 
provi
de 
ELL 
stude
nts 
with 
the 
small 
group 
supp
ort 
they 
need 

to 
succe
ssfull

y 

navig
ate 
the 
instru
ction. 
Finall
y, our 
teach
ers 
use 

Smart 
board 
techn
ology 

to 
creat

e 

lesso
ns 

which 
use 
the 
pictor
ial 
and 
tactil

e 

repre
senta
tions 
neces
sary 
for 
ELL 
stude
nts to 
make 
vocab
ulary 

oom 
teach
er to 
suppo

rt 

these 
stude
nts' 
instru
ctiona

l 

needs. 

 In 
additi
on,  EL

Ls-

SWDs 

are 
given 
suppo

rt 

servic
es by 
the 

SETSS 
 teach
er, 
who 
comm
unicat
e with 

the 
ENL 
and 
classr
oom 
teach
ers  th
rough
out 
the 
day 
about 

the 
progre
ss of 
ELLs -
SWDs.

  

During 
teach
er 

team 
meeti
ngs, 
teach
ers 
discus
s the 
stude
nts' 
IEP an
d ELL 
goals, 
appro
priate 
strate
gies 
for 
meeti
ng 

these 
goals, 

writi
ng 
activ
ities 
in 
Arab
ic, 
Fren
ch, 
and 
Span
ish.  
Thes
e 

book
s are 
tools 
ELL 
stud
ents 
use 
to 
enha
nce 
and 
supp
leme
nt 

their 
unde
rstan
ding 
of 
liter
acy 
and 
mat
h 
conc
epts. 

   

the 
vari
ety 
of 
reso
urce
s 
offe
red 
at 
this 
scho
ol. 
Pare
nts 
are 
give
n an 
opp
ortu
nity 
to 
inter
act 
with 
othe

r 

pare
nts 
duri
ng 
the 
wor
ksho
ps 
spec
ifical
ly 
gear
ed 
to 
the 
nee
ds 
of 
pare
nts. 
 Par
ents 
are 
then 
give
n a 
full 
expl
anat
ion 
of 
the 
avail
able 
plac
eme
nt 
opti
ons 
both 
with
in 
and 
outs
ide 
of 

rs, 

along 
with 
the 
classro
om 
teache

rs, 
receiv

e 

ongoin

g 

profes
sional 
develo
pment 
 and 
attend 

off-
site 
confer
ences 
spons
ored 
by 

other 
agenci
es.  Cla
ssroo
m 

teache

rs 

observ
e the 
ENL 
teache
rs as 
they 
imple
ment 
differe

nt 

strate
gies 
throug
h the 
integr
ated 
co-

teachi

ng 

model. 

 The 
two 
ENL 
teache
rs are 
active 
partici
pants 

in 

variou

s 

grade 
level 
teache

r 

teams. 
They 
meet 
with 
individ

ual 

2018-19 SCEP-FF                                                                                                                                                                                          76 

 

proficien

cy 

levels, 
grade 
level, 
and 

perform
ances on 

both 
formal 

and 

informal 
assessm
ents. 

The ENL 
teacher 
consults 

and 

collabor

ates 

with the 
classroo

m 

teacher 
in order 
to make 
content 

area 

lessons 
more 
accessibl
e to the 
students 
through 
visual 
and 
tactile 

cues and 
activities
. These 
students 
are also 
receivin

g 

services 
through 
Title III 
After 
School. 
c-ELL 

students 

who 
have 
been 
receivin

g 

services 
4 to 6 
years 

continue 

to 

receive 
their 
mandat
ed ENL 
and ELA 
instructi
on. The 

ENL 

teachers 
reviews 
test data 

and 

conn
ectio
ns to 
real 
life 
situat
ions.   

   

and 
groupi
ng/sch
edulin
g that 
would 
best 
benefi

t 

these 
stude
nts. 
We 
also 
use 
data 
to 

assess 

our 
instru
ction 
and 
make 
decisi
ons 
based 

on 
stude
nt's 
perfor
mance 

to 
deter
mine 
the 
best 
instru
ctiona

l 

needs 

for 
our 
ELLs-
SWDs. 
 Acco
mmod
ations 

for 
stude
nts 
with 
disabil
ities 
are 
provid
ed to 
eligibl

e 

stude
nts 
and 
docu
mente
d on a 
stude
nt's 
IEP. T
he 

School 
Based 
Suppo

rt 

team 

P.S. 
92. 
The 
desi
re to 
lear
n 
Engli
sh is 
espe
ciall
y 
stro
ng 
amo
ng 
our 
Haiti
an 
and 
Hisp
anic 
pop
ulati
ons. 
 The
y 
expr
ess 
a 
pref
eren
ce 
for 
imm
ersi
on 
in 
the 
Engli
sh 
lang
uag
e, as 
they 
feel 
it 

puts 
their 
child
ren 
on 
equ
al 
footi
ng 
with 
non-
ELL 
stud
ents

, 

and 
fost
ers a 
fast
er 
acq
uisiti
on 
of 
the 
Engli

grades 

to 

discus
s and 
use 
data, 
exami
ne 
authe
ntic 
studen
t work 

to 

evalua

te 

strate
gies 
used 
in the 
classro
om, 
and 
help 
teache

rs 
deter
mine 
areas 

of 

comm

on 

weakn
ess 

among 
studen
ts, in 
partic
ular 
ELL 
studen
ts.  Eac

h 

team 

of 

teache

rs 

decide

s 

which 

ELL 
strate
gies 
to  im
pleme

nt 

based 
on the 
streng
ths 
and  w
eakne
sses of 

the 
ELL 
studen

ts 

servic
ed.  In 
additi
on, 
the 
ENL 
teache

2018-19 SCEP-FF                                                                                                                                                                                          77 

analyz
es the 

IEP 
and 
deter
mines 
wheth
er a 
stude
nt 

should 

be 

placed 
in an 
ICT 
class 

or 
not.  

 

speak wi

th 

classroo

m 

teachers 

to 

determi
ne the 
specific 
areas of 
difficulty 
for each 
student 

and 

formulat
e a plan. 

In 

addition
, these 
students 
are also 
encoura
ged to 
attend 
the Title 
III After 
School 
Program 
where 
they 

receive 
more 
focused 

skill 

instructi
on and 
small 
group 
instructi

on. 

Based 

on 

assessm

ent 

results, 

this 
year, 
our 

focus is 

on 

developi

ng 

writing 
skills 
and 

broaden

ing 

vocabul

ary, 

particula
rly in the 

core 

content 
areas.  

d-In 

order to 
support 
our long 

term 

ELLs, the 

ENL 

teacher 
consults 

sh 
lang
uag
e.   

rs 

attend 
severa

l 

works
hops 
throug
hout 
the 

school 
year 
and 
turnke
y the 
strate
gies to 

the 
staff. 
Some 
of the 
works
hops 
that 
we 
have 
recent

ly 

attend
ed are 

the 

"STEM 
Institu
te", 
"Engag

ing 

ELLs in 
Rigoro

us 

Instruc
tion 
Part 1 
and 
2", 
"Co-
teachi

ng 

Model
s in 
ELL 
Classr
ooms"
, and 
"Langu
age 

Access 
Coordi
nator 
Trainin
g".   Th

ese 
works
hops 
provid
e ENL 
teache
rs with 

the 
necess
ary 
tools 

to 

suppo
rt the 

2018-19 SCEP-FF                                                                                                                                                                                          78 

 

and 

collabor

ates 

with the 
classroo

m 

teacher 
in order 

to 

create a 
climate 
in which 
the ELLs 

can 
thrive 
using 
ENL 

strategie
s. The 
ENL 

teacher 

also 

collabor

ates 

with the 
classroo

m 

teachers 

to 

provide 
support 
to these 
students 
through 
different

iated 
instructi

on. 

Students 

are 

encoura
ged to 
attend 
our Title 
III After-
School 
Program 

.  

e-Once 

our 

students 
achieve 
Comma
nding 
level on 

the 

NYSESLA
T and 
test out 
of the 
ENL 

program
,  they 

continue 

to 

receive 
transitio

nal 

support 
through 
the ENL 
program

. The 

ELL 
studen
ts as 
they 
engag
e in 
the 
Comm

on 
Core 
Learni

ng 

Standa
rds.  E
very 
teache
r that 
attend
s ELL 
trainin

g 

receiv
es an 
agend
a that 
specifi
es the 
hours 
and 
dates 

of 

trainin

g. 

Every 
teache

r is 

respon
sible 
for 
maint
ain 
record
s in 
order 

to 

meet 
the 
requir
ement
s. The 
ENL 
teache

rs 

keep a 
binder 
 with 
all the 
agend
as and 
sign-in 
sheets 

of 

works
hops 
that 
they 
presen
ted as 
well as 
agend
as of 
the 
works

2018-19 SCEP-FF                                                                                                                                                                                          79 

 

TB
E 

ENL staff 
continue

s to 

monitor 

and 

provide 

90 

minutes 
integrat
ed ef 
ENL 

mandat

ed 

services 
as per 
CR Part 
154 to 
former 
ELLs for 

two 
years, 
offering 

them 
support 

as 

needed. 
Students 

are 

invited 

to 

attend 

the 
After-
School 
program
s that 
are 

provide
d by the 

ENL 

teachers 
through 
Title III. 
During 
testing, 

ELL 

students 

still 

receive 
addition
al time 
and are 
tested in 

a 

separate 
location 
like all 
other 
ELLs in 

the 

school. 
Professi
onal 

develop
ment 
and 

certificat

ion 

require
ments 
*15% 
total 
hours 

hops 
that 
they 
have 
attend
ed. At 

the 

school 
level, 
profes
sional 
develo
pment 
will be 
given 
once a 
month 

to 

ensure 
staff is 
kept 
curren
t on 
ELL 
practic
es.  

 

This 
year, 
the 
ENL 
will 
be 
imple
menti
ng an 

a 

proce

ss 

PS 92 
parent
s are 
strong

ly 

encou
raged 

to 

attend 

the 
sched
uled 

None 

at 
this 
time. 

  

John 

Samerson 

Adr
ian 
He
ge
ma
n 
Ele
me
nta
ry 

17K09

2 

Dr. 
John 
Sam
erso
n 

10/25/1

7 

Mrs. 
Sherise
 Micha

el-

Colem

an 

10
/2
5/
17 

Ms. 
Daw
n 
McL
eod 

10/
25/
17 

J. 

Sterling 
and D. 
Savitt 

10/25/

17 

1
0
9 

2018-19 SCEP-FF                                                                                                                                                                                          80 

 

ELL-

specific 
PD for 

all 

teachers 

and 
outer 
classroo
m staff 
such as 

the 

administ
rators,  S
peech 

Teacher, 
Occupati

onal 

Therapis

t, 

Physical 
Therapis

t, 

secretari
es,  and 
SWD tea
chers.  
*50% 
total 
hours 
ELL-

specific 
PD for 

bi-

lingual 
educatio
n and 
ENL 

teachers 
Agendas 
and sign 

in 

sheets 

are 

given. A 
copy of 

the 

worksho

p 

docume
nts, the 
agenda, 
and the 
sign in 
sheet 
are 

maintain
ed in an 

ENL 

binder 

for 

professi
onal 

develop
ment.    

wher
e we 
meet 
the 
paren

ts 
four 
times 

a 

year 
to 
revie
w 

stude
nts' 
progr
ess. 
Paren
ts are 
infor
med 
of 
stude
nts' 
move
ment 
using 

a 

Progr
ess 
Repo
rt 

given 
at the 
Paren

t 

Teach

er 
confe
rence

s. 
This 
Progr
ess 
Repo
rt is 
used 

to 

track 
the 
progr
ess  o
f all 
ELL 
stude
nts 
towar

ds 
their 
indivi
dual 
goals. 
 On 
Tuesd
ays, 
the 
ENL 
teach
ers 
meet 
with 
paren
ts to 

ELL 
and 
whole

-

school 
orient
ations, 

as 
well 
as 

parent 
works
hops 
specifi
cally 
design
ed to 
teach 
parent

s 

strate
gies 
that 
can be 
used 

at 

home 

to 

impro

ve 
their 
child’s 
acade
mic 
perfor
mance
.  Duri
ng the 
spring, 

the 
ENL 
teach
ers 

offer a 
short 
series 
of  ad
ult 
ENL 
classe
s to 
the 
parent
s to 
encou
rage 
them 

to 

learn 
the 
langua
ge in 
order 

to 

assist 
their 
childr
en 
with 
home
work. 
 Paren
ts are 

2018-19 SCEP-FF                                                                                                                                                                                          81 

 

discu
ss 

stude
nt 

goals 
and 
next 
steps. 
Finall
y, the 
ENL 
teach
ers 
partic
ipate 
in a 
schoo

l-

wide 
works
hop 
series 

on 
the 
Com
mon 
Core 
Learn
ing 
Stand
ards 
to 
educ
ate 
paren
ts on 
how 
the 
stand
ards 
impa
ct 

their 
child'

s 

learni
ng.  D
epen
ding 
on 
the 
works
hop, 
the 
ENL 
teach
ers 
have 
transl
ated 
for 
paren
ts to 
clarif

y 

point

s 

discu
ssed. 

  

also 
encou
raged 

to 

meet 
with 
the 
guida
nce 
staff 
to 

addre

ss 

specia

l 

conce
rns 
that 
impac
t the 
learni
ng 
and 
attend
ance 

of 

their 
childr
en.  Th
ese 
includ
e crisis 
interv
ention 

or 
referr
als for 
intern
al and 
outsid

e 

servic
es 

from 
our 
comm
unity-
based 
organi
zation
s.  We 
have 
transl
ators 

to 

assist 
during 
works
hops.  
When 
a child 

is 

regist
ered, 
we 
provid

e 

interp
retati
on 

assista
nce in 
all the 

2018-19 SCEP-FF                                                                                                                                                                                          82 

 

DL 

N/A 

10/25
/17 

DL 

               

N/A 

DL 

           

 

To
ta
l 

       
   
 

langua
ges. 
We 
also 
have 
an 

Intern
ationa
l Day, 
where 
parent
s are 
encou
raged 

to 

share 
variou

s 

aspect
s of 
their 
cultur

e: 

food, 
clothi
ng, 
dancin
g, and 
histor
y.  Par
ents 
are 
also 
encou
raged 

to 

partici
pate 
in all 
of the 
activiti
es.  

Ms. 
Ann-
marie 
Green

/4 

th  Gr 

Ms 
Elishe
va 

Gantz 

Ms. 

Beverly 
Thenor/5 

th  Gr 

10/25/17 

10/25
/17 

Schoo

l 

Psych
ologis

t 

         

        

       

10/
25/
17 

N/
A 

   
   

N/A 

N/A 

N/A 

N/A 

           

N/A 

N/A 

           

       

       

       

       

Ms
. 
Ca
rla 
De
wg
ard 

N/
A 

   
   

10/2
5/17 

Mr. 
Clar
enc
e 

Ellis 

N/A 

N/A 

0 

     
   

     
   

         

         

       

       

       

       

0 

0 

2
7
3
5 

1717 

276.
02 

0 

10 

30 

0 

0 

604 

0 

92 

0 

0 

6 

 
 
 
Part III: Assessment Analysis 
 
 

2018-19 SCEP-FF                                                                                                                                                                                          83 

 

After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 

1.  What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, 

teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? 
           
 

2.  What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 

           
 

3.  What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL 

Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? 
           
 

4.  What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered?  

           
 

5.  How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-
5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.]  
           
 

6.  What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? 

([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS].  
           
 

7.  What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? 

           

 

 
 
 
Part IV: ELL Programming 
 

Programming and Scheduling Information 

1.  How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented 
as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students 
regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in 
one class]).  

a.  Freestanding ENL program. 

           

b.  TBE program.  If applicable.   

           

c.  DL program.  If applicable.    

           

 

2.  How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each 

program model? 

a.  How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 

below)? 

           
 

2018-19 SCEP-FF                                                                                                                                                                                          84 

 

3.  Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and 

methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core 
Learning Standards.  
           
 

4.  How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? 

           
 

5.  How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? 

SIFE   

a. 
b.  Newcomer  
c.  Developing   
d. 
e. 
           
 

Long Term 
Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status  

6.  What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic 

content areas and accelerate English language development?  
           
 

7.  How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and 

attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? 
           
 

8.  Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups 

targeted).  List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which 
they are offered. 
           
 

9.  Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year?    

           
 

10.  If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? 

           
 

11.  How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs?  Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in 

your building. 
           
 

12.  What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language 

materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. 
           
 

13.  How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? 

           
 

14.  Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels.  

           
 

15.  If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the 

ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met?   

2018-19 SCEP-FF                                                                                                                                                                                          85 

 

 

           
 

16.  Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for 

new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, 
parent coordinator).  
           
 

17.  What language electives are offered to ELLs?  

           
 

18.  For schools with dual language programs: 

a.  What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day 

(percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. 
In which language(s) is each core content area taught? 

b. 
c.  How is each language separated for instruction? 
d. 

Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same 
time (simultaneous)? 

           
 

Professional Development and Support for School Staff 

1.  Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic 

staff.)  What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs 
as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? 
           
 

2.  Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all 
teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include 
how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance).  Refer to ELL Policy and Reference 
Guide, Professional Development section. 
           
 
 

 

Parental Involvement 

1.  How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language 
development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? 
Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent 
orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences?  
           

2.  Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. 

           
 

 

 

2018-19 SCEP-FF                                                                                                                                                                                          86 

 

Additional Information 

Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for 
ELLs.  You may attach/submit charts.   This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted.   
           
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

2018-19 SCEP-FF                                                                                                                                                                                          87 

Part V: ELL Identification Attestation 

Principal Certification 

2. 

3. 

4. 

5. 
6. 

7. 

8. 

9. 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 

In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL 
Policy and Reference Guide, I,           , testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and 
staff are trained on the following: 
 
1. 

The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for 
students entering with IEPs). 
Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined 
a. 

If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status 
relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level.  

The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue.   
a.  The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services 
are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality 
translation service.   

Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined.   
a. 

If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility 
to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. 

Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible.   
Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language.  
a.  Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. 
If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish 
LAB.  
Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources 
available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-
education-sife.  
If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting.  
a.  Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent 

video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask 
questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided 
throughout the meeting. 

10.  ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected.  

a. 

b. 

If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program 
in accordance with DOE transfer policies. 
If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent 
choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice.   

11.  Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process).  
12.  If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose 

ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 
 

 

2018-19 SCEP-FF                                                                                                                                                                                          88 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 

Part VI: LAP Assurances 

School Name:                                                                                           School DBN:            
Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate.  Names listed in Part A, should align with this 
section.  

Name (PRINT) 

           

           

           

           

           

           

           

           

           

           

           

           

           

           

           

Title 

Principal 

Assistant Principal 

Parent Coordinator 

ENL/Bilingual Teacher 

Parent 

Teacher/Subject Area 

Teacher/Subject Area 

Coach 

Coach 

School Counselor 

Superintendent 
 
Field Support Center Staff 
Member 
           

Other            

Other            

Other            

 

Signature 

Date (mm/dd/yy) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

1/1/01 

1/1/01 

1/1/01 

1/1/01 

1/1/01 

1/1/01 

1/1/01 

1/1/01 

1/1/01 

1/1/01 

1/1/01 

1/1/01 

1/1/01 

1/1/01 

1/1/01 

2018-19 SCEP-FF                                                                                                                                                                                          89 

 

 
 

2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS 

Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools 

 

DBN: 

17K092 
 

School 
Name: 

Adrian Hegeman Elementary 
 

Superintendent: 

Clarence Ellis 
 

 
The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. 
If there is more than one LAC, list all. 
 

First Name  

Last Name  

Title  

Has the LAC attended a 

2018-19 training 

The LAC was involved in 
the development of this 

conducted by the Field 

plan? Yes/No  

Language Access 

Coordinator? Yes/No  

David 

Dawn  

Jacqueline  

   

Savitt 

Mc.Leod 

Sterling 

ENL Teacher 

Parent Coordinator 

ENL 

YES 

Yes 

No 

YES 

Yes 

Yes 

 
* The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs 
on translation,  
interpretation, compliance and budget.  
 

School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful 
opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's 
Regulation A-663).  
 
By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and 
interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). 
 
Part A:  Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 
 
1.  Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written 

and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from: 

  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS) 
  Automate The System (ATS) reports 
  Student Emergency Contact cards 
  Surveys conducted by your school. 

 

When a child is registered, parents are interviewed by our ENL teachers and administered the Home Language 
Identification Survey, and if the need is present, he or she will speak with one of our staff members proficient in 
their native language. Once parents indicate their language preference, the information is entered into ATS 
system and then stored in the student's cumulative records. At the beginning of the school year, an ATS report is 
printed to make an assessment of the different languages for which we need to provide information for parents. 
The list is then placed in the office in order for it to be checked when information needs to be sent home to 
parents. This information helps us to determine the number of parents that need to receive written and oral 
communication in Haitian Creole, Spanish, Arabic, French or other languages. If needed, we utilize the DOE 
Interpretation Unit to assist in translation, via a conference call, for language interpretation that is not available at 
the school. A review of data continues to indicate that small percentage of parents, primarily recent immigrants 

2018-19 SCEP-FF                                                                                                                                                                                          90 

 

from Haiti, Yemen, and Spanish speaking countries, presented a need for translators in their native language. 
Based on the above and the evidenced need exhibited during our initial registration period in September, we 
conclude that there is an on-going need to provide written translation services for our Haitian-Creole and Spanish 
speaking populations. In recent years, we have experienced an increased need for Arabic translators. We have 
been able to meet this need through the use of parent volunteers who are available to translate for us during 
registration and parent meetings. We will, as warranted, continue to use the DOE translation unit. Report cards, 
including the new STARS reports, are also available to parents in their native language. Finally, our school uses the 
language identification guide for school staff and the “I speak” card is also displayed in the main office where 
parents from all backgrounds can feel welcome and comfortable registering their children and asking questions. 
The teachers will also be given the "I speak" card for use with the parents.  
 

 
 
2.  List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, 

which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language 
Report (RCPL) ATS report. 
 

Language  

Written Preferred  

Percent Written  

Oral Preferred  

Percent Oral  

English 

English 

76.61% 

English 

77.04% 

 

 

Spanish 

Spanish 

 

 

 

6.87% 

 

 

Spanish 

 

 

6.65% 

 

Haitian Creole 

Haitian Creole 

6.22% 

Haitian Creole 

6.44% 

 

Arabic 

 

French  

 

Other 

N/A 

N/A 

N/A 

   

 

 

Arabic 

 

French 

 

Other 

N/A 

N/A 

N/A 

 

8.15% 

 

1.5% 

 

 

Arabic 

 

French 

 

 

6% 

 

1.07% 

 

Less than 1% 

Other 

Less than 1% 

N/A 

N/A 

N/A 

N/A 

N/A 

N/A 

N/A 

N/A 

N/A 

3.  From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at 

least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, 
French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. 
 

None 

 

 

2018-19 SCEP-FF                                                                                                                                                                                          91 

 
 
Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 
 
1.  List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be 

distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents.  
 

Document Name  

Month/Frequency 

How do you plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely 

Distributed to Families  

provision of translated documents to parents.  

September 

We send out parent 
notification about 
orientations and 
workshops. 

 

 

 

 

 

September 

Entitlement letters, 
non-entitlement, 
placement, and 
continue entitlement 
letters.  

 

Newsletters, testing 
notifications, and 
parent-teacher 
conferences in 
parent's preferred 
language.  

The Bill of Parent 
Rights and 
Responsibilities which 
includes their rights 
regarding translation 
and interpretation 
services.  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

September - May 

 

 

 

 

 

 

September - May 

 

 

These letters are already translated and are available on the DOE 
Intranet. 

 

 

 

These letters are already translated and are available on the DOE 
Intranet. 

 

 

 

 

We use staff members to translate Spanish, Haitian Creole, and 
French letters. Other languages that need translating we plan to use 
the Translation and Interpretation Unit through D.O.E.  

 

 

Posted around the school. Available at 
http://schools.nyc.gov/RulesPolicies/ParentBillofRights/default.html. 

2018-19 SCEP-FF                                                                                                                                                                                          92 

 

N/A 

N/A 

N/A 

   

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

N/A 

N/A 

N/A 

N/A 

N/A 

N/A 

2.  List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as 

parent-teacher  
conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings.  
   

Meeting Name  

Month/Frequency of Meetings  

How does your school plan to provide 

 

Parent-teacher conference 

 

New parent of ELLs Orientation 

 

 

Parent- teacher conferences 

 

September 2018 

 

 

 

September 2018 

 

 

 

 

Attendance Team and SBST 

 

October, November, March, and May 

Monthly starting in September 

interpretation service(s)?  

We use staff members to interpret 
Spanish, Haitian Creole, and French for 
meetings. Other languages that need 
interpretation we plan to use the 
Translation and Interpretation Unit 
through D.O.E.  

 

We use staff members to interpret 
Spanish, Haitian Creole, and French for 
meetings. Other languages that need 
interpretation we plan to use the 
Translation and Interpretation Unit 
through D.O.E.  

 

 

We use staff members to interpret 
Spanish, Haitian Creole, and French for 
meetings. Other languages that need 
interpretation we plan to use the 

2018-19 SCEP-FF                                                                                                                                                                                          93 

 

N/A 

N/A 

N/A 

   

 

Translation and Interpretation Unit 
through D.O.E. 

 

We use staff members to interpret 
Spanish, Haitian Creole, and French for 
meetings. Other languages that need 
interpretation we plan to use the 
Translation and Interpretation Unit 
through D.O.E.  

N/A 

N/A 

N/A 

 

N/A 

N/A 

N/A 

3.  Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of 

a school emergency.  
 

We use staff members to interpret Spanish, Haitian Creole, and French for an emergency. Other languages that need 
interpretation we plan to use the Translation and Interpretation Unit through D.O.E. at 855-249-9103 or 800-231-
0288 

  
 

 
 
Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure

 

 
Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and 
what resources are available to meet compliance.  
 

Language access coordinator will turnkey information from ongoing workshops to staff.  

 

 
 
Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services 
 
Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive 
information. Include any: 

  Translated signage 
  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents 
  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) 

 

In accordance with Section VII of the Chancellors Regulation A-663, the Parent Coordinator and the Language Access 
Coordinator will provide each parent, whose primary language is a covered language and who require language 
assistance services, with a copy of the Bill of Parent Rights and Responsibilities which includes their rights regarding 
translation and interpretation services. Translated versions of this document, in the covered languages, are available 

2018-19 SCEP-FF                                                                                                                                                                                          94 

 

at http://schools.nyc.gov/RulesPolicies/ParentBillofRights/default.htm through the NYCDOE’s website. Parents are 
also informed of the interpretation services available to them. Translated signs, in the covered languages, are 
available at http://schools.nyc.gov/Offices/Translation/TipsandResources/Default.htm. In the event that a limited 
proficient parent speaks a language that is neither English nor a covered language, the Language Access Coordinator 
or the Parent Coordinator will obtain from the Translation and Interpretation Unit a translation into such language 
and will post and provide such forms in accordance with Regulation A-663. 
http://intranet.nycboe.net/SchoolSupport/translation_and_interpretation_unit.  
 

 
 
Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services 
Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the 
language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services?   
 

Each year we review the Parent Survey to elicit understanding of how translation and interpretation services were 
beneficial or not. We also have informal conversations with parents to determine their needs in the area of 
translation and interpretation. We will create a cohort of parents who reflect each language in the school to discuss 
how the needs of each sub-group can be addressed.  
 

 

2018-19 SCEP-FF                                                                                                                                                                                          95 

