 
 

 

 
 

 
  
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

2018-19 

COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN 

(CEP) 

 
 
 
 

 

DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 

21K098 

School Name: 

I.S. 98 BAY ACADEMY 

Principal: 

MARIA TIMO 

 
 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                          
 

 

 

 

 1 

 

Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline  

 
 
Section 1: School Information Page 
 
 
Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page  
 
 
Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) 
 
 
Section 4: CEP Overview  
 
 
Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  

  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction 
  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment 
  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers 
  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership 
  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties  

 
 
Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS)  
 
 
Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) 
 
 
Section 8: Title I Program Information  
 
 
Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 
 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          2 

 

 

 
School Name: 

BEDS Code: 

Grades Served: 

School Address:  

Section 1: School Information Page 

 

School Information 

 

The Bay Academy for Arts and 
Sciences 

 
332100010098 

 
6-8 

 
1401 Emmons Ave Brooklyn, NY 11235 

School Number (DBN): 

 

21 k098 

 
718-891-9005 

Phone Number: 

 

718-646-7250 

Fax: 

 

Janice Dalton 

jdalton3@schools.nyc.gov 

School Contact Person:  

 

Mrs. Maria Timo 

Email Address: 

 

Principal: 

UFT Chapter Leader: 

Parents’ Association President: 

SLT Chairperson: 

Title I Parent Representative (or 
Parent Advisory Council 
Chairperson): 

Student Representative(s): 

 

CBO Representative: 
 

 
Jacqueline Herman 

 
Susanna Faynkikh 

 
Janice Dalton 

 

NA 

 
NA 

 

 
NA 

 

 

District Information 

 

Geographical District: 

21 

 

Ms. Isabel DiMola 

Superintendent: 
1401 Emmons Ave Brooklyn, NY 11235 

 

Superintendent’s Office Address: 

 
IDimola@schools.nyc.gov  

Superintendent’s Email Address: 

 

718-648-0209  

Phone Number: 

 

718-648-2165 

Fax: 

 

 
 

Field Support Center (FSC)  

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          3 

 

Brooklyn South 

Cheryl Watson-Harris 

FSC: 

 

Executive Director’s Office Address: 

Executive Director: 
415 89th street Brooklyn NY 11209 

 

 
CWatsonharris@gmail.com 

Executive Director’s Email Address: 
718-759-4862 

 

Phone Number: 

 

718-759-4864 

Fax: 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          4 

 

Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page  

 

All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this 
Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to 
support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention 
Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal 
number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with 
Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. 
 
Directions: 

 

1.  List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 
2.  Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization 
(CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an 
asterisk*. 

3.  SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member 

does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, 
which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT 
member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval.   

4.  The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file 

in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. 

 

Name 

Position and Constituent Group 

Represented 

Signature 
(Blue Ink) 

Maria Timo 

 
Jackie Herman 

 
Susana Faynkikh 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Nicole D'Agosta 

 
Scotte Perry 

 
Janice Dalton 

 

*Principal or Designee 

*UFT Chapter Leader or Designee 

*PA/PTA President or Designated Co-
President 

DC 37 Representative (staff), if 
applicable 

Title I Parent Representative or 
Parent Advisory Council Chairperson  

Student Representative  
(optional for elementary and middle 
schools; a minimum of two members 
required for high schools) 

Student Representative  
(optional for elementary and middle 
schools; a minimum of two members 
required for high schools) 

CBO Representative, if applicable 

 
Assistant Principal/CSA 

 
Member/ UFT 

 
Member/ CSA 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          5 

 

 

Name 

Position and Constituent Group 

Represented 

Signature 
(Blue Ink) 

Nicole Bourbakis 

 
AishaAshgar 

 
Chi Kwok 

 
Maya Maher 

 
Jian WeiChen 

 

 

 

 

 

Member/ Parent 

 
Member/ Parent 

 
Member/ Parent 

 
Member/ Parent 

 
Member/ Parent 

 
Member/ 

 
Member/ 

 
Member/ 

 
Member/ 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          6 

 

Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan  

 

The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to 
support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing 
school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, 
monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. 
This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the 
school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, 
Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. 

Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools 

The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect 
the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms 
where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity 
and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and 
classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more 
attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and 
Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our 
families and students. 

Strong Schools, Strong Communities  

The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, 
educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school 
prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult.  

The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers 
and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of 
schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, 
school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that 
all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New 
Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students.  

The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development 

The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and 
external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase 
learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently 
ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan 
(CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school 
community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and 
address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for 
students. 
 

Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish 
high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the 
Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community 
members concrete ways to improve. 
 
In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in 
consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to 
participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a 
comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          7 

 
the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all 
the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements 
work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing 
that it likely addresses other elements as well. 
 

The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools  

Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards 
are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical 
thinking skills. 
Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, 
and challenged by their teachers and peers. 
Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. 
They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous 
improvement. 
Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, 
developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. 
Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by 
welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. 
Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school 
and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value 
each other. 

 

The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools 

In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in 
improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative 
and qualitative data. 

NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) 

The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by 
coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality 
Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 
Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below:  

I.       Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) 
II.    School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4)  
III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and 

Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) 

  
School Quality Guide  

The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to 
set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to 
accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also 
available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s 
practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. 
For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. 
The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of 
similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set 
based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. 

 

Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          8 

 
Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, 
professional development, and parent and family engagement. 
 
To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in 
improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will 
serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the 
administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish: 
 
 
 
It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School 
Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the 
joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% 
parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% 
budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent 
and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on 
establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. 

a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; 
a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) 

 
Next Steps for CEP Development 

School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  

  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the 

requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655. 

  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability 

status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year. 

  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed 

by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are 
SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you 
monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school 
community know when you’ve reached your goal. 

  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action 
plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement. 

  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I 

schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). 

  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall 

cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action 
plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. 

Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful 
implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to 
accomplishing desired results. 

Section 4: CEP Overview 

 

1.  What is your school’s mission statement? 

We believe that all children can and will achieve their potential and become productive, literate, responsible citizens. 
We have developed a rigorous program aligned to the Next Generation Learning Standards. We have developed a 
program of collaborative, coherent instruction which includes working in teams, with parents and the community to 
provide intensive instruction and enrichment in every area for all students. This enables all students to be prepared 
for High School and beyond. 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          9 

 

2.  Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, 

including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented.  
The Bay Academy for the Arts and Sciences serves a gifted and talented population of students in grades 6-8. Students 
are accepted to the school through talent testing. Every child is involved in an in-depth study of the talent 
concentration into which they are accepted.  

The Arts Program continues to be a driving force and a strong focus throughout the school. We believe that the arts 
transcend nation, language and culture. This opens doors for large communities of people to share universal 
understandings even though they may not speak the same language or have the same beliefs. The arts create a 
universal language to communicate inner expression which enables the all students but especially English Language 
Learners and students who struggle to communicate verbally or through writing, another means of expression. The 
arts are an important factor in the development of language, motor skills, decision making, visual and kinesthetic 
learning, inventiveness, cultural awareness and improved academic performance. The arts department brings 
rigorous standards and accountability to arts education with the Blueprint for Teaching and Learning in the Arts. The 
arts department lessons and assessments are also in alignment with the Learning Standard Capacities in English 
Language Arts and Standards for Mathematical Practice.  

Technology continues to play an important role in interactive instruction and to drive student centered work. This 
year we will continue to set aside a significant portion of our budget for i-Ready Instruction which is an online 
program that assesses students' progress using adaptive diagnostic assessments throughout the school year. It 
delivers engaging online lessons at each student's level based on results from our online adaptive diagnostic. i-Ready 
Diagnostic provides a deep, customized evaluation of every student to track student growth and performance 
consistently and continuously over the year. Students take adaptive diagnostic exams to track progress and mastery 
of standards in ELA and Mathematics throughout the school year. This efficiently pinpoints students’ needs as 
compared to traditional assessments. i–Ready details each student’s abilities and areas of need. The information in 
these reports provide teachers with an action plan for individual and group instruction as well as the tools to deliver 
differentiated instruction. i-Ready’s Tools for Instruction are downloadable, best-practice learning standard lessons 
that relate directly to skills assessed in the Diagnostic. Tools for Instruction provide additional support for skills 
students may have worked on in the online lessons but have not yet fully mastered. i-Ready assessments will be given 
once per month to all 6th and 7th grade students as well as 8th grade ICT and Special Education students. These 
assessments will be included in the students' overall average grade placing more importance on the assessments and 
making the students more accountable for their work.  

We will also continue to set a portions of our budget aside for our grading system, JupiterEd, updates, repairs and 
maintenance on all technology including iPads and SMART Boards and new technology for the auditorium such as 
sound board, scrim/cyclorama, and gobo projectors.  

The Bay Academy is creating a new website with a new domain www.is98.net. This new website will take the place of 
our previous website and Edline which we are no longer using. The new website will be much more interactive for 
students and parents alike with announcements, forms, videos, pictures, summer assignments, parent resources, 
parent forums, etc. The website will also have a direct link to JupiterEd for a more convenient online experience. 
Training will be provided for supervisor and technology teachers. 

This year we will integrate 3 new initiative programs in our school: 

1. No One Eats Alone is a student-led lunchtime initiative with the goal of combating social isolation. The concept was 
developed by the organization Beyond Differences, a nationwide program which strives to make all children feel 
included, valued and accepted by their peers. The Bay Academy will be introducing several new initiatives in the 2018-
2019 school year with the core principles of creating an inclusive community, stopping bullying and empowering the 
students to make a difference through the following actions: 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          10 

 

 

 

Lunchtime quiet spaces in select classrooms, where students can play games, read and interact with like-
minded peers. These spaces will be an alternative for those children who may feel overwhelmed by the 
activity in the traditional cafeteria setting. 
“Come Sit With Us” placards that students can put out on their cafeteria tables to encourage visitation by 
classmates they may not typically interact with. 

  No One Eats Alone Student Ambassadors who will serve as leaders in the cafeteria, modeling kindness, 

socialization and leadership behavior. 

  A new ethics initiative, headed by our guidance counselors and volunteer teachers. 

2. College Access for All - Middle School The Bay Academy is actively seeking a college that focuses on the arts and 
sciences to peak our students' interests and give students the motivation and drive they will need to continue in these 
fields beyond middle school. We will work collaboratively with the chosen college to: 

  Give students the opportunity to visit a college campus. 
  Provide workshops for students and parents and prepare them to make good decisions about high school, 

college and careers. 

  Engage parents and expand students' horizons. 
  Bring school communities together around setting high goals. 

3. Rethink Ed - Social and Emotional Learning (SEL) for All Learners is a digital, evidence-based program developed 
for every educator and student. This program is a comprehensive solution that promotes well-being, connectedness 
and success for students and adults. It is focused on the entire school community to promote healthy and confident 
students and adults. Rethink Ed SEL develops self-awareness , self-management, responsible decision-making 
relationship skills and social awareness and the technology offers flexibility and ease of access and data recording 
tools tracking progress, behavioral outcomes, learning outcomes, staff training, self-reflections and surveys.. The 
Rethink Ed SEL program is comprised of: 

  Educator Training Modules and Professional Development 
 

Student-centered lessons and resources for general and special education with modifications to meet the 
needs of every student. 

  Assessments, surveys, feedback and growth reports 

Curriculum is regularly reviewed, updated and revised based on our students' needs and standards. We have set aside 
money to purchase the new math curriculum Go Math and consumables that align with the Next Generation Learning 
Standards for Mathematics. 

All teachers will continue to attend weekly scheduled Inquiry Team meetings, where they collaborate, review student 
work and analyze the school’s item skills analysis based on test scores. We also work collaboratively through several 
partnerships including; Urban Advantage, Teaching American History, Spring Concert Series/Brooklyn Borough 
President, Assemblyman Cymbrowitz Health Fair, NIA’s Comprehensive After-School Program, and Cultural After 
School Program (CASA) in conjunction with Brighton Ballet. 

School involvement in philanthropic endeavors such as Autism Speaks, Multiple Sclerosis Walk, Breast Cancer 
Awareness, Breast Cancer Walk, American Heart Association, Toys for Tots, Jeans for Vets, Anarchy Animal Rescue, St. 
Jude, Brick Wall Against Bullying and Prostate Awareness has become a successful driving force of the overall 
academic achievement. The ‘buy in’ is outstanding and supported by staff and students. Students work harder to 
achieve greater results because of this sense of pride, commitment and integrity.  

The strength of the Bay Academy is derived from the continuity throughout the school on the implementation of the 
Next Generation Learning Standards and now the Next Generation Standards in all subject areas, protocols, grading 
systems, strategies, and communication with parents through JupiterEd, Class DoJo, email and progress reports. 
JupiterEd continues to be very successful towards our continued efforts for a more immediate, precise and 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          11 

 

comprehensive communication between teachers and parents. Our goal for our students is to become responsible, 
well organized, critical thinkers and problem solvers who are high school ready.  

 

3.  Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. 

It is the mission of the Consultancy Group to target the academic, social and emotional lives of struggling Black and 
Latino male students. 

 

4. 

Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over 
the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. 

The Element of the Framework for Great Schools in which the Bay Academy has made the most growth is Strong 
Family-Community Ties. We have found that through use of JupiterEd, there is constant real-time communication 
between teachers, which has enabled us to all work closely to meet students' needs and to communicate with 
families about how they can better help their children learn. We would like to continue our focus this year is on 
Strong Family and Community Ties. Although we have made the most improvement in this element, this is the only 
element where we are below the city average by 0.37 and we feel that we can still improve in specifically on Parent 
Involvement in School. 

 

 

 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          12 

 

 

School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 21K098 

School Configuration (2018-19) 

Grade Configuration 

06,07,08 

Total Enrollment (2017-
18) 
English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 

1530 

SIG Recipient (Y/N) 

Transitional Bilingual 

N/A 

Dual Language 

N/A 

Self-Contained English as a Second 
Language 

Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) 

# Special Classes (ELA) 
# Special Classes (Math) 

# Visual Arts 
# Foreign Language 

% Title I Population 
% Free Lunch 
% Limited English Proficient 

39 
38 

36 
53 

% American Indian or Alaska Native 
% Hispanic or Latino 
% White 

# SETSS (ELA) 
# SETSS (Math) 
Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) 
# Music 
# Drama 
# CTE 
# Dance 

87 
83 

33 
6 

# Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) 
# Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) 

School Composition (2017-18) 

55.0%  % Attendance Rate 
46.3%  % Reduced Lunch 
1.4% 

% Students with Disabilities 

Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) 

0.5% 
8.8% 
58.6%  % Multi-Racial 

% Black or African American 
% Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 

Personnel (2015-16) 

Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) 
% of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate 
% Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 

9.08 
1% 
10% 

# of Assistant Principals (2016-17) 
% Teaching Out of Certification 
Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) 

Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) 

ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 

93.6%  Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 

Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 

N/A 

Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-
17) 

Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) 

ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 
Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 
4 Year Graduation Rate 

Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 

N/A 
N/A 
N/A 

N/A 

Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 
US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 
6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) 
% ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures 
(2015-16) 

Reward 
In Good Standing 
Focus District 

Priority School 

Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) 

No 
Yes 
Yes 

Recognition 
Local Assistance Plan 
Focus School Identified by a Focus District 

No 

Focus Subgroups 

N/A 

Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) 

Elementary/Middle School 

Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) 

American Indian or Alaska Native 
Hispanic or Latino 
White 
Students with Disabilities 
Economically Disadvantaged 

American Indian or Alaska Native 
Hispanic or Latino 
White 
Students with Disabilities 
Economically Disadvantaged 

American Indian or Alaska Native 
Hispanic or Latino 
White 
Students with Disabilities 
Economically Disadvantaged 

American Indian or Alaska Native 
Hispanic or Latino 
White 
Students with Disabilities 
Economically Disadvantaged 

American Indian or Alaska Native 
Hispanic or Latino 
White 
Students with Disabilities 
Economically Disadvantaged 

American Indian or Alaska Native 
Hispanic or Latino 
White 
Students with Disabilities 
Economically Disadvantaged 

N/A 
NO 
YES 
NO 
YES 

Black or African American 
Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander 
Multi-Racial 
Limited English Proficient 
ALL STUDENTS 

Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) 
Black or African American 
Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander 
Multi-Racial 
Limited English Proficient 
ALL STUDENTS 

N/A 
NO 
NO 
NO 
YES 

Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) 

N/A 
YES 
YES 
N/A 
YES 
High School 

Black or African American 
Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander 
Multi-Racial 
Limited English Proficient 
ALL STUDENTS 

Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) 

N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 

Black or African American 
Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander 
Multi-Racial 
Limited English Proficient 
ALL STUDENTS 

Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) 
Black or African American 
Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander 
Multi-Racial 
Limited English Proficient 
ALL STUDENTS 

N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 

Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) 
Black or African American 
Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander 
Multi-Racial 
Limited English Proficient 
ALL STUDENTS 

N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 

No 

N/A 

70 
69 

 
 

95.7% 
8.5% 
9.2% 

2.8% 
27.3% 
2.6% 

6 
27% 
6.2 

96.6% 

97% 

N/A 
N/A 
N/A 

N/A 

N/A 
No 
No 

NO 
YES 
N/A 
N/A 
YES 

NO 
YES 
N/A 
N/A 
YES 

N/A 
YES 
N/A 
N/A 
YES 

N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 

N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 

N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          13 

 

 
 

Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans 

 

Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, 
motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged 
in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. 

Part 1 – Needs Assessment   

Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and 
formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not 
limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. 
Number responses accordingly. 
 
1.  What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element?  Indicate the data trends, source and year. 
2.  What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? 

Indicate the data trends, source and year. 

 
1. Our strengths continue in the element of Framework for Rigorous Instruction in which we received a score of 4.84. 
This score encompasses our survey results in regards to Common Core Shifts in Literacy and Math, Course Clarity, 
Quality of Student Discussion and Academic Press. Once again we received 100% positive response in Common Core 
Shifts in both Literacy and Math which speaks to how our school ensures that students are engaged in rigorous 
instruction aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards and/or content standards, how our teachers pedagogy is 
based on a set of coherent beliefs around how students learn, how our assessments of curricula are aligned to the 
content and are on-going, and how the data from the assessments is utilized. The results from all of our work on 
rigorous instruction can be seen in the following results of our State Tests: 

 

6th Grade  7rh Grade  8th Grade  

ELA % of 3's and 4's  96.6% 

Math % of 3's and 4's  99.5% 

90.4% 

96.7% 

92.4% 

93.5% 

 

Our priority needs are based on the Framework Report which indicates the following areas we scored lowest and will 
be targeted for improvement: 

2. The priority needs that we will address are 

Academic Press - Overall we received 75% positive response of which 61% of students responded that teachers ask 
difficult questions and 63% of students responded that they were challenged in their classes. 
Course Clarity - Overall we received 83% positive response of which 71% of students say that they learn a lot from 
feedback on their work and 76% of students responded that the homework assignments help them learn the course 
material. 

Utilizing assessment data we continue to shift instruction to meet the diverse needs of our students. In the areas of 
Math and ELA detailed analysis of the results are noted below.  

Math  

 

Students at the Bay Academy were assessed using an adaptive diagnostic test in Mathematics. Comparing the 
results of the fall to spring diagnostic, students showed growth. The average scale score gain for 20 points 
comparing the fall assessment the spring assessment. Out of 952 students tested, 69% achieved target, 67% 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          14 

 

of students are on or above grade level. In the 6th grade, of the 492 students tested, 73% of students are on 
or above grade level. In the 7th grade, out of the 399 students tested, 68% of students are on or above grad 
level. 

  Teachers continually identify each student's strengths and weaknesses using available data, such as, i-Ready, 

Schoolnet, Formative/Summative assessments, as well as teacher observations and interactions with 
students. Teachers used the summer assignment and the Common Core Learning Standards Aligned Baseline 
as a pre-assessment to identify the skills of their students. The analysis of this comprehensive data is used to 
propel the instructional process of creating meaningful lessons, grouping of students, student programs, and 
student placements. Meaningful and immediate shifts were made to the curriculum maps and pacing guides 
to meet the needs of the students. School leaders and teachers work collaboratively to ensure the math 
curriculum is aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards. Curriculum maps and pacing guides are 
maintained and updated as needed and are kept by the Math team as well as the principal. School leaders 
and teachers have clearly defined criteria to ensure that each student meets the rigorous demands for 
promotion to the next grade. 

ELA  

 

Students at the Bay Academy were assessed using an adaptive diagnostic test in ELA. The average scale score 
gain was 14 points. Out of the 522 6th grade students tested, 44% met their growth target and 57% of 
students are on or above grade level. of the 474 7th grade students tested, 48% of students met their growth 
target ad 51% of students are on or above grade level. 

 

 
Part 2 – Annual Goal 

Indicate  your  school’s  2018-19  goal  for  improving  student  outcomes  and  school  performance  that  addresses  this 
element  of  the  Framework  for  Great  Schools–Rigorous  Instruction.  Your  goal  must  be  responsive  to  the  identified 
priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-
bound.  
By June 2019, students across grades 6-8 will face more challenging questions and will receive more meaningful 
feedback and homework assignments resulting in a 15% performance increase on assessment responses school wide, as 
measured by i-Ready Diagnostics. 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          15 

 
Part 3a – Action Plan 

Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities 
and strategies your school will implement to 
achieve the identified goal for this Framework 
for Great Schools element, including: 

Target Group(s) 
Who will be targeted? 

  Evidence-based instructional programs, 

 

professional development, and/or 
systems and structures needed to 
impact change. 
Strategies to address the needs of 
students with disabilities, English 
language learners, and other high-need 
student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-
credited, SIFE, STH). 

Timeline 
What is the 
start and 
end date? 

Key Personnel 
Who is responsible 
for implementing 
and overseeing 
the 
activity/strategy? 

  Weekly professional development will be 

 

 

 

Teachers 

Administration 

Weekly 
beginning 
Sept 5, 
2018 - May 
2019 

provided on questioning techniques, 
scaffolding and differentiating 
assignments, Next Generation Learning 
Standards and providing effective 
feedback so all teachers recognize that 
questioning and discussion techniques 
promote higher leveled thinking in all 
disciplines. Teachers encourage students 
to create their own questions and to 
build on each others' responses to 
questions by responding either with a 
comment or a new question. This 
promotes student discussions. Teachers 
use probing questioning techniques and 
open ended questions based on DOK 
levels. Teachers are provided with 
discipline-specific professional 
development to effectively implement 
teaching strategies in Next Generation 
Learning Standards as well.  

Meaningful and timely feedback of students' 
work will be provided along with time for revision 
of work to ensure the best performance on 
assessments and projects. 

Teachers 

Sept. 5 
2018 - June 
2019 

Math Action Plan 

 

 

 

 

  The math department has found a new 

Teachers 

curriculum Go Math, books and 
consumables that align with the Next 
Generation Learning Standards for 
Mathematics and will incorporate lessons 
from i-Ready. In selecting resources, 
teachers recognize the importance of 

Sept 5, 
2018 -June 
2019 

Teachers and 
Administrators 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          16 

 

choosing those that align directly with 
the instructional outcomes and those 
that will be most useful to students. 
Teachers also ensure that materials and 
resources are appropriately challenging 
for every student. All subject areas 
incorporate strategies to build on 
student’s critical thinking, reasoning, 
communication and 
media/information/technology through 
literacy and mathematics. These 
strategies provide the students with an 
education that is equal in rigor across all 
subjects. Teachers have also created 
enrichment activities for each unit. This is 
meant to emphasize problem solving 
strategies at an accelerated level. 
Teachers will continue to implement a 
problem of the week in which students 
have multiple strategies in reaching the 
solution. Students will continue have 
meaningful conversations involving the 
conceptual understanding of the content. 
This improves students analytical and 
problem solving skills throughout the 
year. 

  When teacher teams collaborate during 
their weekly common prep period they 
analyze not only student work but 
student development and progress. This 
affords learning opportunities for team 
members to make meaningful 
instructional decisions based on their 
student population. Out of this cohesive 
collaboration successful strategies have 
emerged and parental communication 
and the success of student goals are 
being met. This is evident through the 
frequent use of JupiterEd and our new 
school website by parents, students and 
teachers. These online websites allows 
not only teachers to know their students 
but for parents to understand the type of 
learner their child is. Students monitor 
their own work on a daily basis which 
influences their personal educational 
goals. JupiterEd and the school's website 
is tracked by the webmaster and school 
leaders and visits to this site are 
overwhelmingly substantial. This 
knowledge of students by the teachers, 
parents and students paves the way for a 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Weekly 
Sept 2018 - 
June 2019 

 

 

 

 

Weekly 
Sept 2018 - 
June 2019 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          17 

 

smooth transition and a successful career 
in high school. 

  A monthly newsletter will continue to be 

provided for parents about important 
instructional information and school 
events. Progress reports will be sent 
regularly to all parents. These reports 
along with Go Math curriculum track 
students' progress and provide parents 
with updated information. Parents use e-
mail, phone calls, homework planners or 
appointments as a means to 
communicate with the teachers. This 
open communication is a successful 
strategy to help promote student 
achievement. 

  Teachers establish trust with families by 

communicating regularly with them 
about instructional programs and 
individual students and by inviting 
families to be part of the education 
process itself. Teachers use the online 
grade book JupiterEd so that families can 
access these records privately at any time 
to monitor the progress of their children. 
Teachers also have the opportunity to 
meet with parents after school hours on 
Tuesdays. Teachers have provided 
multiple resources for parents including 
webinars that have been designed to 
assist parents in becoming partners to 
their child and the school. A monthly 
newsletter has been developed for 
parents about important instructional 
information and school events. Progress 
reports are sent to all parents regularly 
and provides parents with updated 
information on their student’s progress 
and an analysis of these reports shows 
students are making gains and 
improvements in their academics. This 
report provides parents with updated 
information on their students’ progress.  

ELA Action Plan 

  The ELA department meets as a whole 
team on Tuesday afternoons to discuss 
how to ensure students have a strong 
understanding of the development of the 
central idea in a passage and how this can 
be traced throughout the text. Several 
strategies will be employed which include 

 

 

 

 

Monthly 
October 
2018 - May 
2019 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          18 

 

 

 

Weekly 
Sept 2018 - 
June 2019 

 

debates in the classroom, lead 
discussions as a specific character, 
student writing assignments in a 
character's voice, and utilizing the 
interactive aspect of JupiterEd for further 
reinforcement. 

  Through Expeditionary Learning students 
are involved in evidence based classroom 
protocols which focus on gathering and 
using evidence during discussion. Every 
teacher is a teacher of literacy and 
therefore all subject teachers have been 
trained to utilize these protocols within 
their classroom to foster cohesive 
instruction. ELA teachers will continue to 
adjust their pacing and curriculum maps 
to meet the instructional goals of the 
department. Reflecting upon 
instructional decisions made when 
Expeditionary Learning was adopted, it 
became apparent that pacing had to be 
adjusted to meet the needs of all 
students for the NYS ELA exam.  

  We have adopted questioning techniques 

using Webb’s DOK tiered questioning. 
Our lesson plan format includes an area 
which enables the teacher to track 
questioning according to level of rigor. In 
this way, teachers can be assured that 
they are challenging students through 
higher order thinking questions. This 
technique allows teachers to build up to 
thought provoking and engaging 
questions. This leads to rich 
conversations among students with 
teachers insisting that students stay 
deeply connected to the topic. All 
classroom discussion must be supported 
with text based details allowing our 
students to meet the demand for 
evidence based discussion and writing. 
  The ELA Team meets regularly with the 
Social Studies department on Tuesday 
afternoons to discuss the importance of 
evidence based writing. Sample student 
work was examined to determine what 
exemplary work looks like as well as work 
that needs improvement. The Social 
Studies department has focused on 
primary source documents which rely 
heavily on using evidence in written 
response. Teachers in the ELA and Social 
Studies collaborate to meet the needs of 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          19 

 

 

 

all students. This practice will continue 
into the 2018-2019 school year. 
Scaffolding instruction has allowed all 
students to perform at a high level. 
Teachers create a variety of entry points 
for more challenging assignments. 
Student schedules are carefully created. 
The school wide programs are created 
using student data to help teachers align 
their instruction to the Next Generation 
Learning Standards and meet the needs 
of all their students. Homogeneous 
grouping based on state ELA and Math 
scores enable teachers to move through 
lessons at an appropriate rate for 
success. Within all classrooms, students 
are offered different entry points to both 
challenge students and allow them to be 
comfortable with the task at hand. 
Teachers move at varied paces constantly 
checking in with students and revising 
instruction to meet the needs at hand. 
Exit slips at the end of lessons provide 
teachers with valuable information for 
the next day. Regrouping based on this 
data continuously assures that teachers 
are fully aware of all students’ needs. 
Teachers use student work and data to 
refine their academic tasks and make 
immediate adjustments to engage, 
advance and assess their students. 
Regular interaction with complex text and 
academic vocabulary builds students’ 
abilities to interact with complex text 
successfully. All students read the same 
complex texts with modifications made to 
the way students approach the text. 
Students naturally refer back to text and 
are continuously questioning and 
discovering through discussion, writing 
and reading. 
Instructional strategies include teacher 
pacing according to students ability, 
embedding enrichment within each 
lesson and providing opportunities for 
students to develop rich and meaningful 
conversations. The adoption of the NYS 
rubric for short response in the 
classrooms has been at the forefront of 
the focus. The goal is that students are 
completely familiar with the way that 
responses will be graded. 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          20 

 

 

Students are identified and tracked for 
accelerated courses beginning in grade 6. 
Identified students receive accelerated 
coursework beginning in grade 7 to 
prepare them for grade 8 courses.  

  The use of i-Ready Instruction, i-Ready 

Teachers 

Diagnostic, iPad applications and SMART 
Boards in instruction will add a more 
hands on student directed dimension to 
instruction. Teachers will have the ability 
to communicate with parents through 
applications such as Jupiter Ed and Class 
Dojo. 

  Placing greater emphasis and importance 

on i-Ready Diagnostics and i-Ready 
Instruction by increasing the overall 
impact on the student's grade point 
average. Students will then become more 
diligent about their work on i-Ready 
which will produce more accurate data to 
use for instruction. 
Focus on 6th, and 7th grades, Special 
Education classes and ICT classes for i-
Ready Assessments. 

 

  All students grade 6-8 will participate in i-

Ready Diagnostics 

 
 

 
3b – Parent and Family Engagement 

Administration and 
Teachers  

Sept 5, 
2018 -April 
2019 Data 
received 
from i-
Ready 
Diagnostics 
at the 
beginning 
and mid-
point of the 
year 

How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York 
State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible 
for implementation and oversight. 
We encourage parents to discuss curriculum and strategies to support their children at home on a regular basis 
through our school's website Parent Forum, Jupiter Ed messenger, and during Tuesday Parent Engagement meetings 
to name a few. 

 

 
Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 

Part  4a.  Indicate  resources  you will  leverage  to  achieve  this  annual  goal  and  implement this  action  plan,  including 
human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 

  Math Resources - Students in grades 6 - 7 will receive 8 periods of Math per week. Students in grade 8 will 

receive 6 periods of Math per week. Instructional resources include i-Ready Instruction and Diagnostics, 
professional development and Common Core and Next Generation Standards materials from Engage NY. 

  ELA Resources - Instructional resources include Expeditionary Learning Curriculum, i-Ready Instruction and 

Diagnostics, professional development in understanding and implementing the EL protocols into the 
classroom and Common Core and Next Generation Standards materials from Engage NY. Students in all 
grades receive 8 periods of ELA per week. Students are grouped homogeneously to support student learning. 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          21 

 

Science Resources - Students in grades 6-7 will receive 4 periods of Science per week and students in grade 8 
will receive 5 periods. Instructional resources include professional development and materials for labs that 
will be utilized to align instruction to the Next Generation Standards.  

 

 

 
Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 
Title III, 

X 

Tax Levy 

 

Title I SWP 

 

Title I TA 

 

Immigrant 

Title II, 
Part A 

 

Title III, 
Part A 

 

 

C4E 

 

21st Century 

Grant 

 
Part 5 – Progress Monitoring  

 

SIG 

 

PTA Funded 

 

In Kind 

 

Other 

Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement 
planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 
By January 2019, students' responses to monthly i-Ready assessments will be compared resulting in shifts made in 
instruction resulting in more meaningful feedback and homework assignments and a 15% performance increase on 
students responses to i-Ready Diagnostics by June 2019. 

 
Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January 
Regents, etc.) 
i-Ready Diagnostics 

 
Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action 
plan, if applicable. 

 

 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          22 

 

Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans 

 
Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and 
school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. 

Part 1 – Needs Assessment   

Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and 
formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not 
limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. 
Number responses accordingly. 
 
1.  What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element?  Indicate the data trends, source and year. 
2.  What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? 

Indicate the data trends, source and year. 

3.  What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? 
1. Our strength in the Supportive Environment element according to the NYC School Survey is in Guidance, Safety, and 
Social-Emotional in which we ranked 6 - 8% higher than the District Average and 8 - 9% higher than the City Average 
on all three. Safety is very important to all staff at Bay Academy and we spend a lot of time researching, planning and 
recognizing issues and ways to resolve these issues quickly and effectively. As per the survey results, 96% of students 
say they feel safe in their classes and 90% say they feel safe in the hallways, bathrooms, locker rooms and cafeteria 
which is a testament to hard work and diligence. 

 

2. The priority needs are:  

  Classroom Behavior - 51% of students responded that most students behave well even when the teacher isn't 

watching and 80% of teachers say that students listen carefully when the teacher gives directions. 

  Personal Attention and Support - 61% of students say that their teachers support them when they are upset 

and 65% of student say that teachers notice if they have trouble learning something. 

3. Even though our strong structures and policies are in place to create an environment that is safe, we need to work 
on recognizing and responding better to individual social, emotional and behavioral issues. 

 

 

 
Part 2 – Annual Goal 

Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this 
element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the 
identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, 
and Time-bound. 
By June 2019, students will receive more personal attention and better support, we will focus out attention on the 
individual student to quickly recognize issues and provide support and additional assistance before problems or 
emotions escalate resulting in a 20% increase in accountable behavior in the classroom and more well adjusted 
students as measured by progress reports, parent/teacher meetings and reflection surveys.. 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          23 

 
Part 3a – Action Plan 

Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies 
your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for 
this Framework for Great Schools element, including: 

Target 
Group(s) 
Who will be 
targeted? 

Timeline 
What is the 
start and 
end date? 

  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional 

 

development, and/or systems and structures needed to 
impact change. 
Strategies to address the needs of students with 
disabilities, English language learners, and other high-
need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, 
SIFE, STH). 

Monthly Professional Development Sessions in the following 
areas: 

Teachers 

  Compassionate Discipline 
  Developing Trusting Relationships with Students 
  Classroom Management/Student Behavior Problems 
  Recognizing Signs of Student Mental Health Problems 
 
  Classroom Culture/Teaching Tolerance 
  Teaching Problem Solving 

Strategies for Dealing with Difficult Behavior 

No One Eats Alone is a student-led lunchtime initiative with the 
goal of combating social isolation. The concept was developed by 
the organization Beyond Differences, a nationwide program 
which strives to make all children feel included, valued and 
accepted by their peers. The Bay Academy will be introducing 
several new initiatives in the 2018-2019 school year with the core 
principles of creating an inclusive community, stopping bullying 
and empowering the students to make a difference through the 
following actions daily: 

 

 

Lunchtime quiet spaces in select classrooms, where 
students can play games, read and interact with like-
minded peers. These spaces will be an alternative for 
those children who may feel overwhelmed by the activity 
in the traditional cafeteria setting. 
“Come Sit With Us” placards that students can put out on 
their cafeteria tables to encourage visitation by 
classmates they may not typically interact with. 

  No One Eats Alone Student Ambassadors who will serve 

as leaders in the cafeteria, modeling kindness, 
socialization and leadership behavior. 

  A new ethics initiative, headed by our guidance 

counselors. 

Administration, 
Deans and Guidance  

Monthly 
from Sept 5, 
2018 - June 
2019 

Students 

Administration, 
Teachers, Guidance 

Daily from 
Sept 5, 2018 
-June 26, 
2019  

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          24 

Students will be programmed for small group or one on one 
counseling sessions at least once per week with guidance 
counselors. 

Students 

 

Rethink Ed Social and Emotional Learning (SEL) for All Learners 

Students 

  Educator Training Modules and Professional 

 

 

Development 
Student-centered lessons and resources for general and 
special education with modifications to meet the needs 
of every student. 

  Assessments, surveys, feedback and growth reports 

The members of the Consultancy Group will meet weekly to plan 
activities for the members of the target demographic population 
focus group. Data utilized from the previous year found that 
students in this group did not feel they have the support needed 
at home to be successful in school. An after school program for 
these students will be formed modelled after the Big Brother 
model. Students in the focus group will be aligned to a volunteer 
staff member who will provide support educationally such as 
helping with homework and studying. Trips will be planned to 
expose students to the theater, cultural institutions and sporting 
events. 

Students 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

Administration and 
Teachers  

Administration and 
Teachers 

 

Administration 

and Teachers  

 

 

Weekly from 
Sept 5, 2018 
-June 26, 
2019 

Weekly from 
October 
2018 - June 
2019 

Weekly from 
September 
5, 2018 -
June 26, 
2019 

 

 

 
3b – Parent and Family Engagement 

How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to 
support  the  whole  child?  Include  the  timeline  and  identify  key  personnel  and  stakeholders  responsible  for 
implementation and oversight. 
The Bay Academy will engage families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment by staying in 
constant communication via JupiterEd, Rethink Ed SEL, Parent Forums on the school's website, Tuesday Parent 
Engagement scheduled meetings and Parent/Teacher Conferences. 

 

 
Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 
Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including 
human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 

  Creating and planning Professional Development sessions for Teachers - Instructional Team 
  Creating, monitoring and responding to Parent Forum on new school website - Supervisor 
  Planning time for Parent Engagement Meetings and Counseling Sessions with Guidance Counselors 

 
Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 

X 

Tax Levy 

 

C4E 

 

 

Title I SWP 

21st Century 

Grant 

 

 

 
Part 5 – Progress Monitoring  

Title I TA 

SIG 

 

 

Title II, 
Part A 

PTA Funded 

 

 

Title III, 
Part A 

In Kind 

 

 

Title III, 

Immigrant 

Other 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          25 

 

 

Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement 
planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 
By June 2019, students will receive more personal attention and better support, we will focus out attention on the 
individual student to quickly recognize issues and provide support and additional assistance before problems or 
emotions escalate resulting in 20% increase in accountable behavior in the classroom and more well adjusted 
students as measured by progress reports, parent/ teacher meetings and reflection surveys.. 

 
Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 
Documentation of all communication with student, parents/guardians, teachers and counselors and the course of 
action and results and reflection surveys.  

 

Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action 
plan, if applicable. 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          26 

 

Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans 

Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success 
and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional 
development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. 

 

Part 1 – Needs Assessment   

Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and 
formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not 
limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. 
Number responses accordingly. 
 
1.  What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element?  Indicate the data trends, source and year. 
2.  What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? 

Indicate the data trends, source and year. 

1. Our strengths relative to the Collaborative Teachers element is in Peer Collaboration (with a score of 4.60 and 98% 
positive response from teachers) and School Commitment (with a score of 4.33 and 96% positive response from 
teachers). Teachers' programs have scheduled teacher team weekly meetings and weekly grade specific meetings 
throughout the school enabling staff common time to research data, discuss and plan instruction and assessments 
and the needs of their students. 

2. Our priority needs for the Collaborative Teachers element are: 

  Quality of Professional Development - Overall we received a score of 4.25 with 91% positive response by 

teachers but this is considerably less than the score of 4.50 with 98% positive response we received last year. 
This year only 76% of teachers said that they had opportunities to work productively with teachers from other 
schools on professional development. 
Innovation and Collective Responsibility - Overall we received 4.09 with 90% positive response by teachers. 
82% of teachers say that teachers help maintain discipline in the entire school, not just their classroom and 
89% of teachers say that teachers take responsibility for improving the school. 

 

 

 
Part 2 – Annual Goal 

Indicate  your  school’s  2018-19  goal  for  improving  student  outcomes  and  school  performance  that  addresses  this 
element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified 
priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-
bound. 
By June 2019, we will provide training and numerous professional development opportunities on class management and 
discipline which will result in an 8% increase (from 90% to 98%) in innovation and collective responsibility. 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          27 

 
Part 3a – Action Plan 

Planned professional development sessions providing teachers 
with the tools needed to not only maintain discipline in their 
classrooms but throughout the school cohesively. Possible 
monthly Professional Development Sessions may include but 
are not limited to: 

  Compassionate Discipline 
  Developing Trusting Relationships with Students 
  Classroom Management/Student Behavior Problems 
  Recognizing Signs of Student Mental Health Problems 
 
  Classroom Culture/Teaching Tolerance 
  Teaching Problem Solving 

Strategies for Dealing with Difficult Behavior 

 

Teachers 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Code of conduct, school rules and disciplinary action will be 
clearly displayed, discussed and understood by all along with 
the expectations of the staff in enforcing these rules 
throughout the building. This will be reviewed periodically 
over the course the the year. 

Students, 
Parents,Teachers 

Rethink Ed Social and Emotional Learning (SEL) for All Learners 

Students 

Educator Training Modules and Professional Development 

Student-centered lessons and resources for general and 
special education with modifications to meet the needs of 
every student. 

Assessments, surveys, feedback and growth reports 

NA 

 
 

 
3b – Parent and Family Engagement 

Administration, 
Teacher Team 

Monthly 
from Sept 5, 
2018 -June 
26, 2019 

Administration 

Administration 

At least 
once per 
trimester 
beginning 
Sept 5, 2018 
-June 26, 
2019 

Weekly 
from 
October, 
2018 - June 
2019 

NA 

NA 

NA 

How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies 
to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and 
identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          28 

 

Families will regularly be made aware of code of conduct, school and class rules and disciplinary actions through 
paper notifications sent home, school and class contracts, parent resources on school's website, scheduled meetings 
and phone calls. 

 

 
Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 

Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including 
human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 

  Planning in school professional development - Instructional Team 
  Professional Development opportunities outside of the school (some are free and some require a fee) 
 

School's website 

 
Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 

X 

Tax Levy 

 

C4E 

 

 

Title I SWP 

21st Century 

Grant 

 

 

 
Part 5 – Progress Monitoring  

Title I TA 

SIG 

 

 

Title II, 
Part A 

PTA Funded 

 

 

Title III, 
Part A 

In Kind 

 

 

Title III, 

Immigrant 

Other 

Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement 
planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 
By June 2019, teachers will have received monthly professional development training sessions on classroom 
management and discipline resulting in an 8% increase on innovation and collective responsibility as measured by 
department meetings, observations and documentation logs of behavior infractions and measures taken. 

 
Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 
By June 2019, teachers will have received monthly professional development training sessions on classroom 
management and discipline resulting in an 8% increase on innovation and collective responsibility as measured by 
department meetings, observations and documentation logs of behavior infractions and measures taken. 

 
Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action 
plan, if applicable. 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          29 

 

Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans 

 

Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and 
nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional 
support that drives student achievement. 
 
Part 1 – Needs Assessment   

Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and 
formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not 
limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. 
Number responses accordingly. 
 
1.  What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element?  Indicate the data trends, source and year. 
2.  What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? 

Indicate the data trends, source and year. 

1. In reference to the Effective School Leadership element, we received 98% positive response for Instructional 
Leadership and Program Coherence which is reflected in our numerous admissions into specialized high schools 
annually, our state test and regent exam scores, and the many awards are granted each year. 

2. Our priority needs for this element are for Teacher Influence where we received a score of 4.00 and a 92% positive 
response. Only 84% of teachers say that they have influence over standards for student behavior. Issues with student 
behavior and classroom management seem to be a pattern throughout the survey element scores and will therefore 
have a very similar action plan. 

 

 
Part 2 – Annual Goal 

Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this 
element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the 
identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, 
and Time-bound. 
By June 2019, the principal will provide monthly professional development training sessions on classroom management 
and discipline resulting in a 5% increase on teacher influence as measured by Rethink Ed SEL data reports and 
observations. 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          30 

 
Part 3a – Action Plan 

Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies 
your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for 
this Framework for Great Schools element, including: 

  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional 

 

development, and/or systems and structures needed to 
impact change. 
Strategies to address the needs of students with 
disabilities, English language learners, and other high-
need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, 
SIFE, STH). 

Target 
Group(s) 
Who will be 
targeted? 

Timeline 
What is the 
start and 
end date? 

Key Personnel 
Who is responsible 
for implementing 
and overseeing the 
activity/strategy? 

Planned monthly professional development sessions providing 
teachers with the tools needed to not only maintain discipline in 
their classrooms but throughout the school cohesively. Possible 
Professional Development Sessions may include but are not 
limited to: 

Teachers  

Monthly 
beginning 
Sept 5, 2018 
-June 26, 
2019 

Administration 

  Compassionate Discipline 
  Developing Trusting Relationships with Students 
  Classroom Management/Student Behavior Problems 
  Recognizing Signs of Student Mental Health Problems 
 
  Classroom Culture/Teaching Tolerance 
  Teaching Problem Solving 

Strategies for Dealing with Difficult Behavior 

Code of conduct, school rules and disciplinary action will be 
clearly displayed, discussed and understood by all along with the 
expectations of the staff in enforcing these rules throughout the 
building. This will be reviewed periodically over the course the 
the year. 

Students, 
Parents, 
Teachers 

Rethink Ed Social and Emotional Learning (SEL) for All Learners 

Students 

  Educator Training Modules and Professional 

 

Development 
Student-centered lessons and resources for general and 
special education with modifications to meet the needs 
of every student. 

  Assessments, surveys, feedback and growth reports 

Administration 

Administration 

At least 
once per 
trimester 
beginning 
Sept 5, 2018 
-June 26, 
2019 

Weekly 
from 
October 
2018 - June 
2019 

N/A 

 
 

 
3b – Parent and Family Engagement 

N/A 

N/A 

N/A  

 

 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          31 

 

How  will  your  school  engage  parents/families  and  support  their  understanding  of  Effective  School  Leadership  and 
strategies  to  promote  parent  leadership  and  engagement  in  order  to  support  their  children  at  home?  Include  the 
timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. 
Families will regularly be made aware of code of conduct, school and class rules and disciplinary actions through 
paper notifications sent home, school and class contracts, parent resources on school's website, scheduled meetings 
and phone calls. 

 

 
Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 
Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including 
human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 

  Planning in school professional development - Instructional Team 
  Professional Development opportunities outside of the school (some are free and some require a fee) 
 

School's website 

 
Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 

X 

Tax Levy 

 

C4E 

 

 

Title I SWP 

21st Century 

Grant 

 

 

 
Part 5 – Progress Monitoring  

Title I TA 

SIG 

 

 

Title II, 
Part A 

PTA Funded 

 

 

Title III, 
Part A 

In Kind 

 

 

Title III, 

Immigrant 

Other 

Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement 
planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 
By June 2019, the principal will provide monthly professional development training sessions on classroom 
management and discipline resulting in a 5% increase on teacher influence as measured by Rethink Ed SEL data 
reports and observations. 

 
Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 

  Department meetings with supervisor 
  Documentation log of behavior infractions and measures taken 
  Rethink Ed SEL data reports 

 
Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action 
plan, if applicable. 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          32 

 

Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans 

 
Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a 
welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. 
 
Part 1 – Needs Assessment   

Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and 
formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not 
limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. 
Number responses accordingly. 
 
1.  What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element?  Indicate the data trends, source and year. 
2.  What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? 

Indicate the data trends, source and year. 

1. In the Strong Family-Community Ties element we have made the most progress and reached our goal from the 
2017-2018 CEP. 100% of teachers say that they work closely with families to meet students' needs and that they 
communicate regularly with families about how they can help students learn. We feel that JupiterEd has been 
extremely helpful in helping us reach our goal. 

2. Although we reached our goal and made significant improvement, we are still 6% below the city average in Parent 
Involvement and have therefore chosen to made this our focus for the year. We believe that our low scores in this 
element are due to the following factors: 

  Ongoing daily updates of grades, assignments, and messages between parents and teachers on JupiterEd 

along with phone calls and emails have supplemented the need for parents/guardians to physically come to 
the school for information and to check on progress. 

  Many of our parents/guardians are working professionals that have scheduling conflicts and/or time 

restrictions making it difficult to attend events and volunteer in the school. 

We identified the following areas that we scored lowest within this to target for improvement: 

  Parent Involvement in School - 57% of families say that they have had the opportunity to volunteer time to 
support their school and 80% of families say that they are likely to attend a general school meeting or school 
event. 

 

 
Part 2 – Annual Goal 

Indicate  your  school’s  2018-19  goal  for  improving  student  outcomes  and  school  performance  that  addresses  this 
element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the 
identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and 
Time-bound.  
By June 2019, we will provide families with several opportunities to volunteer time to the school which will result in 15% 
increase (from 57% to 72%) in the percentage of parents who will agree or strongly agree that they have had the 
opportunity to volunteer time to support their school. 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          33 

 
Part 3a – Action Plan 

Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies 
your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for 
this Framework for Great Schools element, including: 

  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional 

 

development, and/or systems and structures needed to 
impact change. 
Strategies to address the needs of students with 
disabilities, English language learners, and other high-
need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, 
SIFE, STH). 

Target 
Group(s) 
Who will be 
targeted? 

Timeline 
What is the 
start and 
end date? 

Key Personnel 
Who is responsible 
for implementing 
and overseeing the 
activity/strategy? 

Families will be asked to participate and volunteer their time and 
efforts to our our new College Access for All initiative. This 
program will provide workshops for parents and students to 
prepare them to make good decisions about high school, college 
and careers. It is designed to engage parents and expand 
students' horizons and bring school communities together 
around setting high goals. 

Students and 
Parents 

Encourage better attendance at PTA meetings by scheduling 
meetings that coincide with other school events. 

Parents 

Monthly 
from 
October 
2018 -June 
2019 

Monthly 
beginning 
Sept 5, 2018 
-June 26, 
2019 

Provide time for parents of children with special needs to sit in 
on classes and observe their child's performance and interaction 
with their peers prior to IEP updates and annual review. 

Special needs 
students and 
Parents 

Sept 5, 2018 
- June 26, 
2019 

Participation and frequent access to the school website utilizing 
the parent resources and parent forums. 

Parents 

Daily 
beginning 
Sept 5, 2018 
- June 2019 

School 
Administration 

School 
Administration 

School 
Administration and 
teachers of students 
with special needs. 

Administration 

 
 

 
3b – Parent and Family Engagement 

If  any,  list  the  Community  Based  Organizations  or  other  partnerships  that  support  parent/family  and  community 
engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. 

  We are actively seeking a partnership with a college that focuses on the arts and sciences. 
 

School website 

 

 
Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 

Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including 
human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 
Organization and planning time 

 

Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          34 

 

X 

Tax Levy 

 

C4E 

 

 

Title I SWP 

21st Century 

Grant 

 

 

 
Part 5 – Progress Monitoring  

Title I TA 

SIG 

 

 

Title II, 
Part A 

PTA Funded 

 

 

Title III, 
Part A 

In Kind 

 

 

Title III, 

Immigrant 

Other 

Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement 
planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 
By June 2019, there will be a 15% increase in parents who volunteer time to support school as monitored by data 
retrieved from ongoing surveys and attendance records of attendees throughout the course of the school year. 

 
Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 
Surveys and Attendance records of those who participated. 

 

Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action 
plan, if applicable. 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          35 

 

Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS)  

(Required for All Schools) 

  

Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services 
(AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records 
need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area 
listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. 
 

Type of Academic 
Intervention Service 
(AIS) 

English Language 
Arts (ELA) 

Mathematics 

Science 

Social Studies 

At-risk services (e.g. 
provided by the 
Guidance Counselor, 
School Psychologist, 
Social Worker, etc.) 

Criteria for 
determining AIS 
services (For 
additional guidance, 
refer to NYSED’s 
memo.) 
Students are selected 
for AIS based on 
State Exam scores as 
well as teacher 
recommendation. 

 

ESLStudents 

 

 

 

Students are selected 
for AIS based on 
State Exam scores as 
well as teacher 
recommendation. 

 
Students are selected 
for AIS based on 
State Exam scores as 
well as teacher 
recommendation. 

 
Students are selected 
based on teacher 
recommendation. 

 
Teacher 
recommendation and 
IEP mandates 

 

Type of program or 
strategy (e.g. 
repeated readings, 
interactive writings, 
etc.) 

Expeditionary 
Learning, Test Ready, 
Coach, SchoolNet  

 

 

 

Reading Smart Coach 
Leveled Books for 
NYSESLAT 

 

Engage NY, Test 
Ready, Coach, 
SchoolNet 

 

Method for delivery 
of service (e.g. small 
group, one-to-one, 
tutoring, etc.) 

Small group 

When the service is 
provided (e.g. during 
the school day, 
before or after 
school, etc.) 

During the school 
day 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Small Group 

 
Small group 

 

Duringthe school day 

 

During the school 
day 

 

NYC spiral 
curriculum, Gizmos, 
NGSS 

Small group 

 

During the school 
day 

 

 

NYC curriculum 

Small group 

 

 

 

Small group 

 

During the school 
day 

 

During the school 
day 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          36 

 
 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          37 

 

Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH)  

 

Directions: 
-  All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. 
-  All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. 
 
Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) 
As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the 
federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and 
report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support 
your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: 
http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf   

 

Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 

1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your 
school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE 
systems and may change over the course of the year.) 

N/A 

 

2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. 

N/A 

 

Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 

1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school 
(please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). 

1 

 

2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          38 

 

Emergency school supplies if needed, academic support programs ie: Kaplan, and Basic necessities as needed ie: 
clothing  

 

3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary 
housing.  If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation 
Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question.  If your school did not receive an allocation 
and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. 

$8, 600 

 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          39 

 

Directions: 

Section 8: Title I Program Information  

 

  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1. 
  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2. 
  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3. 
  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4. 
 

If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response 
can be found. 

  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. 

 
Part 1: Title I Status 

Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. 

 

Schoolwide Program (SWP) 

 

Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools  

X 

Non-Title I 

 
Part 2: All Title I Schools 

2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) 

Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support 
including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. 
N/A 

 

 
2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development 

Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, 
paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS).  
N/A 

 

 
Part 3: TA Schools Only 

3a. Use of Program Resources 

Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. 
N/A 

 

 
3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program 

Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., 
providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from 
the regular classroom during regular school day). 
N/A 

 

 
 
 
 
 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          40 

 
Part 4: SWP Schools Only 

4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only)  

Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary 
school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early 
intervention services, etc.). 
N/A 

 

 
4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments 

Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate 
multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to 
improve instruction.    
N/A 

 

 
4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools 

Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and 
Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible 
for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide 
plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the 
consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and 
purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, 
and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount 
each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the 
intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. 
Program Name 

Fund Source 
(i.e. Federal, 
State or Local) 

Funding Amount 
Indicate the amount 
contributed to 
Schoolwide pool. 
(Refer to Galaxy for 
school allocation 
amounts) 

Place an (X) in Column A below to verify 
that the school has met the intent and 
purposes of each program whose funds are 
consolidated.  Indicate in Column B, section 
references where a related program activity 
has been described in this plan. 

Column A 

Column B 

Verify with an (X) 

Section Reference(s) 

Title I Part A (Basic) 

Title II, Part A 

Title III, Part A 

Title III, Immigrant 

Tax Levy (FSF) 

Federal 

Federal 

Federal 

Federal 

Local 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
1Explanation/Background: 
Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and 
programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and 
advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools 
may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, 
State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This 
gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students.   
 
2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          41 

 
Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a 
single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual 
identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool 
to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds 
used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from 
which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to 
combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used 
conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the 
dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds.  
 
Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages: 

  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program 

separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different 
sources when accounting for their use. 

  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the 

statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., 
semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent 
and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended 
beneficiaries are met. 

 
2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as 
follows: 

  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to 
improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes 
provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH). 

  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement 

plans that aims to  improve instruction and address the identified needs  

  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in 

grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not 
available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional 
program. 

  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, 
develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and 
achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another 
purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-
quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in 
effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the 
participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language 
instruction programs. 

  Title III Immigrant:  Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of 

English language acquisition and content area achievement. 

 
Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated: 

  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and 
programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent 
representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities 
funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with 
student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. 
IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education 
designed to meet their individual needs. 

 

  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by 

the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 

 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          42 

 

Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)  

 (Required for All Title I Schools) 

 

Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and 
representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will 
participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I 
program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson 
that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the 
parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school 
will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic 
achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family 
Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. 
 
The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current 
S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent 
Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent 
involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen 
family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy.  
 
Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample 
Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) 
as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. 
 
 

Parent and Family Engagement Policy 

Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. 
The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of 
parents and community in the school. IS 98 , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Elementary 
and Secondary School (ESSA) Act, is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to 
strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s 
policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of 
the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent 
Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. 

 

IS 98 will support parents and families of Title I students by: 

Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students 

 

  providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, 

e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; 

  providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and 

 

decision making in support of the education of their children; 
fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and 
monitor their child’s progress; 

  providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 
 

sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and 
in languages that parents can understand; 

  providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve 
outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and 
other members of the school community. 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          43 

 

The school’s Parent Involvement  

 

Parental Involvement and School Quality 

The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all 
parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The 
school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement 
policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school 
surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and 
enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school.  

 

In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the 
school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership 
Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for 
additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: 

 

actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s 
Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of 
the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; 

  engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated 

directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; 

  ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and 

 

strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; 
support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the 
Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing 
technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills;  

  maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and 
families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the 
assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school 
environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of 
events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; 
conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational 
accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and 
support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; 

 

  provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State 

accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality 
Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; 

  host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise 

parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right 
to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 
and other applicable sections under the Elementary and Secondary School Act; 
schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the 
morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the 
Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; 
translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed;  
conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and 
workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; 

 

 
 

 

 

Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          44 

 

The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: 

  holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; 
  hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school 

year; 

  encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-

Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; 
supporting or hosting Family Day events; 

 
  establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; 
  encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; 
  providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their 

children’s progress; 

  developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about 

school activities and student progress; 

  providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a 

format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. 

School-Parent Compact (SPC) 

 

 

 

 

 

IS 98 , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Elementary and Secondary School (ESSA) Act, is 
implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between 
the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, 
agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for 
improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure 
that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. 

 

 

Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating 
children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: 

I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum 

respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; 
implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; 

  using academic learning time efficiently; 
 
 
  offering high quality instruction in all content areas; 
  providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required 

by the Elementary and Secondary School (ESSA) Act; 

 

 

 

I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          45 

 

Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: 

 

 

 

 

conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be 
discussed as well as how this Compact is related; 
convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students 
participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their 
right to be involved; 
arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and 
funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; 
respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation 
services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education;  

  providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents 
of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; 
involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent 
Involvement Policy and this Compact; 

 

  providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment 

results for each child and other pertinent individual school information;  

  ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with 

parents each year; 

 

 

 

Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: 

I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff 

  ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited 

English speaking parents; 

  notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff 

 

member; 
arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and 
to observe classroom activities; 

  planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences;  

 

 

 

I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents 

Provide general support to parents by: 

 

 

 

 

 

creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful 
environment for parents and guardians; 
assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor 
their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that 
the majority of parents can attend); 
sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all 
members of the school community; 
supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents;  

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          46 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as 

 

described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; 
advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and 
consistent with the Elementary and Secondary School Act Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act 
(ESSA) and Title I programs; 

II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities 

  monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the 

appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent  

  ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child 

and his/her age; 
check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; 
read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes);  
set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; 

 
 
 
  promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports 

and/or quality family time; 

volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; 

  encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; 
 
  participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education;  
 

communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by 
prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; 
respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; 

 
  become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement 

Policy and this Compact; 

  participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to 

learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; 
take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on 
advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams;  
share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; 

 

 

III. Student Responsibilities 

Student Responsibilities: 

 
 
 
 
 
 

attend school regularly and arrive on time; 
complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; 
follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; 
show respect for myself, other people and property; 
try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; 
always try my best to learn. 

 

 
 
 
 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          47 

 

DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT 

GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY 

SUBMISSION FORM 

2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR 

 

DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information 

necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English 

language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a 

part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the 

services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should 

be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily 

available on file in the school.  When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces.  For 

additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. 

Part I: School ELL Profile 

 

 

 
 

A. School Information 

District  21 
School Name   Bay Academy 

Borough  Brooklyn 

School Number   098 

 
B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant 

principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. 
 

Principal   Maria Timo 
Coach  Karen Goldberg 
ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher  
 Jennifer Cerbone 
Teacher/Subject Area 
Mandi Bracho IEP Teacher 
Teacher/Subject Area Jeannine Airo, Math 
Related-Service Provider Catherine Brennan 
Superintendent Isabel DiMola 

 

Assistant Principal  Nicole Dagosta 
Coach Anna Savarese 
School Counselor  
Loreli Aguiar 

Parent  Jenny Lee 

Parent Coordinator Caryn DiMari 
Field Support Center Staff Member Marie Bastian  
Other (Name and Title) NA 

C. Teacher Qualifications  
Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section.  Press TAB after each number entered to calculate 
sums and percentages.  
     
Number of certified 
ENL teachers currently teaching in the 
ENL program 

Number of teachers who hold both content 
area/common branch and TESOL certification 

1 

0 

0 

Number of teachers who hold both a 
bilingual extension and TESOL 
certification 

Number of special education teachers 
with bilingual extensions 

0 

0 

1 

0 

Number of certified 
bilingual teachers not currently 
teaching in a bilingual program  
Number of certified foreign 
language/world language teachers 
providing home language arts 
(HLA) to students in bilingual 
programs [applicable to grades 7–
12] 
Number of teachers currently 
teaching a self-contained ENL class 
who hold both a common branch 
license and TESOL certification 
[applicable to grades K–6] 

Number of certified 
bilingual teachers currently 
teaching in a bilingual program 

Number of certified ENL teachers 
not currently  teaching in the ENL 
program  

 

0 

0 

D. Student Demographics  

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          48 

 
Total number of students in 
school (excluding pre-K) 

1540 

Total number of ELLs 

22 

ELLs as share of total student population 
(%) 

1.43% 

 
 
 
Part II: ELL Demographics 
 
 
 
 
 
A. ELL Programs 

This school serves the following grades (includes 
ELLs and non-ELLs) 
Check all that apply 

 
 
This school offers (check all that apply): 

K

    1

    2

     3

     4

     5

 

6

   7

     8

    9

     10

     11

    12

 

Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) 

Yes

             No

Dual language program (DL) 

Freestanding ENL 

Yes

             No

Yes

             No

 

 

 

If yes, indicate language(s):            

If yes, indicate language(s):            

 

 
Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a 
separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. 
 

Bilingual Program Breakdown 

School 
Year 

Opened 
(e.g., 2013-14) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

K 

 
 

1 

 
 

2 

 
 

4 

 
 

3 

 
 

         

       

         

         

         

         

         

Lang. 
NA 
NA 
NA 
NA 
NA 
NA 

Program 
TBE 
TBE 
TBE 
DL 
DL 
DL 
Total 
 
 
 
Part III: Assessment Analysis 
 
 

 
 
0 

 
 
0 

 
 
0 

       

       

       

 
 
0 

 
 
0 

5 

6 

7 

8 

9 

10 

11 

12 

         

         

         

         

         

         

         

         

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

       

       

       

       

       

       

       

       

 
 
0 

 
 
0 

 
 
0 

 
 
0 

 
 
0 

 
 
0 

 
 
0 

 
 
0 

Tot # 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 

After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 

1.  What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, 

teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? 
To guide instructional planning of our ENLs, we used (2016-2017 SY) EdPerformance, an educational performance series that 
lets us know which skills ENLs are deficient in.  For example, Edperformance might show us if a student is having trouble with 
citing textual evidence or analyzing evidence.  We use these results to then differentiate and drive instruction.  Finally, these 
results may lead to referral for small group instruction or other such services.  Currently, our 16 ENLs' literacy skills, as 
determined by EdPerformance, range from 6  th  through 8  th   grade reading levels.  EdPerformance is administered four 
times per year.  Instructional shifts are then made based on results of this assessment tool.  In addition, content teachers set 
SMART goals with students based also on the results of EdPerformance.  These SMART goals have shown to be an effective 
tool for students to self-reflect on their academic progress throughout the year. Additionally, each staff member is required to 
create their own SMART goal.  This teacher goal is presented to the subject AP and then displayed in each teacher's classroom. 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          49 

 

Furthermore, the ENL teacher administers a Fall and Spring ENL baseline assessment to help guide instructional planning for 
our ENLs.  Score reports from these assessments are carefully reviewed by the ENL teacher, and then shared with the ENL AP 
as well as ELA teachers of ENLs.  An item analysis of this assessment aids our ENL teacher in developing lesson plans and 
program goals. 
Lastly, our school has purchased a subscription to ESLreadingsmart.com.  This leveled assessment guides our ENL teacher to 
adjust and create action plans for her ENL lesson plans. As part of this web-based formative assessment, ENLs are required to 
take an assessment after every ten "lessons." 
 

2.  What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 

To support the above mentioned efforts, the ENL AP works  with the ENL teacher each Fall to determine, based on student 
need, which formative assessments are needed.  These assessments, based on careful review, may change each year.   
 
 

3.  What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL 

Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? 
To identify baseline, progress and areas of need, the ENL AP and ENL teacher agreed this year to use , ESLreadingsmart.com 
and Jupiter, an online gradebook each teacher uses to record student progress throughout the year. 
Together, these  summative assessments have guided us in keeping track of our ENLs in terms of progress and need. 
Other assessments include but are not limited to exit slips, pre and post assessments, and finally, new, this year iReady (which 
will replace EdPerformance during the 2017-2018 SY).With iReady, teachers will administer three diagnostic assessments 
throughout the year (Sept, mid-year and in April) to evaluate students' levels and progress in  ELA. This program levels 
students reading/writing  ability in the different strands of ELA content.  For every ten lessons, teachers administer a mini 
assessment focusing on specific ELA strands and then levels the student to show whether or not the level increases, decreases 
or stays the same.  This helps our staff to identify a student's academic weakness.  When a teacher notices that a student is 
making poor progress, that student may be recommended for AIS in the way of small group instruction. 
 

4.  What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered?  

Once the summative data has been gathered and reviewed, we rely on input from our ENLs' ELA teachers, the ENL teacher and 
guidance team (when applicable) to address necessary interventions.  Interventions may include referral to the SBST, referral 
for small group instruction or after school test prep programs, and referral to guidance intervention.  
 

5.  How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-
5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.]  
For ENLs within the response to intervention, we use NYC Schools Account and EdPerformance data to 
guide  instruction.  Details from the aforementioned reports provide us with a window into the exam history of each ENL along 
with past and present weaknesses/strengths.  In addition, we continually provide intervention to ENLs within the RTI 
framework by providing them with small group instruction, after school test prep, individual tutoring and other such 
programs.  
With AIS, all students, who score at a 2 or below (in ELA or math), are scheduled for two periods of services by an ELA or math 
teacher in a setting of no more than ten students.  All subject teachers are expected and trained to assess students to 
determine who may be in need of AIS. in this small group instructional setting, students may be placed at any time during the 
school year.  In other words, evaluations for AIS are ongoing.  Finally, parents are immediately notified when their child is in 
need of AIS. 
 

6.  What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? 

([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS].  
To determine the proper ENL program for our school, we study and review NYSESLAT scores along with NYS ELA test 
scores.  The information from these standardized exams allow us to make the correct decision in choosing an ENL program and 
the best corresponding curriculum. 
 

7.  What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          50 

 

 

To disseminate these findings and then possibly make adjustments to our ENL program, the ENL teacher carefully reviews the 
results of the above mentioned outcome assessments.  She looks for patterns among the results.  For example, the ENL 
teacher meets with a senior member of the ELA department to review the ELA test scores for ENLs.  Specifically, she studies 
the breakdown (item analysis) of the results according to the NYS Common Core Learning Standards.  This year, it was noted 
that among our ENLs, the area where the least progress was made pertains to students determining  the central idea of a 
passage/text.  Therefore, as a school, this skill will be particularly emphasized in the upcoming school year within the ELA and 
ENL departments. 
 
 

 
 
 
Part IV: ELL Programming 
 

Programming and Scheduling Information 

1.  How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented 
as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students 
regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in 
one class]).  

a.  Freestanding ENL program. 

Based on the proficiency levels of our current ENLs,  and our low ENL population,  the program in effect during the 
2016-2017 school year at our school was ESL.   
Implementation for this program includes servicing students both in the stand-alone model and in the integrated 
model by a licensed/certified ENL teacher. The amount of time ENLs spend in this program is strictly based on CR-Part 
154.2 guidelines.  
 
In the stand-alone model, our ENL teacher pulls out eligible students from non-major courses and/or lunch. In this 
setting, students are grouped according to proficiency level.   
 
In the integrated model, our ENL teacher pushes in to service students in ELA.  The ENL teacher meets with the 
ELA teacher prior to each lesson in order to include any necessary  accommodations for the ENL students. 
 
 
  

b.  TBE program.  If applicable.   

N/A  

c.  DL program.  If applicable.    

N/A  

 

2.  How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each 

program model? 

a.  How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 

below)? 

           Our school follows the CR Part 154.2 units of study and staffing requirements. This includes adhering to ENL instructional 
units based on proficiency levels. This will be provided by a dually certified ENL teacher in a core subject area (usually ELA) as 
part of the integrated ENL program.  The stand- alone ENL program will also be based on CR-Part 154.2 mandates according to 
proficiency levels.  This will also be serviced by a certified ENL teacher in a stand-alone program with only two contiguous 
grades at a time.   
a. Finally, HLA is not provided at our school at this time as demand does not call for such programming.  However, native 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          51 

 

language support is provided to our ENLs in the way of native language dictionaries/books/novels made available in ENL/ELA 
classrooms as well as in the school library.  
 

3.  Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and 

methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core 
Learning Standards.  
   Content area instruction is delivered in our ENL program through English only.  All lessons are differentiated and utilize the 
cooperative learning method so that the instruction is comprehensible and therefore enriches language development.  Our 
ENL teacher is certified in both ENL and social studies thereby further enriching instruction.  And finally, to meet the demands 
of the Common Core learning standards, our ENL teacher has attended CCLS training sessions , CCLS PDs and the like.  ENL 
instruction is differentiated to meet the learning styles of all ENL students and to meet their language/learning target as 
well.  Using visual clues is one example of how accommodations are used to make content comprehensible.  The CLOSE 
reading technique, the use of exit/entrance slips and other ELA protocols are used with reading passages/texts from all subject 
areas.  
 

4.  How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? 

   It has been our experience that ENLs prefer to be assessed using English language exams.  However, if we feel that any of our 
ENLs needed to be or requested to be assessed in their native language, we do have staff members on staff who have 
expressed their willingness to translate classroom quizzes/exams.    
 

5.  How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? 

SIFE   

a. 
b.  Newcomer  
c.  Developing   
d. 
e. 

Long Term 
Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status  

5a.  Our instructional plan for SIFE students includes intensive ELA tutoring during lunch-time: small-group instruction with an 
ELA teacher trained in using ENL methodologies.  In addition, the ENL teacher would also increase communication on a regular 
basis with the subject teachers of SIFE students in order to determine specific areas of strengths/weaknesses.  As with all 
students, SIFE students are encouraged to participate in after-school activities which includes but it is not limited to ELA 
review/test prep.  Differentiation of instruction is provided to SIFE students in all subject areas, particularly in ELA where the 
ENL teacher assists these students with their language acquisition skills.  Our school strictly adheres to the use of the 
DOK levels.  All teachers must apply these concepts into all of their lesson plans. 
5b. ENLs, who are classified as newcomers, are assigned a buddy student who shares the same first language.  In addition, 
these newcomers receive counseling services and small group instruction.  Due to recent NCLB requirements, ENLs are now 
required to participate in ELA state testing after one year.  To ensure their success on this exam, students can visit 
EdPerformance and brainpop to both review their weaknesses as well as practice their ELA skills.  As with all ENLs,  newcomers 
are closely evaluated/observed by the ENL teacher throughout the school year. 
5c. For developing ENLs, our ENL teacher provides small group instruction based on their area of weakness as outlined by their 
NYSESLAT scores and posted test results on Jupiter.  During small group instruction, the teacher relies on graphic organizers, 
visual cues and the like to improve students' English language skills. 
5d.  For long term ENLs, our main goal is to have these students reach a proficiency level as soon as possible.  This is done by 
identifying their area(s) of weakness(es) in ELA and work specifically on these skills.  The ENL teacher, as always, remains in 
close contact with said students' subject area teachers for feedback.  And finally, long term ELLs take part in intensive small 
group instruction during lunchtime. 
5e.  Former ENLs (commanding status) are monitored even though they have reached a status of proficient.  These students 
receive state mandated testing accommodations, extra time on classroom exams, monthly meetings with the ENL teacher, 
and  integrated ENL services provided by a certified ENL teacher for two years after testing out of ENL status. These students 
are also considered for small group instruction during lunch and an invitation to attend the NIA after school program where 
they can take a variety of academic and non-academic classes throughout the entire school year at no cost.  During the 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          52 

 

mandated integrated ENL periods, all subject teachers have been trained in using the UDL (universal design of learning) in 
order to ensure that lesson content is designed to accommodate all learners. 
 

6.  What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic 

content areas and accelerate English language development?  
Teachers of ENL-SWDs  use the following instructional strategies to provide access to academic content and accelerate English 
development: read/reread activities, visual aids, verbal activities, tactile aids, and differentiation.  Instructional materials used 
to achieve the aforementioned goals include specialized content area text from special education catalogues chosen along 
with the ENLs teacher's approval.  In addition, ELL-SWDs are mainstreamed into talent areas and into at risk general education 
settings to gradually increase progress rates.  Ultimately, the goal is to move these students into the least restrictive 
environment.  Technology used  to support this goal includes: Jupiter, Class Dojo, EdPerformance, ESLreadingsmart.com (a 
leveled internet program that determines a student's strengths and weaknesses),  and Smartboard interactive lessons. Finally, 
all of our staff members employ the use of expeditionary learning techniques, the DOK and UDL.  Lastly, native language 
dictionaries are available in all classrooms that service current and former ENLs. 
 
More specifically, teachers of ELL-SWDs use "Moby Max."  This program covers all subject areas, provides for assessment of 
math and reading levels, provides test prep for state exams and is designed to include students with IEPs. In addition, we also 
make use of "Kiz Phonics" for our lower performing ENLs. 
 

7.  How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and 

attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? 
To  meet the diverse needs of ENL-SWDs in the least restrictive environment, our scheduling is based on need, IEP 
accommodations and CR-Part 154.2 mandates.  Specifically, the Language Proficiency Team reviews the clinician management 
needs part of the IEP as well as both standardized test scores and evaluation scores such as the Woodcock Johnson Reading 
Evaluation.  
 

8.  Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups 

targeted).  List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which 
they are offered. 
Through the use of departmental teacher teams, the targeted ENL population (for all  ENL subgroups)  receives intervention 
strategies in all content areas.  Teacher teams choose a list of struggling students to study/monitor and then provide additional 
instruction and attention.  If successful, these strategies are implemented with the entire ENL population in content area 
instruction.  Delivered in English, these intervention services include small group instruction as carried out via an ELA  teacher's 
professional assignment, and after-school enrichment programs.  
 

9.  Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year?    

For the upcoming school year, we strive to better our PD activities for subject teachers of our ENLs so that the  needs of ENLs 
are fully met.  In addition, we hope to boost NYSESLAT scores by adhering strictly to the Common Core standards and following 
the expeditionary learning model. We plan to still use the integrated ENL model as well as the stand-alone ENL model. 
 Lastly, new mandates stemming from the recently (revised) CR-Part 154.2 will continue be put into effect this upcoming 
school year.  
 

10.  If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? 

We have never had a bilingual program at IS 98.  Furthermore, none of our programs/services for ENLs will be 
discontinued.  After careful evaluation/reflection, we have decided to keep all of our programs intact.  
 

11.  How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs?  Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in 

your building. 
ENLs are afforded equal access to all school programs just by virtue of being enrolled as a student here.  For example, there are 
after-school programs (drama, ELA/Math test prep, sports, etc.. ) that are open to all IS 98 students.  Letters, emails and phone 
calls to the home are methods by which we share information about such programs or supplemental services.  
 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          53 

 

12.  What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language 

materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. 
At IS 98,  we have many effective technological programs that are used to support our ENLs.  These include Brainpop (which 
covers all subject areas) EdPerformance (which covers ELA and Math), Jupiter, an online teacher grade book and website 
utilized by all staff members and finally, NYC Schools Account, a new program recently launched by the DOE replacing ARIS. All 
of these programs are provided for in English.   The above mentioned materials are also with ENL subgroups. In addition, in an 
integrated ENL content area subject class such as ELA, subgroups are taught through the use of the expeditionary learning 
curriculum,  activities and protocols.  As always, ENLs, in all subgroups, receive ENL support materials in the way of native 
language dictionaries and other related materials.   
 

13.  How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? 

In our stand-alone ENL program and in our integrated ENL program, native language support is provided to our ENLs in the way 
of native language dictionaries and books/novels made available in the ENL classroom as well as in the library.   
 

14.  Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels.  

Required services support and resources correspond to ENLs ages and grade levels.  Materials are carefully chosen to be 
aligned with the NYS Common Core standards and ENL state guidelines.  NYSESLAT test scores are also used to determine 
appropriate level resources.  
 

15.  If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the 

ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met?   
This question does not apply to our school as we do not share a building. 
 
 
 

16.  Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for 

new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, 
parent coordinator).  
Newly enrolled ENLs (as well as new ENLs that may enroll during the school year) receive a tour of the building, a buddy 
partner with the same first language, a teacher "coach" (preferably of the same first language, when possible,) a map of the 
school, an academic planner and access codes for both Jupiter and the new NYC Schools  Account program. These students are 
invited to attend school functions/activities, small group instruction made available at lunch time, and join the NIA after-school 
program which offers a multitude of academic and extra-curricular classes at no cost.  Some of these classes include sewing, 
ELA assistance, and archery. 
Prior to the school year, newly enrolled ENLs may visit our school and meet with the ENL teacher and other available staff 
members and administrators.  This may include the Parent Coordinator, or guidance counselor.  The purpose of this meeting is 
to allow the student to feel comfortable at our school prior to the start of the school year and become acquainted with the 
school and some of our staff members. In addition, our school holds an Orientation in August for incoming students.  This 
event is very well-attended by students/parents and a large majority of our pedagogical/non-pedogogical staff members.  
 

17.  What language electives are offered to ELLs?  

At this time, Latin is the only language elective offered to all members of the student body.  The main focus of this program is 
word etymology, vocabulary enrichment, English-Latin word connections and CLOSE reading activities.  It is our belief that 
Latin helps further improve a student's use and understanding  of the English language.  
 

18.  For schools with dual language programs: 

a.  What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day 

(percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. 
In which language(s) is each core content area taught? 

b. 
c.  How is each language separated for instruction? 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          54 

 

 

d. 

Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same 
time (simultaneous)? 

N/A  
 

Professional Development and Support for School Staff 

1.  Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic 

staff.)  What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs 
as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? 
All  teachers of ENLs receive professional development throughout the school year, and on weekends if a staff member 
chooses to do so.  Beginning in the summer and continuing into the Fall, our PD plan is carefully designed by the Principal 
along with input/suggestions on timely concerns from the LPT to prepare all subject teachers at IS 98 to be able to effectively 
implement the Common Core Standards smoothly and with great confidence for all IS 98 students.  Professional development 
takes place each Monday during the extended day ( 80 minutes).  As per CR-Part 154.2 regulations, non-ENL/bilingual teachers 
receive the required 15% ELL-specific PD while ENL/bilingual teachers receive 50% ELL specific PD.  PD sessions are often given 
by the ENL teacher in conjunction with ELA staff members. 
Some PD topics we have used and will continue to use are the following: note taking skills, scoring 2 point short 
responses,  differentiation of instruction, expeditionary learning, ELA protocols, etc.  Each school year, new topics are created 
based on need and exam data. It is expected that we will  offer PD  on the soon to be released PARCC assessments which align 
questioning techniques to the Common Core standards and prepares ALL students, for the newer and more rigorous state 
exams.  These sessions are offered to all teachers  and more training on similar topics will continue to be offered during the 
upcoming school year. Attendance is recorded at each session and kept on file. 
Non-pedagogic staff also take part in PD.  Members of the SBST attend workshops/PDs on such topics as behavior 
management, graduation requirements and also changes in ENL requirements.  Our guidance team takes part in 
workshops/PDs outlining Hs requirements , Respect for All week, and homelessness concerns that may affect members of our 
student body.  In addition, non-pedagogic staff members are encouraged to attend staff PDs on Monday as we view the school 
community with a team approach. 
 
 

2.  Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all 
teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include 
how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance).  Refer to ELL Policy and Reference 
Guide, Professional Development section. 
Because our ENL population is usually under 25 (minus former ENLs who receive support for 2 years),  individual teachers 
receive training directly by the ENL teacher as per their professional assignment to work with ENLs as they transition from 
elementary to middle school. These teachers may provide the transitioning student with pertinent information about the 
school, one on one tutoring, etc…..  
SInce the Jose P requirements have been replaced and very recently announced, we are now in the process of designing new 
PD requirements as per CR-Part 154.2.  Since September 2015,  PD has been and will be offered to all staff members on 
Monday afternoons after student dismissal.  Topics for  PD are sure to include ENL methodology, academic language 
acquisition,  the ENL identification process, information about the NYSESLAT and general teaching techniques for ENL students 
in the content area. Detailed records  will be kept/recorded  by the ENL teacher in conjunction with the payroll secretary who 
will keep original records in teachers files.  These records will include attendance, agendas and any distributed materials.   
 
 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          55 

 

Parental Involvement 

1.  How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language 
development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? 
Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent 
orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences?  
To provide annual individual meetings with ENL parents to discuss goals, language development, progress, assessment results 
and progress, our ENL teacher is able to (due to low ENL population) plan for individual parent meetings.  At this meeting, 
usually held mid-year, our ENL teacher reviews student progress in  class as well as in other subject areas, NYSESLAT results for 
the previous years as well as years prior, and student needs as identified by formal/informal  ENL  classroom assessment.  If 
needed, translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member or through the DOE translation services telephone 
number. 

2.  Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. 

  
 Parental involvement is ongoing and ever-changing at IS 98.  Mandates, laws, and situations change and we follow suit.  All 
parents, including those of ENLs, are invited to attend PTA meeting/workshops offered throughout the year where translators 
are made available when necessary.  Topics for these meetings have included and may again include the following: Internet 
safety, anti-bullying information , parenting tips, and understanding the Common Core Curriculum.  These topics address the 
needs of all parents, not just ENL parents. Very often, the parent coordinator attends such meetings, keeps track of attendance 
at these meetings and if needed, provides  translation services for said meetings.  
Additionally, parents are invited to serve on the PTA and SLT if so desired, allowing them to voice their opinion and thoughts 
on school matters and be a part of changes that may be addressed.  Also, all parents are invited to act as chaperons on school 
trips and volunteer for activities such as The Fall Costume Ball and Welcome Back to School Night. 
All original paperwork regarding parent involvement remains in the main office and copies are kept by the ENL teacher in her 
classroom.  This includes phone call logs, letters sent home, attendance from meetings, agendas, brochures and the like. 
 
 

 

 

Additional Information 

Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for 
ELLs.  You may attach/submit charts.   This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted.   
NA 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          56 

Part V: ELL Identification Attestation 

Principal Certification 

2. 

3. 

4. 

5. 
6. 

7. 

8. 

9. 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 

In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL 
Policy and Reference Guide, I, Maria Timo, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to 
and staff are trained on the following: 
 
1. 

The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for 
students entering with IEPs). 
Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined 
a. 

If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status 
relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level.  

The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue.   
a.  The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services 
are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality 
translation service.   

Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined.   
a. 

If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility 
to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. 

Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible.   
Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language.  
a.  Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. 
If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish 
LAB.  
Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources 
available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-
education-sife.  
If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting.  
a.  Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent 

video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask 
questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided 
throughout the meeting. 

10.  ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected.  

a. 

b. 

If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program 
in accordance with DOE transfer policies. 
If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent 
choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice.   

11.  Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process).  
12.  If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose 

ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 
 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          57 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 

Part VI: LAP Assurances 

School Name:   Bay Academy                                                                              School DBN: 21k098 
Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate.  Names listed in Part A, should align with this 
section.  

Name (PRINT) 

Maria Timo 

Title 

Principal 

Nicole Dagosta 

Assistant Principal 

Caryn DiMari 

Parent Coordinator 

Jennifer Cerbone 

ENL/Bilingual Teacher 

Jenny Lee 

Parent 

J. Airo/math 

Teacher/Subject Area 

K. Goldberg/ELA 

Teacher/Subject Area 

N/A 

N/A 

F. Caiti 

Isabel DiMola 

Marie Bastian 

Coach 

Coach 

School Counselor 

Superintendent 
 
Field Support Center Staff 
Member 
               

Mandi Bracho 

Other Spec Ed teacher 

           

           

Other            

Other            

 

Signature 

Date (mm/dd/yy) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

6/28/17 

6/28/17 

6/28/17 

6/28/17 

6/28/17 

6/28/17 

6/28/17 

           

           

6/28/17 

6/28/17 

6/28/17 

6/28/17 

           

           

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          58 

 

 
 

2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS 

Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools 

 

DBN: 

21K098 
 

School 
Name: 

IS 98 
 

Superintendent: 

Isabel Dimola 
 

 
The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. 
If there is more than one LAC, list all. 
 

First Name  

Last Name  

Title  

Has the LAC attended a 

2018-19 training 

The LAC was involved in 
the development of this 

D'Agosta 
 

Assistant principal 
 

no 
 

yes 
 

conducted by the Field 

plan? Yes/No  

Language Access 

Coordinator? Yes/No  

Nicole 

*there are no 
other LAC 
coordinators 

   

 
* The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs 
on translation,  
interpretation, compliance and budget.  
 

School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful 
opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's 
Regulation A-663).  
 
By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and 
interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). 
 
Part A:  Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 
 
1.  Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written 

and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from: 

  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS) 
  Automate The System (ATS) reports 
  Student Emergency Contact cards 
  Surveys conducted by your school. 

 

Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS) and informal student and parent questionnaires allow 
us to assess the language needs of our parent community. Language survey forms are reviewed to see which 
languages are spoken in our students' homes. In addition, the parent surveys affords us the opportunity to learn 
which language parents prefer. Finally, emergency blue contact cards are checked as they contain parent 
language preference, both written and oral. The Parent Coordinator (PC) works to provide forms/letters in the 
ENL parent's native language, and uses translation services to provide information to those ENL parents when 
needed. In addition, our PC creates a welcoming environment by individually greeting parents and helping parents 
during Parent Teacher Conference to complete parent surveys as well as at other school events. The PC is also a 
key part of annual end-of-year meetings with the principal, assistant principal and ENL parents to discuss 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          59 

 

information about the upcoming school year. The school messenger outreach system is also used by the school to 
relay important messages/announcements via phone to ENL parents in their native language. During parent 
engagement on each Tuesday afternoon throughout the school year, parents are invited to participate in 
workshops to help understand their child's academic day and support their child at home in their native language.  
Additionally, ATS reports such as the Parent's Preferred Language Report (RCPL), help us to identify and assess 
language preferences at our school. This report is downloaded and reviewed by the LAP team each year. A second 
ATS report used to assess language preferences of our parent community is the RHLA, the home language 
aggregation. 
Finally, the PTA constitutes a mixed demographic and they are involved as volunteers at school events to help 
translate when the need arises. 
 

 
 
2.  List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, 

which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language 
Report (RCPL) ATS report. 
 

Language  

Written Preferred  

Percent Written  

Oral Preferred  

Percent Oral  

 
Albanian 
Amoy 
Arabic 
Bengali 
Burmese 
Bulgarian 
Chinese 
Cantonese 
French 
Georgian 
Hebrew 
korean 
Mandarin 
English 
Punjabi 
Polish 
Portuguese 
Russian 
Senufo 
Spanish 
Turkish 
Urdu 
Ukrainian 
Uzbek 

 

5 

0 

20 

6 

2 

1 

 

0.23 

0 

0.91 

0.27 

0.09 

0.05 

252 

11.45 

0 

0 

7 

1 

2 

0 

1309 

1 

3 

0 

0 

0.32 

0.05 

0.09 

0 

59.47 

0.05 

0.14 

 

7 

1 

21 

6 

3 

1 

228 

30 

2 

7 

1 

2 

9 

1251 

1 

3 

 

0.32 

0.05 

0.95 

0.27 

0.14 

0.05 

10.36 

1.36 

0.09 

0.32 

0.05 

0.09 

0.41 

56.84 

0.05 

0.14 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          60 

 

NA 

NA 

NA 

   

 

3 

396 

2 

118 

2 

64 

2 

5 

NA 

NA 

NA 

0.14 

17.99 

0.09 

5.36 

0.09 

2.91 

0.09 

0.23 

NA 

NA 

NA 

3 

424 

2 

121 

2 

69 

2 

5 

NA 

NA 

NA 

0.14 

19.26 

0.09 

5.5 

0.09 

3.13 

0.09 

0.23 

NA 

NA 

NA 

3.  From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at 

least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, 
French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. 
 

The three languages that constitute at least a 10% population of our school is English, Chinese and Russian. 

 

 
 
Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 
 
1.  List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be 

distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents.  
 

Document Name  

Month/Frequency Distributed to 

Families  

* ID badge notice 
* cell phone policy 
* discipline code 
* Chancellor regulations 
* student lunch forms 
* online grading website information 
* subject class contracts 
* IEPs 
* notice of IEP meetings 
* prior written placement packages 
* school calendar 
* medical documents 
* school initiatives 
* HS admission information 

September 

September 

September 

September 

September 

 

September 

How do you plan to translate? Include 
procedures to ensure timely provision 
of translated documents to parents.  

Staff members and volunteers help to 
provide written translations services. 
Our school has also purchased a 
VARIQUEST Poster Printer Maker to 
enable the administration and Parent 
Coordinator to physically enlarge 
important information deemed as 
helpful to parents. Every effort is made 
to translate the documentation in the 
preferred language as assessed in our 
school survey and other such 
documents. These posters will be in 
our Parent Information Center located 
in the main lobby and on the Parent 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          61 

 
* graduation news 

NA 

NA 

NA 

   

 

 

September 

 

various dates 

various dates 

 

various dates 

 

September 

various dates 

various dates 

various dates 

 

Spring 

NA 

NA 

NA 

Coordinator's bulletin board. We 
believe that by providing this 
information to parents in their home 
language will increase potential parent 
involvement. All parents that have 
students with disabilities are provided 
with IEP notices in advance in their 
preferred home language. This allows 
the special education team to prepare 
for the meeting to ensure that parents 
are well-informed about their child's 
special education mandates. In 
addition, all key letters sent home are 
notated with a message (in various 
foreign languages) stating that said 
letter contains important school 
information. The school also 
communicates through the school 
messenger which will send important 
phone messages home in the 
preferred language to allow parents to 
be informed of upcoming events, 
important dates and general school 
information. 

NA 

NA 

NA 

2.  List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as 

parent-teacher  
conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings.  
   

Meeting Name  

Month/Frequency of Meetings  

How does your school plan to provide 

* Welcome Back to School Night 
* grade orientations 
* ENL orientation 
* Fall PTC 
* Spring PTC 
* Family Science Night 
* student led conferences 
* PTA meetings 
* IEP meetings 

September 

 

September 

September 

November 

March 

interpretation service(s)?  

To provide interpretation services for 
these meetings, our entire staff is 
informed of the services offered 
through the NYC Department of 
Translation and Interpretation Services. 
At any and all meetings, translation 
services are provided by the above 
mentioned office or through willing 
bilingual staff members. 

For the meetings listed to the left, 
letters are sent home to inform 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          62 

 

NA 

NA 

NA 

   

 

May 

 

can be any Tuesday 

 

throughout the year 

throughout the year 

parents/guardians of such meetings. 
Letters are sent home in English, unless 
otherwise requested. Our school utilizes 
the services of the NYC DTIS to translate 
any such letters when the need arises. 
Information on the blue emergency 
contact card and the RCPL report allows 
us to determine which language is the 
parent's preferred method of written 
communication. In addition, bilingual 
staff members are asked to attend 
these meetings to provide translation 
services when necessary. Our top four 
most widely spoken languages at Bay 
are English, Chinese, Russian and 
Spanish. Prior to the aforementioned 
meetings, we make certain staff 
members (as well as PTA members) of 
these languages are available to meet 
parents' language needs. 

NA 

NA 

NA 

NA 

NA 

NA 

3.  Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of 

a school emergency.  
 

There are many forms of communication to serve the families of our students. The first measure we use is the School 
Messenger translated into specific languages. This information is uploaded into the School messenger system at the 
beginning of the school year to ensure that all families are notified clearly when there is an emergency. The second 
form of communication is our online website Jupiter. Here, parents can access alerts in their home language. Finally, 
our school does maintain an active Facebook account to alert parents of any potential emergency. 

 
 

 
 
Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure

 
Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and 
what resources are available to meet compliance.  
 

To ensure that all staff members are aware of Chancellor's Regulation A-663, the entire regulation is sent to each staff 
member in September along with other pertinent school information. Teachers are instructed to download this 
document onto a thumb drive and then sign off that they have received and read all back to school documents. The 
parent coordinator reaches out to families to invite them to workshops with training on topics such as technology, the 
signs of bullying, cyber-bullying, reading strategies for all students and school initiatives that are aligned to helping 
students master the common core learning standards. These workshops are given in a native tongue and celebrated 
with refreshments.  

 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          63 

 
 
 
Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services 
 
Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive 
information. Include any: 

  Translated signage 
  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents 
  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) 

 

Parents will be informed of the availability of translation services and written notices will be sent home. The school 
messenger system provides attendance/lateness information in three languages: Spanish, English and Russian. For 
information related to school activities and functions, translation is provided for all languages represented at our 
school. Documents and policies sent home are provided by the NYC Department of Translation and Interpretation 
Unit. Staff members can fax or send class contracts in any language. Notices are placed on Jupiter as well.  
 

 
 
Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services 
Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the 
language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services?   
 

The Bay Academy utilizes an on-line website and grade book (Jupiter) that allows parents to communicate with the 
school with ease. All staff members can be contacted through the website through email. This tool has helped to 
bridge the gap of communication with the parents and the school in all languages. Parents can email concerns to the 
administrators, support staff and teachers on a daily basis. A parent survey will be created every trimester to allow 
the parents to have a voice on the quality of translation and interpretation services as well as provide suggestions to 
further increase a positive experience. The school uses the weekly student led conferences to create action plans to 
work together with the home. In the meeting , parents can express concerns and give feedback to the teachers as to 
how the strategies and initiatives are showing progress.  
 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          64 

