 
 

 

 
 

 
  
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

2018-19 

COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN 

(CEP) 

 
 
 
 

 

DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 

17K138 

School Name: 

P.S. 138 BROOKLYN 

Principal: 

MARIE CHAUVET-MONCHIK 

 
 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                          
 

 

 

 

 1 

 

Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline  

 
 
Section 1: School Information Page 
 
 
Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page  
 
 
Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) 
 
 
Section 4: CEP Overview  
 
 
Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  

  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction 
  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment 
  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers 
  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership 
  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties  

 
 
Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS)  
 
 
Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) 
 
 
Section 8: Title I Program Information  
 
 
Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 
 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          2 

 

 

Section 1: School Information Page 

 

School Information 

 

 
School Name: 

PS/MS 138 
 
33170010138 

BEDS Code: 

 

Grades Served: 

Pre-Kindergarten- Eighth grade 
 

School Address:  

760 Prospect Place 
 

School Number (DBN):  17K138 

 

Phone Number: 

718 467-0800 
 

Fax: 

718-954-3422 
 

School Contact Person:  

Lewis St Victor 
 

Email Address:  mchauve@schools.nyc.gov  

 

Principal: 

UFT Chapter Leader: 

Parents’ Association President: 

SLT Chairperson: 

Title I Parent Representative (or 
Parent Advisory Council 
Chairperson): 

Student Representative(s): 

 

CBO Representative: 
 

Marie B. Chauvet-Monchik 
 

Hamesh Massey 
 

Latisha Cobbs 
 

Mr. Lewis St Victor 
 

LatishaCobbs 
 

N/A 
 

N/A 
 
MaxineSeals 

 

 

District Information 

 

Geographical District:  17 

 

Superintendent:  Mr. Clarence G Ellis 

 

Superintendent’s Office Address: 

1224Park Place Brooklyn New York 11213 
 

Superintendent’s Email Address: 

CEllis3@schools.nyc.gov  
 

Phone Number: 

718 221-4372  
 

Fax: 

718 221-4326 
 

 
 

Field Support Center (FSC)  

 

Brooklyn South field 
Support Center 

FSC: 

 

Executive Director:  MauriciereDe Govia 

 

Executive Director’s Office Address:  415 89 Street, Brooklyn, NY 11209 

 

Executive Director’s Email Address:  CherylWatson@schools.nyc.gov 

 

Phone Number: 

(718) 759-4862 
 

Fax: 

718 759-4863 
 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          3 

 

Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page  

 

All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this 
Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to 
support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention 
Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal 
number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with 
Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. 
 
Directions: 

 

1.  List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 
2.  Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization 
(CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an 
asterisk*. 

3.  SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member 

does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, 
which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT 
member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval.   

4.  The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file 

in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. 

 

Name 

Position and Constituent Group 

Represented 

Signature 
(Blue Ink) 

Marie Chauvet-Monchik 
 

*Principal or Designee 

Hamesh Massay 
 

Letisha Cobbs 
 

Denise Jones 
 

LetishaCobbs 

 

None 
 

None 
 

Maxine Seals 
 
Lewis St Victor 

 
Yvette Mason 
 

James Pieper 
 

Micdyva Alexandre 
 

Angela Hospedales 
 

*UFT Chapter Leader or Designee 

*PA/PTA President or Designated Co-
President 

DC 37 Representative (staff), if 
applicable 

Title I Parent Representative or 
Parent Advisory Council Chairperson  

Student Representative  
(optional for elementary and middle 
schools; a minimum of two members 
required for high schools) 

Student Representative  
(optional for elementary and middle 
schools; a minimum of two members 
required for high schools) 

CBO Representative, if applicable 
 

Member/ School Rep 
 

Member/ Teacher 
 

Member/Teacher 
 

Member/ Teacher 
 

Member/ Parent 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          4 

 

Name 

Position and Constituent Group 

Represented 

Signature 
(Blue Ink) 

S. Terry 

 
Jody Paul 
 

Shasta Paul 
 

George Sandiford 
 

Latoya Claire 
 

 

 

 

Member/ Parent 
 

Member/ Parent 
 

Member/ Parent 
 

Member/Parent 
 

Member/ Parent 
 

Member/ 
 

Member/ 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          5 

 

Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan  

 

The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to 
support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing 
school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, 
monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. 
This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the 
school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, 
Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. 

Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools 

The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect 
the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms 
where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity 
and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and 
classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more 
attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and 
Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our 
families and students. 

Strong Schools, Strong Communities  

The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, 
educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school 
prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult.  

The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers 
and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of 
schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, 
school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that 
all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New 
Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students.  

The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development 

The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and 
external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase 
learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently 
ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan 
(CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school 
community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and 
address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for 
students. 
 

Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish 
high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the 
Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community 
members concrete ways to improve. 
 
In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in 
consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to 
participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a 
comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          6 

 
the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all 
the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements 
work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing 
that it likely addresses other elements as well. 
 

The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools  

Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards 
are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical 
thinking skills. 
Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, 
and challenged by their teachers and peers. 
Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. 
They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous 
improvement. 
Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, 
developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. 
Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by 
welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. 
Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school 
and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value 
each other. 

 

The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools 

In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in 
improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative 
and qualitative data. 

NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) 

The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by 
coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality 
Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 
Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below:  

I.       Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) 
II.    School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4)  
III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and 

Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) 

  
School Quality Guide  

The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to 
set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to 
accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also 
available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s 
practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. 
For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. 
The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of 
similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set 
based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. 

 

Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          7 

 
Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, 
professional development, and parent and family engagement. 
 
To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in 
improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will 
serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the 
administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish: 
 
 
 
It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School 
Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the 
joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% 
parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% 
budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent 
and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on 
establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. 

a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; 
a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) 

 
Next Steps for CEP Development 

School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  

  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the 

requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655. 

  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability 

status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year. 

  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed 

by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are 
SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you 
monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school 
community know when you’ve reached your goal. 

  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action 
plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement. 

  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I 

schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). 

  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall 

cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action 
plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. 

Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful 
implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to 
accomplishing desired results. 

1.  What is your school’s mission statement? 

Vision 

Section 4: CEP Overview 

 

While striving for excellence, PS 138 will create an all-inclusive, risk-free learning environment where all students are 
given the opportunity to succeed academically, socially, and emotionally in a culturally diverse world. 

At PS 138, our teams will be engaged in differentiated instruction based on continuous assessments , data analysis 
while adjusting instructional practices. Students will be empowered to share in the ownership of their learning while 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          8 

 

engaging in collaborative and independent work that reflect critical thinking, logical reasoning, and making 
connections to real world experiences to prepare them for college and career and a successful life. 

Mission 

Children First! High expectation based on effective effort while teaching students, according to their abilities, all the 
core curriculum, while using the next generation standards, which includes math, literacy, writing across the 
curriculum , STEAM and advanced classes in an inclusive and safe orderly environment. This involved staff, students, 
parents and administrators working collaboratively to find solutions in order to raise academic and social 
performance for all students so they can be well-rounded individuals who are college and career ready and be 
productive members of a global society. There is no excuse. Effort is the answer. Failure is not an option. 

 

 

2.  Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, 

including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented.  
P.S. 138 is a K-8 school located in the Crown Heights section of Brooklyn, New York. Approximately 610 students are 
enrolled in this school. The ethnic breakdown is as follows: 2% Asian, 85% Black, 9% Hispanic, and 4% White. The 
student attendance rate for the year, 2016-17, is 90%. To increase the attendance rate of our students, we are 
currently implementing a monthly assembly programs to recognize students with perfect monthly attendance. We 
have also implemented school messenger service system, which immediately notifies parents of his/her child’s 
absence. The teacher attendance rate is at 97%. Student achievement on the NYS ELA assessment, for the school term 
2017-2018, reflects that 45% of the students in grades 3-8 met state standards. While on the NYS math test, 39.3% 
met standards. Further data shows that 100% is the average pass rate for courses in Math, English, and Social Studies. 
100% of the 8th grade student body earn English High School credit for 9th grade. Based on the 2016-2017 data, there 
is a need to provide continual professional development activities for special education teachers and teachers of 
English Language Learners. 

 

P.S. 138 is a school where every community member works collaboratively to cultivate the school's shared vision of 
ensuring that all students succeed. We are dedicated to student learning, academic success, and personal well-being. 
We engage families and the outside community to promote and support student successes academically and 
emotionally. In addition, we provide our students with additional programs such as: high school courses in Science 
and Math, Specialized High Schools preparation course , 

 

Our curricula, aligned to The Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS), deepens the Middle School student 
understanding of the necessary strategies and techniques required for effective CCLS mastery. We provide teachers 
with focused instructional objectives aimed at improving student performance by including the instructional shifts 
throughout unit plans. 

P.S. 138 designs and analyzes coherent curriculum that provides teachers with numerous ways to improve student 
ability to comprehend and analyze complex text. We do this by using the instructional shifts as an integral part of unit 
/ lesson planning. Some of the steps that we take to align the curricula to the CCLS are to engage in a range of one-to-
one, and small group, teacher-led discussions analyzing an array of grade-appropriate topics, texts, and issues, 
building on others' ideas and expressing their own clearly. 

P.S. 138 instructors are encouraged to promote higher order thinking skills by using discussion protocols. Front 
loading the unit with academic vocabulary, scenes, and / or background information, helps ensure that students have 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          9 

 

read or studied required material--drawing on that preparation to refer to evidence on the topic, text, or issue--to 
probe and reflect on discussion ideas. 

P.S. 138 also focuses in Columbia University writing process from Kindergarten through the eighth grade. Teachers 
use the writing materials created by Columbia University as part of their writing process. They are being trained by 
Columbia University coaches.  

Teachers set high expectations for every student’s progress and set ambitious targets for improving classroom 
performance. All teachers implement effective teaching methods that have been shown to be effective in promoting 
successful learning for all students. For example, our school uses the Depth of Knowledge (DOK) and Universal Design 
for Learning (UDL) methodologies to set rigorous student instruction. PS 138 uses the instructional shift to guide 
students through complex text scaffolding. The Common Core Learning Standards require that all students, including 
ELL's and students with IEP’s, read grade-appropriate text. However, in order for our students to get the gist of the 
reading, our teachers include multiple readings of selected texts, read-alouds, text-scaffolding, and one-on-one 
reading support. This allows all students to successfully negotiate and comprehend complex texts. 

Students are able to perform at a higher academic level when the curriculum’s content is deeper and intensive 
instruction focus is placed on breaking down the barriers preventing text comprehension. 

Furthermore, we use active student engagement by allowing students to take an active role in both the learning and 
assessment process. For students, this carves a path to increased academic skill mastery along with motivation and 
self-responsibility, (connecting, picturing, predicting, and noticing). We have noticed that students, when personally 
invested in the learning process and when encouraged to take ownership of their learning and academic goals. 

In addition to providing teachers with numerous ways to improve student ability to comprehend and analyze text 
complexity, we also design and analyze the features of standardized exams. We do this by generating quarterly and 
benchmark tests. For example, during ELA and Social Studies, students are taught to identify key words in order to 
determine the main idea. They infer, visualize, and ask themselves who, what, why and how questions; they also self-
monitor while they read. Students learn to use graphic organizers, develop their listening comprehension skills, and 
take notes to better comprehend either the text or questions related to the text. In the end, students will better 
comprehend what the text suggests and be prepared to respond correctly. Teachers use both shared and 
individualized assessments that measure common skills to evaluate student progress across classes and over time. 

Below are some examples of formative and summative assessments used at P.S. 138. 

Formative Chart 

Observations 

Questioning 

Discussion 

Peer/Self 
Assessments 
Practice 
Presentations 
Visual 
Representations 
Constructive 
Quizzes 

Summative 
Chart 
Diagnostic 
Test 
Baseline 
Test 
Midterm 
Exam 
Final 
Project 
Essay and 
Research 
Paper 
 

Exit/Admit Slips 

Think Pair Share 

Learning/Response 
 
Logs 
Graphic Organizers  

Our Instructional Focus 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          10 

 

We at P.S. 138 strongly believe in effective questioning to promote student engagement through student lead 
discussions that transfer into writing across content areas for all students. 

I. P. S. 138 takes great pride in promoting a positive school culture that celebrates learning through student 
accomplishments and emotional development resulting in respect and warmth throughout the school. The Respect 
for All, (anti-bullying program) has made a positive and significant impact on reducing the number of bullying 
occurrences in the school. Through grade level assembly programs that stress the importance of showing respect for 
all, peaceful conflict resolution, school-wide poster contests emphasizing a learning community in which all students 
are safe, and through grade-appropriate reading materials about bullying; we were able to reduce the magnitude of 
bullying occurrences. Students must feel safe and nurtured in their daily learning environment. 

II. The Response to Intervention (RTI) Initiative, which was implemented has helped us to reduce the number of 
students needing RTI intervention from 102 students to 46 students. All students involved in this program are 
receiving high quality, research based instruction such as Wilson for grade 3 to 8, and Fundation for students in the 
early childhood grades (K to 2). Throughout the process, the students’ progress is monitored frequently to examine 
student achievement and gauge school curriculum effectiveness. 

III. The student government meets regularly with the principal and the council adviser to voice their concerns about 
the school community. This has helped the school to foster active student body participation and foster opportunities 
for them to be meaningfully involved in decision-making processes that lead to school improvement as evidenced by 
the student newspaper, student suggestion box and student tutoring program, for the younger students. More so, the 
school’s inclusive culture enables each student to be well-known by a staff member who helps support his/her 
academic and social growth. Students are encouraged at the beginning of the year to list their goals for the year and 
to remain committed to their long-term goals. The attendance team, through parent outreach, workshops, and home 
visits, ensure the daily 92% attendance rate in our quest to reach 95% and better. 

IV.  

The school provides students with a vision so that they can be exposed to their future. College Access for All is an 
initiative where students are exposed to the requirements for college and how they can become college ready. 
Students and their parents attend college conferences organized by the Parent Coordinator and a CBO . The Guidance 
Counselor organizes College trips for for Middle School students. Students can earn up to 6 High School credits upon 
graduating the eighth grade. The school offers High School courses to eighth graders in Living Environment, Earth 
Science and Algebra. To date, 75% of sixth and seventh graders attend Specialized High School Courses sponsored by 
P.S. 138 on Saturdays and during the summer, in preparation for the Specialized High School examination. 

V. Monthly progress reports, calendar, newsletter, and school messenger enable the parents to be aware of school-
wide events as well as their child’s academic progress. Workshops coordinated by the Parent Coordinator and Pre-K 
Family Worker help parents gain strategies to help their child with homework, learn how to read, and cope with 
stress. We also offer parent orientation tailored toward our non-English speaking parents. Pupil Personnel Team (PPT) 
meetings and Individual Educational Plan (IEP) meetings are conducted regularly by the School Based Support Team in 
order to address the educational needs of students with disabilities, and their parents. Special Education providers 
conduct orientations and other training to parents of students with disabilities. Teachers also communicate with 
parents through email, sending then homework assignments and other activities. 

VI. Additional partnership with parents includes Cool Culture (Pre-Kindergarten-Kindergarten) which provides access 
to museums and other cultural sites in New York City to provide educational experiences for their children and to 
serve as their child’s primary educator. We also offer Cook-shop for Families, which helps families to make healthy 
diet choices. 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          11 

 

VII. The Friends of Crown Heights, Beacon After-school Program, Brooklyn Museum Partnership for Arts Education, 
Semi-Annual Career Day, and Health Fair and College Visits have all helped us to create a cohesive community among 
our staff, students and parents. 

VIII. Regular conferencing with students, small group instruction, one to one instruction, lesson accommodations for 
Students With Disabilities (SWD) and English as a New Language (ENL), Universal Design for Learning (UDL), and 
adaptive technology have helped us provide feedback to our students on their progress as well as academic areas in 
which they need to improve. 

IX. Finally, educational trips, to enhance the curriculum, to such places as the American Museum of Natural History, 
Liberty Science Center, Brooklyn Museum of the Arts, Green Meadows Farm, Shadow Box Theatre, Queens College of 
the Performing Arts, and The Native American Festival enable our students to be more appreciative of the arts and of 
the community in which they live. 

 

 

 

3.  Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. 

 
The student body includes 45 English Language Learners, 102 students with IEPs and 26 students across the grade 
levels, receiving Special Education Teacher Support Services (SETSS) support. We also have 9 Integrated (ICT) classes 
and 3 self-contained special education classes. The ENL program currently provides a combination of pull out and 
push-in instructional support. The needs of both our students with IEP and ENLs include the use of scaffolds and 
supports, visual learning aides, hands on learning opportunities, videos, and computer assisted resources to meet 
their varying needs and learning styles. Our ELL population also requires an intensive focus on improving their 
speaking and listening skills, both of which are necessary to support their English language acquisition. 
 

4. 

Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over 
the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. 

To address expectation for a collaborative teachers practice, the P. S. 138 is a learning community is comprised of 
eight strong teams that are academic and environmental , which play an integral role in the school’s learning 
environment. They are: 

1. Professional Development Team 

2. School Leadership Team 

3. Contract Implementation Team 

4. RTI Team 

5. MOSL Team 

6. Building Response Team 

7. Data Team 

8. New Teacher Mentoring Team 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          12 

 

As a result, teachers are encouraged to assume various team leadership roles and to attend outside professional 
development sessions. Upon their return, they share the information learned, from attending the professional 
development sessions, with the rest of the staff. Additionally, several teachers serve as content specific ambassadors 
in the areas of art, science, social studies, mathematics, and English language arts. The ambassadors attend monthly 
training sessions to acquire the latest strategies and methodologies in their area of expertise to then turn-key the 
information learned to the rest of the staff. 

 

All curricula are driven by the work of the school Data Team. All teachers are engaged in inquiry teacher teams, 
among and across grades, to develop and share effective instructional strategies and work on the alignment of the 
CCLS to strategically promote the school’s instructional goals. The school has a common planning schedule. Here, 
teachers meet according to their grade or subject. Teachers conduct these common planning meetings. They also use 
their preparation periods and their lunch periods to conduct study groups and plan for their classes. The school 
reflects a professional learning community in which students are the core focus. 

Common Prep Schedule 

Pre-Kindergarten Thursday Period 2 

Kindergarten Wednesday Period 2 

First Grade Wednesday Period 5 

Second Grade Monday Period 5 

Third Grade Tuesday Period 6 

Fourth Grade Monday Period 7 

Fifth Grade Wednesday Period 6 

Sixth Grade Wednesday Period 8 

Seventh Grade Wednesday Period 7 

Eighth Grade Thursday Period 2 

Science Wednesday Period 2 

Special Education Friday Period 2 

PPT/RTI Friday Period 3 

Safety Thursday (monthly) Period 3 

School Leadership Team Every other Friday 3:30 P. M.-6:00 P. M. 

2016- 2017 Common Planning Time Schedule will be offered at different times but all the teams will be the same. 

Data analysis is embedded in each academic team meeting agenda. Every team has a facilitator and conducts itself 
according to a common protocol using an agenda. The teachers examine student work; develop next steps, and share 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          13 

 

their findings at monthly staff meetings. The teams also discuss student goals and set benchmarks to track student 
progress--targeting areas of student need to assure student mastery. 

To address rigorous instruction which is the are in need of greatest improvement, the school intends to provide  

professional development sessions, data analysis, and flexible grouping to enhance teachers ability to target at-risk 
students and students who have been referred to the School Based Support Team for intervention. Grade specific 
special education teachers participate on the teams, as well as the ENL teacher; this provides the opportunity to for 
all educators affecting student academic progress to discuss the appropriate entry points into the curriculum for the 
SWD’s and ENL's, as they review student work. Teachers also meet to develop instructional practices that strategically 
support academic interventions to meet all student instructional needs. In addition, teacher teams share best 
practices that are aligned with the findings of various assessment data to monitor student progress. 

Ultimately, teacher teams empower teachers to play meaningful roles in determining the directions of the school’s 
curricula. P.S. 138 takes pride in the roles team take in implementing the vision and mission of the school. 

· Grade level teams take part in lesson design, which results in pivotal Depth of Knowledge( DOK) questions being 
included in individual lesson plans. 

· Also to address the need to improve the quality of rigorous instruction, professional development teams will design 
and initiate a varied study groups to research and implement writing across all content areas. 

· Content area subject-specific focus groups meet and plan for math, science, social studies, ELA, Technology, physical 
education, Health and the Arts in order to integrate contents among the literacy and writing standards. This resulted 
in the creation of integrated curriculum maps. 

· Additionally veteran teachers provide mentoring sessions to mentor newly appointed teachers, and at risk teachers 
with help in planning, demonstrating lessons, discussing and developing instructional plans that will meet the needs 
of all learners throughout the school year. 

 

The Universal Literacy Coach works closely with the early childhood teachers by offering professional development, 
demonstration lesson, co-teaching to teachers in grade K, 1 and 2.,  

· Teachers, supervisors, and the school Inquiry Teams compile and utilize data to drive instruction and enhance 
teaching methodology to create inquiry teams based on grades, content, and academics. 

· Curriculum modification during collaborative Inquiry Team meetings to foster and align differentiated instruction 
through UDL, and to utilize scientific research based practices for students with diverse needs. 

· Needs assessment conducted to identify areas that teachers need to improve, which result in individual professional 
development plans. 

 

 

 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          14 

 

 

School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 17K138 

School Configuration (2018-19) 

Grade Configuration 

PK,0K,01,02,03,04,
05,06,07,08 

Total Enrollment (2017-
18) 
English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 

565 

SIG Recipient (Y/N) 

Transitional Bilingual 

N/A 

Dual Language 

N/A 

Self-Contained English as a Second 
Language 

Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) 

# Special Classes (ELA) 
# Special Classes (Math) 

# Visual Arts 
# Foreign Language 

% Title I Population 
% Free Lunch 
% Limited English Proficient 

40 
41 

 
 

% American Indian or Alaska Native 
% Hispanic or Latino 
% White 

# SETSS (ELA) 
# SETSS (Math) 
Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) 
# Music 
# Drama 
# CTE 
# Dance 

44 
42 

 
 

# Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) 
# Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) 

School Composition (2017-18) 

92.0%  % Attendance Rate 
86.2%  % Reduced Lunch 
8.3% 

% Students with Disabilities 

Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) 

% Black or African American 

0.9% 
13.1%  % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 
4.8% 

% Multi-Racial 

Personnel (2015-16) 

Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) 
% of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate 
% Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 

17.75 
0% 
0% 

# of Assistant Principals (2016-17) 
% Teaching Out of Certification 
Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) 

Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) 

ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 

51.6%  Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 

Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 

93% 

Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-
17) 

Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) 

ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 
Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 
4 Year Graduation Rate 

Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 

N/A 
N/A 
N/A 

N/A 

Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 
US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 
6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) 
% ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures 
(2015-16) 

Reward 
In Good Standing 
Focus District 

Priority School 

Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) 

No 
Yes 
Yes 

Recognition 
Local Assistance Plan 
Focus School Identified by a Focus District 

No 

Focus Subgroups 

N/A 

Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) 

Elementary/Middle School 

Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) 

American Indian or Alaska Native 
Hispanic or Latino 
White 
Students with Disabilities 
Economically Disadvantaged 

American Indian or Alaska Native 
Hispanic or Latino 
White 
Students with Disabilities 
Economically Disadvantaged 

American Indian or Alaska Native 
Hispanic or Latino 
White 
Students with Disabilities 
Economically Disadvantaged 

American Indian or Alaska Native 
Hispanic or Latino 
White 
Students with Disabilities 
Economically Disadvantaged 

American Indian or Alaska Native 
Hispanic or Latino 
White 
Students with Disabilities 
Economically Disadvantaged 

American Indian or Alaska Native 
Hispanic or Latino 
White 
Students with Disabilities 
Economically Disadvantaged 

N/A 
YES 
N/A 
YES 
YES 

Black or African American 
Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander 
Multi-Racial 
Limited English Proficient 
ALL STUDENTS 

Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) 
Black or African American 
Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander 
Multi-Racial 
Limited English Proficient 
ALL STUDENTS 

N/A 
YES 
N/A 
YSH 
YES 

Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) 

N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
YES 
High School 

Black or African American 
Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander 
Multi-Racial 
Limited English Proficient 
ALL STUDENTS 

Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) 

N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 

Black or African American 
Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander 
Multi-Racial 
Limited English Proficient 
ALL STUDENTS 

Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) 
Black or African American 
Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander 
Multi-Racial 
Limited English Proficient 
ALL STUDENTS 

N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 

Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) 
Black or African American 
Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander 
Multi-Racial 
Limited English Proficient 
ALL STUDENTS 

N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 

No 

N/A 

45 
46 

 
 

90.9% 
6.0% 
18.2% 

79.5% 
1.6% 
1.1% 

2 
20% 
3.1 

49.7% 

81% 

N/A 
N/A 
N/A 

N/A 

N/A 
No 
No 

YES 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
YES 

YES 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
YES 

YES 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
YES 

N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 

N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 

N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          15 

 

 
 

Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans 

 

Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, 
motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged 
in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. 

Part 1 – Needs Assessment   

Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and 
formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not 
limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. 
Number responses accordingly. 
 
1.  What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element?  Indicate the data trends, source and year. 
2.  What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? 

Indicate the data trends, source and year. 

 
 

This past school year, the results of our 2016-17 New York State (NYS) ELA exam results revealed that of all students 
tested, we achieved 14% growth in the number of students achieving proficiency, resulting in 45% of all students 
reaching proficiency. In addition, on the NYS Math exam we experienced 1.2% growth in the number of students 
achieving proficiency, resulting in 37% of all students reaching proficiency. 

Though students made improvement on both exams, based on end of year student assessment and teacher Advance 
data, which shows that 85% of teachers were trending at effective in component 3b, and 67% trending at effective in 
component 3c, and ,the priority need is to further improve teacher effectiveness in the areas of questioning ad 
discussion (3b) and engaging students in learning (3c), by developing a shared understanding of instructional 
excellence as per the Common Core Learning standards and the Danielson Framework for Teaching. To enhance 
pedagogical staff ability to design questioning techniques while promoting student higher thinking skills and writing 
across all curriculum (Domain, 1 and 4) PS 138 conducted a needs assessment during the month of May 2016; it was 
revealed that most pedagogical staff wanted additional training in (3B) Questioning and Discussion Techniques, (3D) 
Questioning and assessing lessons, writing across the curriculum, and additional in math professional development in 
areas such as modeling and using data to drive instruction.  

 

 

 
Part 2 – Annual Goal 

Indicate  your  school’s  2018-19  goal  for  improving  student  outcomes  and  school  performance  that  addresses  this 
element  of  the  Framework  for  Great  Schools–Rigorous  Instruction.  Your  goal  must  be  responsive  to  the  identified 
priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-
bound.  
 

By June 2019, there will be a 5% increase in the number of students scoring at levels 3 and 4, as measured by 
NYS ELA and NYS Mathematics assessments. 

 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          16 

 
Part 3a – Action Plan 

Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and 
strategies your school will implement to achieve the 
identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, 
including: 

Target 
Group(s) 
Who will be 
targeted? 

Timeline 
What is the 
start and 
end date? 

Key Personnel 
Who is responsible for 
implementing and 
overseeing the 
activity/strategy? 

  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional 
development, and/or systems and structures needed 
to impact change. 
Strategies to address the needs of students with 
disabilities, English language learners, and other 
high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-
credited, SIFE, STH). 

 

(Domains 3b and 4: )To instruct grade leaders and other 
teachers to work collaboratively before and after school, 
planning and assessing instructional best practices. They will 
develop effective questioning techniques in Domain 3b in the 
Danielson Teaching Framework. They will incorporate writing 
across the curriculum while using the Teachers' College 
model. Teachers will also focus in mathematics as well. 

Teachers in 
grades Pre-K 
to 8. 

To provide weekly common planning time for teachers to 
meet and plan to ensure that the needs of all students, 
including ENLs, SWDs, and at-risk students are adequately 
addressed throughout the school year according to grade 
levels and content areas. They will develop instructional 
bundles in Literacy, Math , Social studies and Science. 
Teachers will be engaged in Data analysis by using Data Wise  
for inquiry. 

Teachers in 
grades Pre-K 
to 8. 

( Domain 3b: Initiate a school wide focus group to read and 
discuss The Art of Questioning: An Introduction to Critical 
Thinking by Daniel Framework to enhance teachers 
questioning techniques and writing across the curriculum. 
Attend Teachers College professional development and use 
their instructional strategies for literacy and math. 

Teachers in 
grades Pre-K 
to 8. 

Administration/Reading 
coach, AP and Principal 

Administration: 
Principal, Assistant 
Principal, Math coach 
and Reading Coach 

Professional 
Development Team, 
Grade Leaders & 
Educational 
Consultants 

Sept 2017 
through 
June 2018 
 
There will be 
a midpoint 
assessment 
in February 
2017 to 
monitor 
students 
progress. 

Sept 2017 
through  
June 2018 
 
 
Midpoint 
assessment 
in February 
to monitor 
students 
progress. 

September 
2017 
through 
June 2018 
 
Midpoint 
assessment 
in February 
2016 to 
monitor 
students 
progress. 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          17 

To encourage the practice of study groups for all pedagogical 
staff in various content areas, including: curriculum alignment, 
using individual data to address students’ needs. The entire 
school community will be engaged in professional 
development base in improving writing across the curriculum 
and the arts of questioning, TC reading and writing . 

Teachers in 
grades Pre-k 
to 8. 

Professional 
Development Team, 
Grade Leaders, 
Educational Consultant 
 
s, Parent Coordinator & 
Administration 

Sept 2017 
through 
June 2018 
 
Teachers 
will meet in 
January to 
assess the 
quality of 
their PDs 
and create a 
new Needs 
Assessment 
to schedule 
more PD. 

 

 
 

 
3b – Parent and Family Engagement 

How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York 
State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible 
for implementation and oversight. 
The school held parent orientation on August 31st for the in coming students in grades: Pre-K, Kindergarten and sixth 
grade. Curriculum conferences were held on September 13, 14 and 26. The parent coordinator offers workshop to 
parents in multiple content which includes curriculum, test sophistication, safety, financial literacy, College for All and 
other areas of concerns. The Parent Coordinator works collaboratively with the parents t, teachers and outside CBOs 
in order continuously engaged parents throughout the year. She disseminates pertinent information to parents as 
needed. She send home monthly calendar and a newsletter to keep parents informed ; she organized monthly parent 
workshop, walk-through and other event to keep parents engaged and informed about heir children's education. 

 

 
Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 

Part  4a.  Indicate  resources  you will  leverage  to  achieve  this  annual  goal  and  implement this  action  plan,  including 
human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 

We will use the teaching staff, educational assistants, ENL teacher all members of the School Based Support 
Team, educational consultants, as well as the administration team.  
 
The budget is scheduled to cover the expenses during the school year. In addition, the budget must cover all 
the instructional initiatives to adequately run the school. 
-Purchasing materials 
-Per Diem and per-session for teachers and paraprofessionals  
-Parental involvement 
-Special needs students and English language learners 
-Technology and other expenses 

 
Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 
Title III, 

X 

Tax Levy 

X 

Title I SWP 

X 

Title I TA 

 

Title II, 
Part A 

X 

Title III, 
Part A 

X 

Immigrant 

X 

C4E 

 

21st Century 

Grant 

 
Part 5 – Progress Monitoring  

 

SIG 

 

PTA Funded 

 

In Kind 

 

Other 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          18 

 

 

Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement 
planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 
 

By February 2019, there will be minimum of 5% increase of students showing improvements, as evidenced by their 
most recent MOSL results. 

September 2018- teachers and administrators review the 2018 ELA and math NYS test results; they analyze the data, 
plan for students according to their functional levels. General Education, ELL, SWD, students take the base line 
assessment in ELA and Math. Teachers use the information in order to assess students' growth and area of concerns; 
they formulate teaching groups and implement differentiated instruction. teachers formulate flexible groups 
according to students' ability. Teachers meet and review students' work and adjust their flexible groups as students 
master their skills. 

 

 
Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January 
Regents, etc.) 
Students will be assessed with the Mid year MOSL assessment. We will be measuring students' growth from 
September 2017 to January 2019. By June 2019, students will show a 5% increase in their MOSL assessment. 

Teachers and the data team will meet in February to analyze students progress and address areas in need of 
improvement. This information are used to provide students small groups differentiate instruction according to their 
abilities. Teachers must teach, assess, examine the result, then re-each intended in order to obtain mastery. 

There is an after school test prep program that helps individual students in their identified area in needs of 
improvement. Grade three to eight students receive additional assistant through achieve 3000, and engaged ne York 
math materials. These online resource allow students opportunity for independent practice. 

 
Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action 
plan, if applicable. 

 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          19 

 

Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans 

 
Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and 
school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. 

Part 1 – Needs Assessment   

Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and 
formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not 
limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. 
Number responses accordingly. 
 
1.  What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element?  Indicate the data trends, source and year. 
2.  What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? 

Indicate the data trends, source and year. 

3.  What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? 
Based upon a review of 2018-19 observational and Occurrence Report (OORs) data, it is clear that our students feel 
safe and supported. However, a review of those same observation reports revealed that teachers must improve their 
ability to ensure that ALL students are cognitively engaged in the learning talking place, as only 67% of teachers 
scored "effective" in component 3b of the Danielson Framework.. To that end, the priority need for the school is to 
improve our ability to provide scaffolds and supports and teacher moves, to increase student engagement during 
lessons. 

 

Every child has an adult in the school he or she can confer with to advocate on his or her behave. ELL students are 
partnered with staff members who speak their language and who can identify with their particular culture. Our 
mission statement asserts that we can improve teaching and learning to improve student academics by creating a 
school culture where individuals have the same goals and same mind set, to provide a safe and nurturing 
environment for the students. 

 

Teaching students to be involved in their environment will provide growth and safety while they are being nurtured. 
Students will be able to self- regulate their behavior and make positive choices and rational decisions--providing for a 
strong culture in the school. Students set their own academic goals with high expectations and rigorous work effort. 
The teachers use data to improve academic achievement, keep students on track, and decrease behavioral problems. 
Teachers, parents, administrators, guidance counselor, social worker, and support staff are constantly working 
collaboratively to assist students and to keep them safe--making changes as needed-- through positive reinforcement 
and cooperation. All students feel safe when they are actively engaged in activities throughout the school such as 
student government, community service, peer tutoring, and conflict resolution; these structures and activities provide 
a safe environment for all.  

 

 
Part 2 – Annual Goal 

Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this 
element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the 
identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, 
and Time-bound. 
By June 2019, Students suspension will reduce at least 50%, as measured by the OORS 
 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          20 

Target 
Group(s) 
Who will be 
targeted? 

Timeline 
What is the 
start and 
end date? 

Key Personnel 
Who is responsible 
for implementing 
and overseeing the 
activity/strategy? 

September 
2017- June 
2018 

All students: 
Gifted and 
talented 
students, 
general 
population, 
bott0m third, 
ENL's, 
students with 
disabilities, 
and STH 

Overseer: Mr. St 
Victor 
Implementers:  
Guidance counselor, 
The Dean of 
discipline, Social 
Worker, School 
Psychologist, 
Classroom Teachers, 
Sixth grade science 
teacher 

Students in 
Temporary 
Housing 

September 
2017 to June 
2018 

Guidance Counselor, 
Family workers, 
Parent Coordinator, 
Dean, School 
secretary 

 
Part 3a – Action Plan 

Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies 
your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for 
this Framework for Great Schools element, including: 

  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional 

 

development, and/or systems and structures needed to 
impact change. 
Strategies to address the needs of students with 
disabilities, English language learners, and other high-
need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, 
SIFE, STH). 

Guidance Counselor will train students to use Skoolbo to 
improve academics while making learning fun and competitive. 
During Professional Development staff will learn about 
disproportionately of suspension, teachers will develop a better 
understanding of student behaviors, to decrease suspensions.  
Victory Theater brings art and theater into the classrooms to 
cultivate skills through the performing arts.  
Dignity for all students act. Students participate in contest to 
create posters, poems and classroom presentation about dignity 
for all. 
Anti-Bullying. Students attend assemblies and have open forum 
discussion. 
PBIS Program uses positive behavior intervention strategies to 
discuss character and raise self-esteem awareness in students. 

Students In Temporary Housing (STH) are monitored on a 
continuous basis. They are provided with counseling sessions if 
needed, and basic school supplies, including uniforms. These 
students receive at risk counseling if deem necessary.  
Parent coordinator and other support staff will maintain 
communication with the STH family and their counselors in order 
to provide maximum support for the students in question. 
Department of Health provided an additional nurse in the school 
to provide additional services to STH students. STH students are 
provided with book bags, school supplies , uniforms and 
additional materials as needed.  
They received free bus services from the bureau of 
transportation. 
The Beacon After-school program helps students with their 
homework and social development. The mission statement 
states that we can improve teaching and learning to improve 
student academics, by creating a school culture where 
individuals have the same goals to provide a safe and nurturing 
environment for the students. 

At risk students such as the bottom third are involved in Respond 
to intervention by the RTI team. Once they are identified, they 
receive tiered instruction by their teacher or by an additional 
staff through tier one or tier two. Additional materials are used 
according to students’ instructional need. 

Level one 
students, 
Ells, Students 
with 
behavior or 

September 
2016 to June 
2017 

Respond to 
intervention team, 
ENL Teacher, SETTS 
teacher, Math 
teacher, Reading 
Teacher, 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          21 

Push in additional staff during literacy and math instruction for 
additional instructional support. 
Using technology base instruction to assist students in needs and 
accelerate those students who are functioning above level. 
Teaching coping mechanism so they can control their behavior 
when experiencing a trigger for crisis. 

emotional 
problems 

English 
language 
learners  

September 
2017-June 
2018 

At P.S. 138, the guidance counselor and school social worker 
provides students with disabilities, at risk students and ELL's with 
counseling and support, to make the transition or meet the 
needs of families. SIFE students are taught life skills and basic 
education so that they can catch up with other students in their 
grades. 
 
The school social worker is also involved in providing these 
services. 
English language teacher provides mandates 90 minutes ENL 
instruction to ELL's students who score below 40% in the LAB 
assessment. 
Parent coordinator provides workshops for ELL's parents. 
Translators are hired during Parent teacher conferences to 
translate for parents who speak a language that are not 
represented in the school. ENLS  
Parent engagement weekly during Tuesday afternoon sessions. 
Parent coordinator offers parent workshop on behavior 
modification.  
Teachers discuss strategies to positively assist their children ‘s 
behavior. 
Monthly Progress reports sent home monthly. 
Conduct sheet signed by parents. 
Open school parent conferences occur four times a year. 

Paraprofessionals, 
Science Teachers, 
technology teacher 
Guidance counselor, 
school Social 
Worker, Family 
Worker 

Guidance Counselor, 
Social Workers, ENL 
teacher, Alternate 
Placement Language 
Paraprofessionals, 
Crisis 
Paraprofessionals, 
Parent Volunteers, 
classroom Teachers 
District Guard. 
Parent coordinator, 
family workers, 
support staff:  
Contracting 
translators in Arabic, 
Hindi, Fulani 
For Parent Teacher 
Conferences 

 

 
 

 
3b – Parent and Family Engagement 

How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to 
support  the  whole  child?  Include  the  timeline  and  identify  key  personnel  and  stakeholders  responsible  for 
implementation and oversight. 
Parents will be updated on how the school will support students in and out of the class via parent meetings, Class 
DOJO, is a computer-based data and communication system, and via workshops about the curriculum their children 
are learning. Tuesday afternoon parental involvement activities, monthly progress reports . These types of activities 
will take place in an on-going fashion each month of the school year. The school held parent orientation on August 
31st for all incoming Kindergarten and sixth graders. Curriculum conference were held from 9:00 am to 11:00 am on 
September 13 and 14; Back to School Parent Teacher Conference will be held on Tuesday, September 26th from 5:00 
to 7:30 PM. The Parent coordinator sends home Parent Survey for parents to select the type of services that they 
want from the school and when is the best time to hold a workshop. She send home monthly calendar stating the 
activities for the specific month. The school will be walking in the Breast Cancer walk in October. We want our parents 
to feel that the school is their home away from home. 

 

 
Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          22 

 

Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including 
human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 

The safety team consists of the: Guidance Counselor, School Guard, Dean, Family worker, School Social 
Worker, School Psychologist, School Security Agents: Edward, Mc Clean, and Ford, The custodian, School 
Nurse, a member of the Cafeteria staff, a member of Success Academy and The Assistant Principal in charge 
of safety; these people are also involved in providing students emotional support in order to build students’ 
self-esteem . They are in contact with students’ teachers and parents on a regular basis and they meet 
frequently in addition to the monthly safety plan while addressing students’ emotional needs and how to 
keep the school safe and orderly. They collectively decide create structure to support students in order for 
them to function in s a safe environment.  
 
We will monitor the progress of this by: 
-Implementing positive behavior modification by raising students self-esteem 
-Conduct assemblies recognizing academic and social achievement on a monthly basis 
-Implement PBIS 
-Create different clubs for students as extra curricular activities 
-Involved parents by providing Cool Culture passes so that they can take their families to different cultural 
institutions 
-Students will be enriched by participating in trips that are aligned with the curriculum. 
-College Access for All. 
-Specialized High School preparation courses 
Financial literacy 
 
 
 
Suspension will be reduced by 50% or more. 
 

 
Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 

X 

X 

Tax Levy 

X 

Title I SWP 

C4E 

 

21st Century 

Grant 

 

 

 
Part 5 – Progress Monitoring  

Title I TA 

X 

Title II, 
Part A 

X 

Title III, 
Part A 

SIG 

 

PTA Funded 

 

In Kind 

X 

 

Title III, 

Immigrant 

Other 

Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement 
planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 
 

 

 

By February 2019 there will be a minimum of 50% reductions in suspensions, as compared to suspension logged in 
February of 2019 as evidenced by the OORS. There is already a low level of suspension throughout the school.. 
students are mostly engaged in academic programs that keep them engaged at all times. 

  
Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 
The instrument of measure will be OORS reports. The New York City MSOLS is also measurable instrument for 
students' progress. 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          23 

 

 

Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action 
plan, if applicable. 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          24 

 

Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans 

Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success 
and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional 
development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. 

 

Part 1 – Needs Assessment   

Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and 
formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not 
limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. 
Number responses accordingly. 
 
1.  What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element?  Indicate the data trends, source and year. 
2.  What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? 

Indicate the data trends, source and year. 

65 percent of the teachers scored effective in the Domain 3c on Danielson. 

A great foundation for classroom teachers is for teachers to continuously meet, plan, and discuss student academic 
progress, using the data to customize instruction to address student individual needs. Teachers will plan and 
collaborate during common planning times, Monday afternoon professional development , and Tuesday reflection/ 
family outreach time in order to address the diverse needs of the students. 

This collaboration will include teachers planning together, performing inter-visitations, demonstration lessons for one 
another, discussion and self-reflections of strengths and weaknesses to determine areas in need of improvement to 
adjust their practices accordingly. I will like to increase the amount of walk through that I perform to three times 
weekly in order to provide teachers feedback on a regular basis. 

 

 
Part 2 – Annual Goal 

Indicate  your  school’s  2018-19  goal  for  improving  student  outcomes  and  school  performance  that  addresses  this 
element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified 
priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-
bound. 

By June 2019, 80 % of our teachers will be using ATLAS Protocol while conducting inquiry approach teacher 
team meetings and professional development, as evidenced by their agendas and minutes. 
In addition to Atlas protocol, teachers will be using Data Wise where they will assess their notice and wondering 
as they analyze data. They will be able to identify areas of focus in students' instructional outcome. 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          25 

 
Part 3a – Action Plan 

Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies 
your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for 
this Framework for Great Schools element, including: 

  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional 

 

development, and/or systems and structures needed to 
impact change. 
Strategies to address the needs of students with 
disabilities, English language learners, and other high-
need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, 
SIFE, STH). 

(Domain 4E)To instruct grade leaders and other teachers to work 
collaboratively before and after school, planning and assessing 
instructional best practices. They will develop effective 
questioning techniques in Domain 3C in the Danielson teaching 
framework. 
(Domain 4E) To provide weekly common planning time for 
teachers to meet and plan throughout the school year according 
to grade levels and content areas. They will develop instructional 
bundles in literacy, Math , Social studies and science 
(Domain 3C) Initiate a school wide focus group to read and 
discuss The Art of Questioning: An Introduction to Critical 
Thinking by Daniel Framework to enhance teachers questioning 
techniques and writing across the curriculum.  
Domain 3D) Data driven Instruction.. How do teachers assess 
students progress during the delivery of the lesson and how to 
adjust the lesson in the future in adhering to the needs of 
individual student. 
(Domain 1A, 4E))To encourage the practice of study groups for 
all pedagogical staff in various content areas, including: 
curriculum alignment, using individual data to address students’ 
needs. The entire school community will be engaged in 
professional development base in improving writing across the 
curriculum and the arts of questioning. 

(Domain 4 A) To provide professional development for ENL 
teaching strategies to accommodate ENL’s learning styles and 
language acquisition and assimilation strategies.  
(Domain 1 A, 4E)To use content area focus groups to enhance 
teacher knowledge in; math, science, social studies, English 
language arts, technology, physical education, health, and arts 
and integrate the contents in literacy and writing. Content are 
teachers will be involved in continuous training in curriculum 
integration so that they become knowledgeable in implementing 
the Danielson teaching framework. 
(Domain 4E)To utilize Lead Instructional Specialist for literacy, 
special education and mathematics, to offer ongoing 
professional development to all of PS 138’s teachers in the 
content areas twice a month.  
(Domain 4E)To provide mentoring sessions using veteran 
teachers, to mentor newly hired teachers-helping them with 

Target 
Group(s) 
Who will be 
targeted? 

Timeline 
What is the 
start and 
end date? 

Key Personnel 
Who is responsible 
for implementing 
and overseeing the 
activity/strategy? 

September 
2017 to June 
2018 

All teachers 
will 
participate. 
 
 

Classroom 
teacher who 
has ELLS in 
their classes. 

September 
2017 to June 
2018 

Facilitators:School 
Administrators, 
Teacher Leaders, 
Coaches, ELL 
teacher, Special 
Education 
Coordinators, Parent 
Coordinator. 
 
 
 
Professional 
Development done 
by Classroom 
Teachers and 
Instructional 
Specialist 
 

The strategies will 
be instructed by the 
ENL teacher. The 
classroom teachers 
are responsible to 
provide 
accommodation for 
English Language 
Learners in order to 
effectively 
differentiate 
instruction. 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          26 

September 
2017 to June 
2018 

All 
pedagogical 
staff 
members , 
Parent 
Coordinator 
and parents 

Increase parental 
involvement and 
articulate strategies 
to teach their 
children. We want 
to create 
partnership with the 
parents. 
 
Parent Coordinator, 
Guidance Counselor, 
Family Worker, 
SBST, Teachers, 
Administration, 
Friends of Crown 
Heights, and the 
Medgar Evers 
Beacon Community 

 

planning, demonstrating lessons, and discussing and developing 
instructional plans together to meet the needs of all learners 
throughout the school year.  
(Domain 4E)To engage in continual professional development 
through the initiative of Columbia University, STEM, Council of 
Supervisors and Administrators (CSA), Literacy ambassadors, 
Mathematics ambassadors and other professional development 
organizations. 

Create parent/teacher partnerships through on-going, 
purposeful, and accountable dialogue and communication.  
Provide ways for parents to participate in their children’s 
learning through parent/teacher conferences, the school 
leadership team, parent volunteer program, and collaborative 
workshops in literacy and math where they are informed of 
specific knowledge and skills that students need in order to be 
successful and to be able to meet the new College Career 
Standards. 
Utilizing the Tuesday after school Parental Involvement time to 
reach out to parents and meet with parents to inform them 
about their children’s progress. 
Provide parent workshops given to inform them of the College 
Career Standards.  
Distribute monthly student progress reports which are used to 
update parents on their children’s’ academic performance. 
Parents will be trained and encouraged to use the Advanced 
data system.  
Provide professional development in regards to city, state, and 
federal standards.  
Encourage parents to share their expertise and to attend forums 
where they can ask, answer, and clarify questions pertaining to 
student achievement.  
Establish programs that will provide advice and training in 
regards to parenting skills both social and academic.  
Continue parent programs that allow them to join in classroom 
activities that include the following: reading books to the 
students, preparing materials and crafts for classroom activities, 
assisting students with painting and drawing materials, and 
visiting museums and other cultural institutions. Parents also 
help in creating and implementing the culminating activity. They 
will develop the literacy and art gallery where the students’ best 
writings, paintings, and drawings will be displayed for the 
enjoyment of the entire school community.  
Ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are 
utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in our 
Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact. 
Provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the  
accountability system, e.g., NCLB/State accountability system, 
student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress 
Report, Quality Review Report, and Learning Environment 
Survey Report.  
Schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, 
with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening. 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          27 

 

 
 

 
3b – Parent and Family Engagement 

How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies 
to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and 
identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. 
The school has an open door policy. From the beginning of the school year parents will be exposed to teacher teacher 
collaboration during the parent orientation sessions. Parents will take a school tour where they visit classrooms and 
ask teachers questions about their children's progress. Parents are engaged in their children's academic progress 
through progress report, sending lie data through Class DOJO, text messages, parent letters and School Messenger 
calls to parents regarding their children's progress. Multiple parent workshops are offered throughout the year 
morning evening and weekends to accommodate parents schedules.  

 

 
Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 

Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including 
human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 
P.S. 138 has a full time parent coordinator that works closely with parents in all of the grades. There are two family 
workers. One is in charge of attendance and communication with parents from grades K to 8. The other works solely 
with Pre-Kindergarten parents. There is also a Dean of Discipline issues at the school. There is also a Guidance 
Counselor who addresses behavior and academic issues as well. The Guidance Counselor works closely with parents 
throughout the year. The parents are also served by the School Based Support Team, School Psychologist, Social 
Worker and classroom teachers. 

 
Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 

 

 

Tax Levy 

X 

Title I SWP 

C4E 

 

21st Century 

Grant 

 
Part 5 – Progress Monitoring  

X 

X 

Title I TA 

SIG 

 

 

Title II, 
Part A 

PTA Funded 

 

 

Title III, 
Part A 

In Kind 

X 

 

Title III, 

Immigrant 

Other 

Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement 
planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 
 
By February 2019, a minimum of 60 % of our teachers will be using ATLAS Protocol while conducting inquiry approach 
teacher team meetings and professional development, as evidenced by their agendas and minutes. 
 
Teacher will use the information that they discover after analyzing their students' data to formulate instructional 
groups . They will reconvene every six weeks to make the necessary adjustment. 
 
Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 
Teacher team agendas, minutes, sample of student work and evidence of Flexible grouping in classrooms.. 

 

Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action 
plan, if applicable. 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          28 

 

Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans 

 

Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and 
nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional 
support that drives student achievement. 
 
Part 1 – Needs Assessment   

Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and 
formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not 
limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. 
Number responses accordingly. 
 
1.  What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element?  Indicate the data trends, source and year. 
2.  What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? 

Indicate the data trends, source and year. 

The school received a Well-developed rating in the Quality Review Indicators 1.1, 1.2, 2.2, and 3.4. We received a 
proficient in the Quality Review Indicator 4.2. 

1.1 

The school is doing extremely well in the area of curriculum and instruction. P. S. 138 scored a Well-developed Rating 
in Curriculum and Instruction. School leaders and faculty ensure that curricula are aligned to the Common Core and 
strategically integrate the instructional shifts. Curricula and academic tasks are planned and refined using student 
data. Schools leaders and the school community ensure engaging rigorous and coherent curricula in all subjects, 
accessible for a variety of learners and aligned to Common Core learning Standards and all content learning 
standards. 

 

1.2. We were celebrated by the Quality Reviewer for our ability to engage students in learning. Across the vast 
majority of classrooms , teaching practices strategically provide multiply entry points, and high-quality support 
extensions to the curricular. Student work products in decision reflect high level of thinking thinking and participation. 

 

All learners including ELL's and students with SWD's are engaged in appropriately challenging task and demonstrate 
higher-order thinking skills and ownership in student work product. 

 

2.2 School Assessment 

The school uses common assessments to create a clear picture of student progress toward goals across grades and 
subjects. ,tracks progress, and adjust curricular and instructional decision. Across the vast majority of classrooms 
teachers assessment practices consistently reflect the varied use of ongoing checks for understanding and student 
self-assessment. 

 

3.4 High Expectation 

School leaders consistently communicate high expectation to the entire staff and provide training. School leaders and 
staff effectively communicate expectations connected to a path to college and career readiness, and provide focused 
feedback to all students. Impact a culture of mutual accountability for high expectations exist at this school. The 
school has successfully partnered with family to support student progress towards those expectations. All students 
own their educational experience and are aware of their next learning steps. 

 

4.2 We scored a Proficient in Teacher Teams and Leadership Development 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          29 

 

Teacher teams consistently analyze assessment data and student work for students on whom they are focused, 
Distributed leadership structures are in place within this school. Team analysis of assessment data and student work 
has work has resulted in improved teacher practice and progress toward goals for groups of students; however, 
regular documentation of the team's discussions to connect team participation in collaborative work to 
improvements in teacher practice is not systematic. Teachers have built leadership capacity and have a voice in key 
decisions that affect student learning across the school. 

We need to improve in following the Atlas Protocol during our Professional Development activities. This procedure 
will enable us to properly analyze data in order to adjust the curriculum to meet all students needs. 

with the school and outside agencies should the parent need additional assistance. Teachers communicate with 
parents through text message, email, telephone, and letters. Parents feel like they are welcome, and they view the 
school as part of their family. 

 

 
Part 2 – Annual Goal 

Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this 
element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the 
identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, 
and Time-bound. 

By June 2019 P.S. 138 will show a 5 % increase in the ELA and math scores, as evidenced by the New York state 
exam results. 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          30 

 
Part 3a – Action Plan 

Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies 
your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for 
this Framework for Great Schools element, including: 

  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional 
development, and/or systems and structures needed 
to impact change. 
Strategies to address the needs of students with 
disabilities, English language learners, and other high-
need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-
credited, SIFE, STH). 

 

P.S. 138 uses Ready Gen, Go Math, CMP3 and Codex as its 
instructional programs. Teachers were trained for 2 
consecutive years in these programs during the Summer and 
throughout the school year. These programs allow teachers to 
utilize effective research based instructional program while 
they teach their students.  
 
School administrators were also trained in using Ready Gen, Go 
math, CMP3 and Codex. The administrative staff along with the 
professional development and assessment team were trained 
in Advanced, MOSL and collaborative planning. 

The school is committed in offering the best educational 
experience to all of its pupils. We do that by collaborating 
among ourselves. 

  Principal conducts cabinet meetings with her assistant 

principals 

  The School Leadership Team meets twice a month 
  Grade level planning conducted by grade leaders 
  Principal meets with Parent Coordinator, Family 

Workers and Dean to plan for parent events 

  Principal collaborating with other principals in District 

17 to observe best practices 

  Principal meeting with grade leaders to share 

information with them in order to share information 
with the grade leaders to turn key the information with 
other teachers 

  Teachers use the ATLAS Protocol to analyze data and 

adequately plan for diverse groups of students in their 
classes, ENL's, SWD, STH and gifted students  

  Principal meet with the school leadership team 
member. To discuss vital information relating to 
curriculum and instruction and school environment. 
They plan together throughout the school year and 
play a vital role in writing the Comprehensive 
Educational Plan (CEP). 

  Principals work with assistant principals to convey her 

vision and plan accordingly for the benefit of all 

Target 
Group(s) 
Who will be 
targeted? 

Timeline 
What is the 
start and 
end date? 

Key Personnel 
Who is responsible 
for implementing 
and overseeing the 
activity/strategy? 

All classroom 
teachers and 
administrators. 

September 
2017-June 
2018 

Principal, Assistant 
Principals, Teacher 
Leaders, Coaches 
and Parent 
Coordinator 

September 
2017-2018 

Principals, Assistant 
Principals, Lead 
Teachers, Parent 
Coordinator, Family 
Worker and Dean of 
Discipline 

All classroom 
Teachers, 
Assistant 
Principals, 
parents, 
School Based 
Support Team 
(SBST), and 
students. 

 

 

September 
2017-June 
2018 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          31 

students: ENL's, SWD's, STH and the Gifted and 
Talented. 

  The school has instructional teams that meet on 

regular basis that plan curriculum teams, Data Teams, 
Professional Development Team, Response to 
Intervention Team, School Based Support Team, School 
Leadership Team, MOSL Team, Positive Behavior Team 
and Enforcement Team 

 

 

 
 

 
3b – Parent and Family Engagement 

How  will  your  school  engage  parents/families  and  support  their  understanding  of  Effective  School  Leadership  and 
strategies  to  promote  parent  leadership  and  engagement  in  order  to  support  their  children  at  home?  Include  the 
timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. 
PS 138 will continuously engage families in their children education by providing them literature that clarifies the type 
of instruction being offered in the school, The school will offer parent workshops in multiple subjects to educate 
parents on pertinent information that they need in order for them to assist their children. The school will send 
parents monthly publications in regards to the school; progress report, monthly calendar, school news letters, school 
celebration. They are communicated through school DOJO, email, school web cite, mass phone calls and te 

 

 
Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 
Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including 
human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 

This goal is achievable to multi-usage of resources. Staff are trained in many areas to facilitate the use of their 
talents. the following staff are available: Assistant Principal, Math Coaches, Grade Leaders, ENL Teacher, 
Dean, Parent Coordinator and Family Workers.  

 
Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 

X 

X 

Tax Levy 

X 

Title I SWP 

C4E 

 

21st Century 

Grant 

 

 

Title I TA 

SIG 

 

 

Title II, 
Part A 

X 

Title III, 
Part A 

PTA Funded 

 

In Kind 

 

 

Title III, 

Immigrant 

Other 

 
Part 5 – Progress Monitoring  

Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement 
planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 
By February 2018, there will be a minimum of 3% increase in students performance, as evidenced by our most recent 
MOSL results. 
  
Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 
The instrument will be the mid-year MOSL results. 

 

Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action 
plan, if applicable. 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          32 

 

Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans 

 
Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a 
welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. 
 
Part 1 – Needs Assessment   

Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and 
formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not 
limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. 
Number responses accordingly. 
 
1.  What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element?  Indicate the data trends, source and year. 
2.  What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? 

Indicate the data trends, source and year. 

 

P.S. 138 has several strengths. We have a strong PTA organization that works with the parent coordinator, teacher 
staff, and administration to service the entire school community. They work with family workers, instructional 
specialists, and outside consultants to provide workshops for the parent population of the school. They attend 
training offered by the district and outside organizations to broaden their curriculum knowledge, behavior 
modification, and other important issues. They conduct PTA meetings on a monthly basis in collaboration with the 
Beacon Crown Heights Program. They have a monthly newsletter that highlights important school events. Parent 
leaders volunteer in classrooms, the cafeteria, and in the assistance of school personnel, daily. The parents are highly 
aware of pertinent school data relating to test scores, attendance, the school’s snapshot, CEP, and budget. They are 
an integral part of the school. They make up fifty percent of the School Leadership Team. They are advocates for 
student learning and they help other parents in need of assistance. They also participate in fund raising activities to 
defray the costs of graduation, trips, and unforeseen expenses. P.S. 138 is their home away from home. They feel 
comfortable being here. We scored a well-developed, on the Quality Review, in Parental Involvement. The parent 
survey indicates that 93% of our parents are satisfied with the instructional core. 90 % are satisfied with our system 
for improvement, and 88% show satisfaction with school culture. Although, the data indicates that we surpass the city 
average in our school survey, we still recognize that there is need for further improvement of our school culture.  

 

 
Part 2 – Annual Goal 

Indicate  your  school’s  2018-19  goal  for  improving  student  outcomes  and  school  performance  that  addresses  this 
element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the 
identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and 
Time-bound.  
By June 2019, we will have achieved a minimum of 10% increase in parents who respond to the NYC School Survey.  

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          33 

 
Part 3a – Action Plan 

Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies 
your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for 
this Framework for Great Schools element, including: 

  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional 

 

development, and/or systems and structures needed to 
impact change. 
Strategies to address the needs of students with 
disabilities, English language learners, and other high-
need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, 
SIFE, STH). 

Target 
Group(s) 
Who will be 
targeted? 

Timeline 
What is the 
start and 
end date? 

Key Personnel 
Who is responsible 
for implementing 
and overseeing the 
activity/strategy? 

1. Everyone – Those persons having needs will be 
provided resources both socially and educationally 

All 

Sept. 2017-
2018 

1. Disabilities – Parents and students will be given 
services to meet their individual needs 

Persons who 
meet the 
criteria 

Sept. 2017-
2018 

1. English Language Learners – Parents will be informed 
of services (including workshops) available to them. 
Translators will be provided as needed 

ELL Students 
& Parents 

Sept. 2017-
2018 

1. Shelter Students – Parents and Students who meet 
criteria will be informed of all resources available to 
them  

Students & 
Parents 

Sept. 2017-
2018 

Parent Cord., Family 
Workers, Guidance 
Counselor, Parent 
Teacher Association 
(PTA), Parent 
Advisory Council ( 
PAC), Instructional & 
Support Staff 

Parent Cord., Family 
Workers, Guidance 
Counselor, PTA, PAC, 
Instructional & 
Support Staff 

Parent Cord., Family 
Workers, Guidance 
Counselor, PTA, PAC, 
Instructional & 
Support Staff 

Parent Cord., Family 
Workers, Guidance 
Counselor, PTA, PAC, 
Instructional & 
Support Staff 

 
 

 
3b – Parent and Family Engagement 

If  any,  list  the  Community  Based  Organizations  or  other  partnerships  that  support  parent/family  and  community 
engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. 
The Medgar Evers College Beacon program provides after school services to 400 students and their family members. 
The program is in operation six days a week. The instructors assist their students with their homework. Students are 
also engaged in extra curricular activities which include but not limited to ; dance, technology, sign language, chess , 
arts, basketball, soccer, chess, chorus, cooking and other activities. They also help the parents and other members of 
the community by offering adult classes in technology, General Education Degree (GED) and English As a Second 
Language. Friend of Crown Heights offers a STEM after school program for the middle school population. .  

 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          34 

 
Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 

Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including 
human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 

Quite a few staff will be involve in this initiative: Parent coordinator, Guidance counselor, Family worker, 
Dean, School Leadership Team (SLT), Principal, class room teachers and the technology specialist. 

 

Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 

X 

Tax Levy 

X 

Title I SWP 

 

C4E 

 

21st Century 

Grant 

 
Part 5 – Progress Monitoring  

 

 

Title I TA 

SIG 

 

 

Title II, 
Part A 

 

Title III, 
Part A 

PTA Funded 

X 

In Kind 

X 

 

Title III, 

Immigrant 

Other 

Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement 
planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 
By February 2019, there will be a minimum of 10% increase in the number of parents responding to the school 
survey, as evidenced by survey forms 
 

Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 
School-created survey 

 

Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action 
plan, if applicable. 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          35 

 

Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS)  

(Required for All Schools) 

  

Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services 
(AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records 
need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area 
listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. 
 

Type of Academic 
Intervention Service 
(AIS) 

English Language 
Arts (ELA) 

Mathematics 

Type of program or 
strategy (e.g. 
repeated readings, 
interactive writings, 
etc.) 

Pre-K-5 will use 
)Ready Gen, Other 
literacy books based 
on Fountas and 
Pinnell. Grades 6-8 
will use Code X 
 
Students read 
individual Novels and 
book of the month in 
addition to reading 
Ready Gen and Code 
X. 
 

CMP3 and Go Math 
And materials from 
Engaged New York. 
 

Criteria for 
determining AIS 
services (For 
additional guidance, 
refer to NYSED’s 
memo.) 
Students who are 
functioning one or 
more years below 
level in N.Y. State ELA 
Exam, DRA, or the 
MOSL.. 28% are Level 
1. 
 
English language 
Learners who need to 
become English 
proficient. 50% of 
ENL's need to 
become English 
proficient. 
 
Students with 
learning disabilities. 
27% of SWD Level 1 
Students with 
emotional problems. 
 
1Students are 
identified for AIS in 
Mathematics based 
on their functional 
levels indicated by NY 
State Math 
assessment, MOSL, 
Unit Test and other 
unofficial 
assessments. 
26% scored Level 1 
  

Science 

Students who are 
functions below level 

Pre-K - 5 Hartcourt 
Brace, grade6-8 

Method for delivery 
of service (e.g. small 
group, one-to-one, 
tutoring, etc.) 

When the service is 
provided (e.g. during 
the school day, 
before or after 
school, etc.) 

Tiered One activities 
which is whole class 
focusing on data-
driven instruction. 
Small group 
instruction provided 
by service providers. 
 
 
Students are also 
involved in blended 
learning wherethey 
research for 
individual 
assignments. 
Studentsread 
independently on 
theirlexilelevels from 
from Achieve 3000. 
 

Whole class focusing 
on data driven 
differentiated 
instruction, small 
group instruction and 
one-to-one. 
 
Go math and CMP3 
are available on line 
as well for additional 
practice. Teacher 
incorporate engaged 
NY materials for 
additional practice. 
 
Not applicable. 
Science teachers 
tutor students who 

Regular teaching 
hours, before and 
after school. 
 

Regular teaching 
hours, before and 
after school. 
 

During teacher 
preparation time or 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          36 

Social Studies 

At-risk services (e.g. 
provided by the 
Guidance Counselor, 
School Psychologist, 
Social Worker, etc.) 

 

 

indicated by the 
fourth grade ILSPT. 
2% scored below 
grade level. 
 
Students who 
perform below level 
in the MOSL. 
!4% of the students 
scored below level in 
the MOSL. 
 
 
 
 
  
Students who are 
showing difficulty 
adjusting 
emotionally. 
2% of the students 
receivemandated 
counseling and .4% of 
those students 
receiveat risk 
counseling. 
 

Glencoe Science, 
McGuire Hill 
 

don’t show progress 
in science. 
 

after school on a 
voluntary base. 
 

During Social Studies 
instruction. 
 

During the regular 
school day. 
 

Social Studies 
teacher integrates 
Social Studies with 
literacy and math 
when applicable. 
Students use 
technology to 
research different 
topics in Social 
Studies. 
 

Push in and pull out 
for academic 
intervention as per 
academic and 
emotional needs. 
 

Grades 6-8 use 
Prentice Hall 
 

Counseling small 
groups, and 
individual for 
mandate and non-
mandated students. 
 
The at risk students 
receivecounseling by 
the social worker.  
 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          37 

 

Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH)  

 

Directions: 
-  All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. 
-  All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. 
 
Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) 
As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the 
federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and 
report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support 
your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: 
http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf   

Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 

 

1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your 
school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE 
systems and may change over the course of the year.) 

75 
Students in 
Temporary 
houses. 

 

2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. 

I have a nurse on site designated just for them. The school social worker and the Guidance counselor also work with 
them. The Parent coordinator makes home visit and provide them additional information regarding their children. The 
school provide uniforms and book bags for the pupils.. 

 

Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 

1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your 
school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). 

There are 
75 STH 
students 
attending 
the school. 
The STH 
received 
assistance 
by having 
having bus 
service 
from their 
homes to 
the school. 
Their 
absences 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          38 

 

are very 
closely 
monitored 
by the 
family 
worker. 
They 
attendance 
visits their 
homes on a 
regular 
basis. 
There is an 
additional 
nurse 
assigned to 
the school 
that 
provides 
support for 
the STH 
students. 
The parent 
coordinator 
contact 
CBOs to 
provide 
additional 
supports to 
STH 
parents. 
We provide 
school 
supplies 
and 
uniform to 
the STH 
families. 
The STH 
students 
are invited 
to all after 
school 
activities 
and Test 
preparation 
classes. The 
guidance 
counsellors 
plays a vital 
role in 
offering at 
risk 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          39 

2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 

The allocation will be used to purchase students material in order for them to function in school; book bags, 
notebook, pencils. crayons, paper, uniforms, and other necessities for school. 

 

counselling 
to students 
as needed. 

 

3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary 
housing.  If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation 
Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question.  If your school did not receive an allocation 
and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. 

$4,613 

 

 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          40 

 

Directions: 

Section 8: Title I Program Information  

 

  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1. 
  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2. 
  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3. 
  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4. 
 

If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response 
can be found. 

  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. 

 
Part 1: Title I Status 

Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. 

X 

Schoolwide Program (SWP) 

 

Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools  

 

Non-Title I 

 
Part 2: All Title I Schools 

2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) 

Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support 
including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. 
P.S. 138 collaborates with higher education institutions such as: Medgar Evers College, Long Island University, Pace, 
Columbia University and other colleges by allowing student teacher and other educators time for their internships. 
They sometimes volunteers after graduating in order to gain additional experience. The administrative staff works 
with these interns and has a pool of teachers available to select in case there is a vacancy. 
 

 
2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development 

Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, 
paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS).  
The Professional Development team met during the summer of 2015. They planned the topics that they will cover 
during the academic year of 2015-2016. They also created a calendar for the entire school year. 

  The Math Coach will provide continuous professional development to staff reviewing common core. 
  The Reading Coach will work will work with the early childhood staff. 
  Mentor teachers will mentor newly hired teachers. 
  Teachers will perform inter-visitation of their peers and other schools. 
  Teachers will perform demonstration lesson for their peers and teacher of other schools. 
  Teachers attending content specific professional development. 
  Teachers will reflect on their practices. 

 

 
Part 3: TA Schools Only 

3a. Use of Program Resources 

Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. 
P.S. 138 is a SWP School. 
 

 
3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program 

Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., 
providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from 
the regular classroom during regular school day). 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          41 

 

Team was assembled for the purpose of deciding on the measures of student learning to be adopted by PS138 K. The 
team is comprised of 60% teaching staff and 40% administrative staff. 50% of the team was selected by the UFT chair 
and 50% was selected by the Principal. In July, the MOSL team members attended the ADVANCE training workshop. 
The workshop provided the team the training necessary to make MOSL selections that were appropriate for PS138K. 
Upon returning to school in September the MOSL team met and made its decisions on the measures that were 
adopted for the staff of PS138K. In addition the staff voted to set aside 50 minutes each week for professional 
development in implementing the Common Core Learning Standards, and the use of assessment data to inform 
instruction. During the professional development teachers are grouped according to grade levels and work 
collaboratively to streamline instruction to meet their student’s needs and the requirements of the common core. 
 

 
 
 
 
 
Part 4: SWP Schools Only 

4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only)  

Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary 
school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early 
intervention services, etc.). 
Children go through many transitions throughout their lives, but one of the most important transitions is the one from 
a Pre-Kindergarten Program to Kindergarten. At P. S. 138, we have initiated the following activities to ensure that the 
students as well as their parents undergo a smooth transition from one setting to the next, 

●Domain 2a and 4d During the Months of May and June, we schedule tours of our on site 
kindergarten classrooms. At that time, the students and their teachers visit the classrooms, meet the 
kindergarten staff and share in a joint class activity (such as a read aloud) with the each kindergarten 
class. In addition, the students also visit the cafeteria, library, and computer lab and other pertinent 
aspects of the building. 
● Domain 4c Parents are encouraged to attend New York City Department of Education City wide 
forum on “Moving from Pre-Kindergarten to Kindergarten, which is held 4 times during the year.  
● Domain 4c Parents are also encouraged to attend the DOE Pre-K Common Core Foundation, which 
is held 3 times a year. 
● Domain 1b and 4c The family worker and parent coordinator present workshops to familiarize the 
pre-kindergarten parents with the expectations that their children must meet in order to be 
successful in kindergarten. 
● Domain 4c At the end of the school year, students are given books in a bag centered around 
transition from Pre-Kindergarten to Kindergarten. Parents are encouraged to read these books over 
the summer as they begin to prepare their children for kindergarten. 

 

 
4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments 

Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate 
multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to 
improve instruction.    
The MOSL Team meets continuously doing the spring to research the best assessment measure that they wanted in 
order to benefit all students while keeping track of their academic growth during the school year. They selected the 
Growth Model as their MOSL selection so students’ academic growth can be measured during the school year from 
baseline assessments, benchmarks, and final assessment in May. In addition to the MOSL selection, students from 
Kindergarten to the second grade take the DRA at the beginning of the school year and the end of the school year. 
The remainder of the student population grades 3 to 8 takes the Achieve 3000 assessment system in ELA. Teachers 
assess students at the end of each unit of studies in ELA, Math, Science, and Social Studies.  
Professional Development  
Members of the MOSL Team attended professional development session on MOSL sponsored by Tweed, 
Assessment Department, and the Field Support Center level on:  

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          42 

 

-Analyzing Data 
-The Bottom Third 
-Differentiated Instruction 
-ENL 
Special Education 
Team members turn keyed the information that they obtained to other staff members. Teachers were able to 
create differentiated groups for instructional purposes. They were able to analyze students’ progress and work on 
appropriate lessons in addressing students need. As a result, student engagement practices increased and the 
students mastered the intended instruction skills at a faster rate. 
 

 
4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools 

Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and 
Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible 
for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide 
plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the 
consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and 
purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, 
and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount 
each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the 
intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. 
Program Name 

Fund Source 
(i.e. Federal, 
State or Local) 

Funding Amount 
Indicate the amount 
contributed to 
Schoolwide pool. 
(Refer to Galaxy for 
school allocation 
amounts) 

Place an (X) in Column A below to verify 
that the school has met the intent and 
purposes of each program whose funds are 
consolidated.  Indicate in Column B, section 
references where a related program activity 
has been described in this plan. 

Column A 

Column B 

Verify with an (X) 

Section Reference(s) 

 

X  

X  

x  

X  

X  

 

 

 

 

Title I Part A (Basic) 

Title II, Part A 

Title III, Part A 

Title III, Immigrant 

Tax Levy (FSF) 

Federal 

Federal 

Federal 

Federal 

Local 

417,308 

 
142,847 

 
0 

 
12,366 

 
3,251,394 

 

 
1Explanation/Background: 
Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and 
programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and 
advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools 
may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, 
State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This 
gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students.   
 
Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a 
single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual 
identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool 
to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds 
used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          43 

 
which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to 
combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used 
conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the 
dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds.  
 
Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages: 

  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program 

separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different 
sources when accounting for their use. 

  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the 

statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., 
semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent 
and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended 
beneficiaries are met. 

 
2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as 
follows: 

  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to 
improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes 
provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH). 

  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement 

plans that aims to  improve instruction and address the identified needs  

  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in 

grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not 
available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional 
program. 

  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, 
develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and 
achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another 
purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-
quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in 
effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the 
participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language 
instruction programs. 

  Title III Immigrant:  Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of 

English language acquisition and content area achievement. 

 
Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated: 

  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and 
programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent 
representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities 
funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with 
student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. 
IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education 
designed to meet their individual needs. 

 

  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by 

the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 

 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          44 

 

Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)  

 (Required for All Title I Schools) 

 

Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and 
representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will 
participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I 
program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson 
that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the 
parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school 
will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic 
achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family 
Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. 
 
The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current 
S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent 
Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent 
involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen 
family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy.  
 
Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample 
Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) 
as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. 
 
 

Parent and Family Engagement Policy 

 

Parent Involvement Policy (PIP) 

Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. 
The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of 
parents and community in the school. PS 138K, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every 
Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen 
the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is 
designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the 
education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent 
Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community.  

 

 

Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students 

P.S. 138 will support parents and families of Title I students by: 

  Providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, 

e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology. 

  Providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and 

 

decision making in support of the education of their children. 
Fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and 
monitor their child’s progress. 

  providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 
 

Sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and 
in languages that parents can understand. 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          45 

 

  Providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve 
outreach, communication skills, and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and 
other members of the school community. 

The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based on a careful assessment parents/guardians, including 
parents/guardians’ ELL needs and that of students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual 
evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the 
academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation, through school surveys and feedback forms, will be 
used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and to enhance the school’s Title I program. 
This information will be maintained by the school. 

 

Parental Involvement and School Quality 

In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the 
school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership 
Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for 
additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: 

  Actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review, and evaluation of the effectiveness of the 

school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the 
implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact. 

  Engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated 

directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills. 

  Ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and 

 

strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact. 
Support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the 
Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing 
technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills. 

  Maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and 
families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the 
assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school 
environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of 
events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office. 

  Conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational 

accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and 
support services; and technology training to build parent capacity to help their children at home. 

  Provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State 

accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality 
Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report. 

  Host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before, December 1st, of each school year to advise 

parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right 
to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 
and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA). 
Schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the 
morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the 
Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions. 

 

  Translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed. 
  Conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event, wherein all parents are invited to attend formal presentations 

and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help. 

 

Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement 

The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          46 

 

 

  Holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference. 
  Hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school 

year. 

  Encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent- 

Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. 
Supporting or hosting Family Day events. 

 
  Establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library with instructional materials for parents. 
  Encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers. 
  Providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their 

children’s progress. 

  Developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about 

school activities and student progress. 

  Providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a 

format, and to the extent practicable, in the languages that parents can understand. 

School-Parent Compact (SPC) 

P.S. 138K, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is 
implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between 
the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, 
agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for 
improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure 
that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. 

 

I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum 

Provide high-quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating 
children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by, 

respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; 
implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; 

  using academic learning time efficiently; 
 
 
  offering high-quality instruction in all content areas; 
  providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required 

by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), 

 

I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships 

Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: 

  Conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be 

discussed as well as how this Compact is related. 

  Convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students 
participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their 
right to be involved. 

  Arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and 

funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting. 

  Respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation 

services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education. 

  Providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents 
of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand. 
Involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent 
Involvement Policy and this Compact. 

 

  Providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment 

results for each child and other pertinent individual school information. 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          47 

 

 

  Ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with 

parents each year. 

Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: 

I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff 

  Ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited 

English speaking parents. 

  Notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff 

member. 

  Arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and 

to observe classroom activities. 

  Planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences. 

 

Provide general support to parents by: 

I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents 

  Creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful 

environment for parents and guardians 

  Assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor 
their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that 
the majority of parents can attend). 
Sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all 
members of the school community. 
Supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents. 

 
  Ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as 

 

described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy. 

  Advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and 

consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs. 

 

Parent/Guardian Responsibilities: 

II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities 

  Monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the 

appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent. 

  Ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child 

and his/her age. 

  Check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary. 
  Read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes). 
 
  Promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports 

Set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games. 

and/or quality family time. 

  Encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child. 
  Volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits. 
  Participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education. 
  Communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by 

prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district. 

  Respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested. 
  Become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement 

Policy and this Compact. 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          48 

  Participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to 

learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible. 

  Take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on 

advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams. 
Share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child. 

 

 

 

P.S. 138 strives to have an effective relationship with its parents, creating an environment that is positive. This 
attitude creates positively throughout the entire school community. The school’s policy was designed to keep parents 
abreast of all activities involving their children, educationally and socially. Parents are involved in planning and 
decision making that supports the education of their children. They actively participate on The School Leadership 
Team, Parent Association, and the Title 1 Parent Committee. 

P.S. 138 will effectively work as one body (school staff, students, parent and community), 

  Parents will share responsibility for improved student achievement 
  Parents will ask for resources that will benefit parents and children 

Provide general support to parents by: 

 

Sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration, and partnering will all 
members of the school community. 
Supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents. 

 
  Ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as 

described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy. 

  Advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and 

consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs. 

  Holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference. 
  Hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school 

year. 

  Encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-

Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. 
Supporting or hosting Family Day events. 

 
  Establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents. 
  Hosting events to support, men asserting leadership in education for their children, parents/guardians, 

grandparents, and foster parents. 

  Encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers. 
  Providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their 

child’s progress. 

  Developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about 

school activities and student progress. 

  Providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a 

format, and to the extent practicable, in the languages that parents can understand 

 

Student Responsibilities: 

III. Student Responsibilities 

  Attend school regularly and arrive on time. 
  Complete my homework and submit all assignments on time. 
Follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions. 
 
Show respect for myself, other people and property. 
 
  Try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully. 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          49 

 

 

 
 
 
 

  Always try my best to learn. 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          50 

 

Division of English Language Learners and Student Support 
Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 
52 Chambers Street, Room 209  
New York, New York 10007 
Phone:  212-374-6072 
http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY 
Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components: 

 

 

  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high 

academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas.  

o  The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need 
o  These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154.  
o  Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. 
o  Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.   

  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on 

the teachers’ performance in classrooms.”  

o  Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term 

workshops and conferences.  

  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet 

community needs.   

o  These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process.  

 
NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional 
development, and 20% to OTPS.   
  
For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and 
Performance Specialist.  Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30.   
 

Part A: School Information 
Name of School:            
This school is (check 
one): 
 

DBN:            

conceptually consolidated (skip part E below)                
NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below)     

 

Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information  
The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): 

Before school                After school             

Saturday academy        

Total # of ELLs to be served:            
Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply):  

1       
7       

2       
8       

K       
6       

4         
10       
Total # of teachers in this program:            
# of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers:            
# of content area teachers:            

3       
9       

5 
11       

12 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          51 

 

Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information  
Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the 

rationale 

 
  subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  
  schedule and duration 
 
language of instruction 
  # and types of certified teachers 
 

types of materials  

Begin description here:            
                                                                                                                                              Rationale: 
 
At P.S. 138, the Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs is a strong, student-centered program 
designed to enhance the academic performance of our students.  The program supplements 
mandated instruction for ELLs enrolled in general education and special education 
classes.  Students actively attend our Title III Academy's before school and after school 
programs.   The Title III program enables the certified ENL teacher and common branch teacher to 
provide standard-based instruction that addresses each student’s academic, linguistic and socio-
emotional needs.  As a student-centered program, instructional services are aligned with students’ 
IEPs and individual data-driven goals with supporting action plans.  Instructional services have 
been revised to incorporate the use of the Common Core Learning Standards and Universe by 
Design in ENL instruction across the academic curriculum. 
Balanced literacy and second language acquisition methodologies are used to develop the 
students’ skills in listening, speaking, reading and writing. This intensive instructional approach 
strives to develop the linguistic and literacy skills of students by incorporating a number of 
activities, such as, read-aloud, shared reading, guided reading, interactive reading, phonics, writing 
mechanics, shared writing, modeled writing and independent writing.  In addition, students are 
engaged in standard-based activities in order to build upon their social, academic and cultural 
experiences. Students at varied levels of English language acquisition are encouraged to work 
together in engaging critical thinking groups.  This cooperative learning style supports group 
assessment in conjunction with individual accountability through their participation and 
work.  Students receive supplementary instruction in the following academic subjects: ELA, math, 
social studies and science.  Students’ academic needs are addressed in order to prepare them for 
standard-based, grade level instruction. 
 
Instruction is driven by formative and summative assessment data.  With the support of the 2017- 
2018 Title III Grant, our ELLs made academic progress on the NYSESLAT.  Thirty-five percent 
of ELLs advanced from the transitioning level of language acquisition to the expanding level of 
language acquisition.  Sixty percent of ELLs showed growth at the entering and emerging levels of 
English language acquisition.  The continued funding of the Title III Grant is needed to enhance 
our students’ academic performance. Our ENL teachers address the academic needs of each 
student by aligning instruction for ELLs who are scheduled to take the Common Core ELA and 
math assessments.  Throughout the program, the teachers assess the students’ academic progress 
in ELA, math and science by developing and maintaining data portfolios.      
   
Title III Academy incorporates the Achieve3000, RIGOR Program, AWARD Reading Program 
and ReadWorks into the instructional format.  Each student’s Lexile reading level is used by the 
online Achieve3000 program and print-based RIGOR program to drive instruction.  Achieve3000 
effectively develops our students' comprehension skills through differentiated instruction of 
nonfiction and fiction texts.  The RIGOR Program is designed for SIFE students and ELLs who 
read below grade level.  This program develops students’ phonemic awareness, comprehension 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          52 

 

Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information  
and vocabulary development.   The AWARD Reading Program is an online, research based 
program that is designed to improve students’ fluency and reading comprehension skills.  It is a 
program that actively engages the students with animated stories from a wide array of 
multicultural books.  The AWARD Reading Program supports the Common Core State 
Standards.   The Achieve 3,000 curriculum provides research-based units, lessons and texts that 
are aligned to the Common Core State Standards. Achieve 3,000 gives students the opportunity to 
develop their reading comprehension and analytical skills by exploring both informational and 
literary texts.  The high-interest literary passages are supported with evidence-based question 
sets.  As our students read with a purpose, they become critical thinkers with the ability to 
comprehend and analyze texts that are written in their new language. 
This year, the Title III Academy will have a multicultural arts fair that highlights unique crafts and 
objects from each student’s culture.  Students will use materials obtained from the Materials for 
the Arts to create multicultural arts and crafts to display.  Students will utilize their background 
knowledge, conduct research and interview relatives in order to write descriptions of their 
crafts.  As students work collaboratively on the projects, their speaking, listening, reading and 
writing skills will be developed and enhanced.  The project will culminate with a dynamic 
multicultural arts and craft fair.  At the fair, students will present themselves as cultural experts as 
they interact with other students and staff members.    
     
Subgroups and Grade Levels:  
The ENLs population consists of students who are enrolled in general education classes, inclusion 
classes and special education classes.  There are currently 48 ENLs in grades K - 8.  Seven 
students with interrupted formal education and five long term ENLs are participants in the 
program.  An additional eight former ENLs are encouraged to participate in the program for a total 
of 55 ENLs.   Title III Academy consists of three classes.  One class is designed for 15 early 
childhood students in grades K to 2.  Another class is designed for 19 elementary school students 
in grades 3 to 5.   The other class is designed for 21 middle school students in grades 6 -to 8.  
 
Schedule and Duration: 
Title III Academy will be implemented for seven months, beginning in November 2018 and 
ending in May 2019.  Early childhood and elementary students are scheduled to attend 
supplementary classes from 7:30 AM to 8:30 AM.  Classes are held from Mondays to 
Thursdays.  Early childhood students in grades K to 2 will attend classes on Mondays and 
Wednesdays.  Elementary students will attend classes on Tuesdays and Thursdays.  The ENL 
teacher will provide instruction during the morning program.  The middle school students will 
attend after-school classes on Wednesdays and Thursdays from 2:50 PM to 4:50 PM.   Both, the 
ENL teacher and common branch teacher will teach during the after school classes.  Flexibility is 
embedded in the schedule for siblings in various grade bands.   
 
Language of Instruction:  
P.S. 138’s Title III Academy is conducted in English.  Language of instruction is designed to 
develop academic language skills and content knowledge in English.  Home language(s) support is 
used to enhance students’ academic vocabulary and comprehension.  Students continuously use 
bilingual dictionaries and multilingual websites in order to bridge language gaps and further 
promote instruction.   The interactive program, Achieve3000 has multilingual supports for 
students. 
 
Certified Teachers: 
The Title III Academy will be taught by Ms. Charles and Ms. Celius-Guillaume.   Ms. Charles, the 
ENL teacher, is certified and possesses a NYCDOE license to teach English as a Second 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          53 

 

 

Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information  
Language.   Ms. Celius-Guillaume, the certified bilingual teacher, has a NYCDOE license to 
provide instruction in English, French and Haitian Creole.  
 
Materials: 
The program will utilize the comprehensive research-based programs AWARD Reading Program, 
RIGOR, Achieve3000  and ReadWorks.  The program will purchase two ipads and a projector in 
order to visually engage students during the interactive learning process.  It will also purchase 
Ready New York workbooks, bilingual dictionaries and books in order to develop students’ 
academic vocabulary and literacy skills across the content areas. Other consumable materials 
needed to implement the program are notebooks, workbooks, folders, printer ink and paper.  The 
Title III program will purchase “Cool Culture Passes” for parents and their 
children.    Multicultural flags, academic certificates and certificate holders will be purchased for 
the award's ceremony.  Additional materials will be obtained from the Department of Cultural 
Affairs’ Materials for the Arts (MFTA) Program.  Creative materials from MFTA will be used for 
inquiry-based projects that highlight students’ rich cultural background.   
                                                                                       

Part C: Professional Development  
Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other 
staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs.   

rationale 
teachers to receive training  

 
 
  schedule and duration 
 
  name of provider 

topics to be covered 

Begin description here:            
Professional development for teachers responsible for the instructional delivery and services to English 
language learners is essential for the academic success and development of our students.  Professional 
development is crucial to build upon the knowledge and skills of teachers of ELLs.  Participants of the 
professional development series learn how to effectively use technology during instruction.  They will 
discern how to construct an engaging curriculum that supports the academic growth and development of 
students.  Teachers who actively participate in quality instructional professional development sessions 
gain understanding of the best instructional strategies for students' academic progress and 
success.                                                                                                                                                              
 
Teachers to Receive Training: 
The ENL teacher and bilingual teacher will participate in professional development sessions provided by 
Teq pd staff.   The reflective teaching and the fusion of technology with learning are the primary focus of 
the professional development sessions.  Participants will actively reflect on the implementation of their 
practice.  As reflective teaching practitioners, they will learn how to evaluate and analyze their 
instructional strategies.  They will reflect upon the logic and reasons for their instructional practice and 
student grouping decisions.  As teachers reflect upon their practice with their colleagues, they will identify 
areas of successful practices and unsuccessful practices.  In conjunction with the reflective practices of 
educators, students will also be trained to respond reflectively upon what they have learned.  The 
conscious implementation of our teachers’ best practices will ensure that our English language learners 
are taught in a productive learning environment.     
 
Schedule and Duration:      
Three professional development sessions will be held during the 2018-2019 academic school year.  All 
sessions will be held on the first Fridays in December, February and April from 7:30 AM to 8:30 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          54 

 

 

Part C: Professional Development  
AM.  Teachers who attend the professional development sessions will receive training rate.  The 
professional development presenter(s) will be paid per session.  There will be no additional cost to the 
program.                                                                                                                                                             
 
Topics to be covered by on-site Professional Development: 
 
Session 1: The Role of Reflective Teaching in the ENL Instruction II – December 2018 
This workshop focuses on the importance of self-evaluation and self-reflection during and after 
instruction.  Participants will uncover how effective teachers are continuously developed as a result of 
inquiry.  The reflective process generates questions and leads to instruction solutions for ELLs.  
 
Session 2: Effectively Incorporating Technology in Instructions for ELLs - February 2019 
Technology is an essential component of effective instruction for English language learners.  At this 
professional development session, participants will increase their technological literacy through first-hand 
and hands-on experiences.  Strategies and resources for ELL instruction will be presented in a clear, 
coherent manner.   
 
Session 3: Literacy Workshop for ELLs - April 2019 
The literacy workshop focuses on factors that influence second language literacy 
development.  Participants will write and compile effective literacy lessons across the 
curriculum.  Characteristics of effective literacy instruction will be addressed.   Best practices will also be 
discussed.  
 
Name of Provider: 
Ms. L.  Edwards will facilitate the professional development series.  She has participated in extensive 
ENL trainings.  As an experienced workshop presenter, she will effectively facilitate the professional 
development series.  Agendas, attendance sheets and evaluations for professional development sessions 
will be maintained in the Title III 
binder.                                                                                           Rationale: 
 

Part D: Parental Engagement Activities   
Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher 
achievement for ELLs.  NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during 
ELL identification process.   

rationale 

 
  schedule and duration 
 
  name of provider 
  how parents will be notified of these activities 

topics to be covered 

Begin description here:            
 
Active parent involvement is a critical component for students’ academic progress and success.   Parents of 
students enrolled in the Title III Academy will be encouraged to actively participate in parent engagement 
activities.  Three parent workshops are designed to address parents’ concerns, students’ academic needs and 
provide information about the school’s curriculum and expectations.   Since some families have recently 
arrived in the country, the workshop series will introduce parents and their children to the rich resources 
available to them at our school and in the community.  Involving parents in the academic activities of their 
children creates stronger family environments which, in turn, enhances student learning.  A parent’s role as a 
teacher is a continual process, the more parents learn, the more they are able to help their child/children 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          55 

 

Part D: Parental Engagement Activities   
learn.  Parents who are unable to attend the workshops will receive online web resources - “The Toolkit for 
Parents and Families.” 
 The selected websites contain parent-friendly information and guides about the ELA and math Common 
Core Standards.  The websites equip parents with information they can use to support their child/children’s 
academic learning.  The information on the websites is presented in the following languages: English, Haitian 
Creole, French, Spanish, Bengali and Arabic.  They are provided with a pacing calendar that illustrates how 
the ELA and math standards progress from year to year.  Parents can view these multilingual videos that 
focus on the Common Core Standards and tips in preparation for college and career readiness.  Actively 
involved parents create supportive communities for our students.           
Our parent engagement activity will provide "Cool Culture" passes to parents and their children.  These 
passes will enable families to have access to 90 premiere museums and cultural institutions.  Families who 
recently moved to New York will be able to benefit from the rich arts and culture of our city at no cost.  As 
families are continuously engaged in the experience, the children will be learning and developing their depth 
of knowledge.  The creative venues bond learning into a real-world experience, thereby inciting a love of 
learning.  The students’ love of learning will ensure their success in school and life. 
 
Schedule and 
Duration                                                                                                                                                                  
                                          Three parent workshops will be held during the 2018-2019 academic school 
year.  All sessions will be held on the second Tuesdays in December, February and April from 3:30 AM to 
4:30 PM.                                      
 
Topics to be Covered by Parent Engagement Activities: 
Session 1: The Keys to Educational Success through High Expectations and Academic Rigor - Dec.  2018 
Being an English language learner is an academic strength.  The keys to educational success through high 
expectations and academic rigor will be presented in this workshop.  The presenter will present methods that 
help parents build stronger relationships with their child's teacher.  Key items children should be learning in 
English language arts and mathematics in each grade.  The presenter will model activities that parents can do 
at home to support their child's learning. 
 
Session 2: Technology and Community Resources for Parents that Promotes Education - February 2019 
This parents' workshop is designed to help parents learn about and discuss resources.  The presentation will 
provide information about technology and community resources that are designed to promote their children’s 
academic performance.  
 
Session 3: Effective Home Instruction Using AWARD Reading Online Services - April 2019 
The AWARD Professional Development session will inform parents about literary benefits of the 
program.   Parents will learn how to effectively monitor literacy instruction at home.    The presenter will 
review the major components of the online program and model the effective use of the program at 
home.     At the end of the session, parents will learn how to support individual learning styles in a digital 
learning environment.  
A luncheon award ceremony will be the culminating activity for the Title III Literacy program - May 2019. 
 
Providers                                                                                                                                                                
                                                                      The ENL teacher, Ms. Charles and the parent coordinator, Ms. 
Marthone will plan and facilitate the parent engagement activities.   The principal, Ms. Marie Chauvet-
Monchik will welcome parents to the parent engagement activities.   The following teachers will provide oral 
interpretation services: Ms. Brutus, Ms. Cellius-Guillaume and Ms. Y. Mason.   The administration and 
teachers will work cooperatively in order to welcome our parents and provide a parent-friendly information. 
 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          56 

 

 

Part D: Parental Engagement Activities   
Parent 
Notification                                                                                                                                                            
                                            Letters and flyers will be sent to parents in a timely manner in order to support the 
planning and implementation of effective parental involvement activities.  In early November, parents will 
receive a bilingual letter that list all the dates, times and titles of the five workshops in the parent workshop 
series.  The letters will be written in the parent’s first language and English.   Parents will receive a monthly 
reminder about the upcoming workshop.  The multilingual letters and flyers will be sent home with the 
students and via email.  Our goal is to actively communicate with our parents and stress the importance of 
their involvement in their children's academic success.  We also want parents to feel welcomed and supported 
at our school.  
 
Agendas, attendance sheets  and evaluations for all parent engagement activities will be maintained in the 
Title III binder.  Invitations, flyers and notification letters in parents' preferred languages will also be placed 
in the Title III binder. 
                                                                                                                                                            

Part E: Budget  
FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY.  Ensure that your 
Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. 
Allocation Amount: $           
           
Budget Category 

Budgeted Amount 

Professional salaries 
(schools must account for 
fringe benefits) 

           
           

  Per session 
  Per diem 

Purchased services 

  High quality staff 

and curriculum 
development 
contracts. 

Supplies and materials 

  Must be 

supplemental. 

  Additional 

curricula, 
instructional 
materials. 

  Must be clearly 

listed. 

Educational Software 
(Object Code 199) 
Travel 

Other 

TOTAL 

           
           

           
           

           
           
           
           
           
           
           

Explanation of expenditures in this 
category as it relates to the 
program narrative for this title. 
           
           

           
           

           
           

           
           
           
           
           
           
           

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          57 

 

 
 
 
 

Part E: Budget  
FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY.  Ensure that your 
Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. 
Allocation Amount: $           
           
Budget Category 

Budgeted Amount 

Explanation of expenditures in this 
category as it relates to the 
program narrative for this title. 
           

           

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          58 

 

DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT 

GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY 

SUBMISSION FORM 

2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR 

 

DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information 

necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English 

language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a 

part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the 

services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should 

be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily 

available on file in the school.  When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces.  For 

additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. 

Part I: School ELL Profile 

 

 

 
 

A. School Information 

District  17 
School Name   P.S. 138 

Borough  Brooklyn 

School Number   138 

 
B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant 

principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. 
 

Principal   Marie Chauvet-Monchik 
Coach  Marie Letang 
ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher  
 Wendy Charles 
Teacher/Subject Area Michelle Hird 
Teacher/Subject Area Claudette Robinson 
Related-Service Provider K. Domitrz 
Superintendent Clarence G. Ellis 

 

Assistant Principal  Lewis St. Victor 
Coach J. Cuyson 
School Counselor  
Carla Robinson 
Parent  B. Cayad 
Parent Coordinator M. Marthrone 
Field Support Center Staff Member Marie Bastien  
Other (Name and Title) N/A 

C. Teacher Qualifications  
Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section.  Press TAB after each number entered to calculate 
sums and percentages.  
     
Number of certified 
ENL teachers currently teaching in the 
ENL program 

Number of teachers who hold both content 
area/common branch and TESOL certification 

1 

1 

1 

Number of certified 
bilingual teachers not currently 
teaching in a bilingual program  
Number of certified foreign 
language/world language teachers 
providing home language arts 
(HLA) to students in bilingual 
programs [applicable to grades 7–
12] 
Number of teachers currently 
teaching a self-contained ENL class 
who hold both a common branch 
license and TESOL certification 
[applicable to grades K–6] 

0 

0 

Number of teachers who hold both a 
bilingual extension and TESOL 
certification 

Number of special education teachers 
with bilingual extensions 

0 

0 

Number of certified 
bilingual teachers currently 
teaching in a bilingual program 

Number of certified ENL teachers 
not currently  teaching in the ENL 
program  

 

0 

0 

D. Student Demographics  
Total number of students in 
school (excluding pre-K) 

585 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          59 

Total number of ELLs 

45 

ELLs as share of total student population 
(%) 

7.69% 

 
 
 
 
Part II: ELL Demographics 
 
 
 
 
 
A. ELL Programs 

This school serves the following grades (includes 
ELLs and non-ELLs) 
Check all that apply 

 
 
This school offers (check all that apply): 

K

    1

    2

     3

     4

     5

 

6

   7

     8

    9

     10

     11

    12

 

Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) 

Yes

             No

Dual language program (DL) 

Freestanding ENL 

Yes

             No

Yes

             No

 

 

 

If yes, indicate language(s):  

If yes, indicate language(s):  

 

 
Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a 
separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. 
 

Bilingual Program Breakdown 

School 
Year 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Lang. 

Opened 
(e.g., 2013-14) 

K 

1 

0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 

Program 
TBE 
TBE 
TBE 
DL 
DL 
DL 
Total 
 
 
 
Part III: Assessment Analysis 
 
 

0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 

3 

0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 

4 

0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 

2 

0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 

5 

0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 

6 

0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 

7 

0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 

8 

0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 

9 

0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 

10 

11 

12 

0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 

0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 

0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 

Tot # 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 

After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 

1.  What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, 

teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? 
Achieve 3000 LevelSet Assessment, Teacher’s College Reading and Writing Project (TCRWP), Fundations Intervention 
Assessment Inventory, writing portfolios and teacher-created assessments are the formative assessments used to determine 
academic instructional planning and implementation for English language learners (ELLs).  Achieve 3000 LevelSet is an online 
assessment that measures reading students’ comprehension of nonfiction text in English and Spanish.  The Fountas and Pinnell 
Benchmark Assessment System determines each student’s independent and instructional reading level.  Fundations 
Intervention Placement Inventory is an assessment tool used to assess early literacy skills of English language learners (ELLs) in 
Kindergarten through 2nd grade.  The writing portfolio assessment consists of a collection of students’ academic 
writing.  Teacher-created assessments are on-going assessments based on academic units of instruction taught across the 
curriculum. 
 

2.  What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          60 

 

An interactive/systematic structure of formative assessment data is in place to support our effort to guide instructional 
planning for ELLs effectively.  The online Achieve 3000 LevelSet Assessment consists of pre, interim and post-tests that can be 
administered in as little as 15 minutes per assessment.  Each week during technology instruction, students are given an 
opportunity to read and write responses to text on Achieve 3000 for up to fifty minutes.  Data from assessment and student 
work provide real-time reporting to both students and teachers.  TCRWP running record assessments are administered every 
three months.  The data is used to determine student’s independent and instructional reading levels.  
As a curriculum-embedded assessment, Fundations Intervention Assessment Inventory occurs throughout the academic 
year.  The data generated clearly identifies the students’ phonological awareness, reading level, accuracy, fluency and 
comprehension.  Students’ interactive writing portfolio binders are specially designed for English language learners.  The 
standard-based writing assignments are assessed based on the New Language Arts Progressions Rubrics.      
Teacher-created tests are curriculum-embedded assessments.  These assessments provide information needed to determine 
each lesson’s entry points, next step, small group compositions and students' academic growth.  The following formative 
assessments are used by both teacher(s) and students: questioning, discussion, learning/response logs, graphic organizers, 
peer/self-assessments, individual whiteboards, constructive quizzes, think, pair, share and exit/admit slips. 
 

3.  What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL 

Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? 
Data from NYC and NYS assessments in ELA and math are aggregated to identify the academic progress, growth, strengths and 
areas of needs of English language learners.  Standard-based periodic assessments, interim assessments, end of unit and 
chapter tests are used to identify students’ academic performance and monitor their academic progress.  The assessments are 
used to drive instruction during whole group instruction and differentiated instruction.  Teachers use baseline data to 
determine academic interventions and topics that need to be revisited.  The insight provided by formal assessments data 
equip teachers with information needed to design and deliver scaffolded instruction. 
 
 

4.  What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered?  

At P.S. 138, the Datawise structure for data analysis has been introduced.  This structure is in place to address academic 
interventions once the summative data has been gathered.  Datawise is a collaborative way to organize, analyze and assess 
data in an eight step process.  It uses a variety of data sources to improve instruction.  During the “prepare” stage of the 
Datawise process, teachers organize for collaborative work and build assessment literacy.  During the “inquire” stage of the 
Datawise process, teachers create data overview, dig into students data and examine instruction.  During the “act” stage of the 
Datawise process, teachers develop action plans, plan to assess progress, act and assess.  The Datawise structure has been in 
effect for one academic year.  It has proven to  address interventions needed for ELLs effectively.  
 

5.  How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-
5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.]  
The ENL teacher, members of the data team and classroom teachers effectively aggregate assessment data in order to guide 
instruction for ELLs with the Response to Intervention.  Formative and summative assessment data from grades K to 8 is used 
to identify areas of students’ academic strengths and weaknesses.  Students who score below specified levels of performance 
on the annual English language proficiency assessment receive additional support services: Response to Intervention and/or 
Academic Intervention Services.  Intensive, targeted intervention in small groups systematically addresses skills and 
competencies that are below the benchmark.  Small group instruction is differentiated in order to address academic needs, 
cultural differences and linguistic concerns with the students’ home language(s) and newly acquired language.  Academic 
progress is continuously monitored and evaluated in order to make educational decisions about grouping, short-term goals 
and direct instruction.   
Our school’s instructional plan requires all English language learners (ELLs) to actively participate in the school’s 
curriculum.  Data-driven, scaffolded and differentiated instruction provides support that gives ELLs the ability to master our 
school’s grade-level and content-area curriculum.  This supportive academic environment optimizes students’ learning.  
 

6.  What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? 

([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS].  

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          61 

 

 

The ELL Data Analysis Tool is used to gather and evaluate outcome assessment from formative data sources.  This tool is used 
by our school as a self-assessment and self-monitoring platform for data from NYSESLAT, NYS ELA and NYS Math 
assessments.  We are able to effectively analyze the school’s status information, students’ achievement and students’ 
progress.  We also use the tool to develop a rigorous, standard-based curriculum and instructional programs that will enhance 
instruction for all ELLs and nonELLs.   
We use data information to assess students’ academic and linguistic progress on the NYSESLAT.  As the staff members 
aggregate the test performance data, they are able to identify students’ areas of growth, strengths and weaknesses.  The data 
revealed from the NYSESLAT guides our school’s programming and instructional decisions.  The teacher of ELLs are informed of 
students’ data and encouraged to plan accordingly.  
 

7.  What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? 

A collaborative structure is in place to disseminate data findings in order to make adjustments to the ENL program.  Teachers 
collaborate in grade level groups and subject-based groups.  During the data meetings, teachers receive NYC assessment data 
and NYS assessment data from the ENL teacher and members of the data team.  Teachers will also receive data via email and a 
hard copy. 
After attending the ELL Data Analysis Tool, the ENL teacher turnkeyed the information presented at the workshop to the P.S. 
138 staff.  The agenda included a presentation of data analysis, ELL assessment and ATS reports.  After a hands-on 
demonstration of features within EDAT, administrators and teachers were able to download and assess the information from 
Microsoft spreadsheets.  The second part of the workshop will be presented during the 2017-2018 academic year. 

 
 
 
Part IV: ELL Programming 
 

Programming and Scheduling Information 

1.  How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented 
as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students 
regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in 
one class]).  

a.  Freestanding ENL program. 

Instruction for ELLs delivered through the Freestanding English as a New Language (ENL) program is presented in 
English with home language support.  The ENL program emphasizes English language acquisition.  As per CR Part 154, 
stand-alone ENL instruction and integrated ENL instruction are used to effectively deliver instructions.  At P.S. 138, the 
ENL teacher has dual certification in ENL and common branch.  She presents stand-alone instruction designed to 
develop English language skills.  She also presents integrated ENL instruction across the curriculum in order to develop 
English language skills through academic content area.     
The heterogeneous ENL program model is based on students’ academic proficiency levels, stage of English language 
acquisition and grade levels.  Students at various levels of English fluency and proficiency are instructed in academic 
groups.  Early childhood students in grades K to 2 work in collaborative groups that optimize their learning 
experiences.  Elementary students in grades 3 to 6 work in differentiated, small groups that target the students’ 
literacy skills development across the curriculum.  Middle school students in grades 7 and 8, actively participate in 
experiential, inquiry groups that promote critical thinking skills. 
The blended organizational model is used to deliver ENL instruction.  ELLs at the entering and emerging levels of 
English language acquisition receive 360 minutes of instruction each week: 180 minutes standalone ENL and 180 
minutes of integrated ENL/ELA instruction.   ELLs at the transitioning level of English language acquisition receive 180 
minutes of instruction each week: 90 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA instruction and 90 content area instruction.  ELLs 
at the transitioning level of English language acquisition receive 180 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA instruction or 
other content area instruction.  Whereas, former ELLs at the commanding level of English language acquisition receive 
90 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA instruction or other content area instruction. 

b.  TBE program.  If applicable.   

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          62 

 

 

N/A 

c.  DL program.  If applicable.    

N/A 

2.  How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each 

program model? 

a.  How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 

below)? 

Our staff is held accountable to ensure that the mandated number of instructional minutes are provided according to 
proficiency levels in the ENL instructional program.  The proficiency levels of ELLs are determined after reviewing the RNMR 
and RLAT reports.   Students at the entering and emerging stages of English language acquisition receive 360 minutes of ENL 
instruction each week.   Students at the transitioning and expanding stages of English language acquisition receive 180 minutes 
of ENL instruction each week.  However, students at the commanding stages of English language acquisition receive 90 
minutes of ENL instruction each week. After determining the mandated numbers of service minutes, the ENL teacher develops 
a schedule that is approved by the principal.   A copy of the ENL teacher’s schedule is posted on her door.  The homeroom 
teachers of ELLs receive a service schedule from the ENL teacher.  When the ENL teacher picks up the ELLs with IEPs, she signs 
the students out of class. 
 

3.  Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and 

methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core 
Learning Standards.  
Core content delivery in the ENL program consists of a rigorous, student-centered and data-driven approach.  Instruction is 
delivered in English with home language supports.  Systematic literacy instruction is at the core of our educational 
approach.  By using a language experience approach, language development is fostered and academic content is made 
comprehensible.  The ENL teacher and teachers of ELLs provide instruction that develops progressive mastery in the students’ 
ability to read fluently, comprehend and critically analyze grade-level texts.   Standard-based instruction is presented across 
the curriculum.  During instruction, ELLs actively participate in close reading activities of fiction and nonfiction texts.  Students’ 
academic development is made evident when they critically discuss the texts, effectively present ideas, use text-based 
evidence to write varied responses and solve real-world problems.      
The ReadyGen and the Scholastic Code X curricula are utilized during scaffolded whole group and small group instruction.  The 
ELLs are instructed according to the same rigorous curriculum the nonELLs receive.  Emphasis is placed on students’ reading 
comprehension development.  Through generative vocabulary instruction, students acquire the ability to apply knowledge 
from content in order to learn new words.  Generative vocabulary promotes English language acquisition and develops fluency 
and reading comprehension.  The utilization of ELA modules on the Engage NY website, ReadyGen Program and Scholastic 
Code X Program enables the ENL teacher and teachers of ELLs to meet the demands of the Common Core Learning 
Standards.     
Throughout the academic year, a rich array of instructional activities and strategies are used to optimize learning and meet 
students’ learning needs.  Students are given opportunities to read authentic reading materials such as trade books, magazine, 
articles, newspapers and credible online websites.  These high-interest reading materials expose students to a world of 
wonder and knowledge.  While skillfully, validating every student’s cultural experiences, we seek to broaden their knowledge 
base and create an intense desire for learning. 
   
 
 

4.  How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? 

Within ten days of registration, Spanish-speaking ELLs are administrated the Spanish LAB-R.  The NYSED Interview 
Questionnaire, NYSED Multilingual Literacy SIFE Screener and Writing Screener are administered to SIFE students in their home 
language.  Throughout the year, students are given the MOSL assessments in English and their home language.  Content area 
teachers also download and administer multilingual assessments.  During New York State assessments, students receive a 
translated glossary, an interpreter and/or translated-editions of the assessments. 
 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          63 

 

5.  How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? 

SIFE   

a. 
b.  Newcomer  
c.  Developing   
d. 
e. 

Long Term 
Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status  

d.  The instructional plan for long-term ELLs is based on the school’s standard-based curriculum.   The ENL teacher and the 
classroom teachers collaborate during the planning process in order to organize instruction.   Our school implements the ELA 
ReadyGen Program and the Go Math Program in the elementary grades.  In the middle school, we use Scholastic Code X for 
ELA and CMP3 for math.  The ENL teacher scaffolds the lessons in order to develop engagement, inquiry and 
understanding.  The Common Core State Standards are the foundation of our instructional plan.    Students are taught to read 
and negotiate complex fiction and nonfiction texts.   Throughout the academic year, instruction is used to build the knowledge 
students need for high-stakes Common Core State Assessments. 
e.  The instructional plan for former ELLs is designed as an academic support service.   English proficient students are 
supported academically for two years.  The ENL teacher works closely with every students’ homeroom teachers.  They 
collaborate and make inquiries about students’ strengths and weaknesses, academic growth and development.   On a regular 
basis, the ENL teacher analyzes live data in order to effectively assess her students' academic progress.  Data is used to provide 
academic support through small group instruction.  Former ELLs are encouraged to attend the Title III AM Academy.   
 

6.  What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic 

content areas and accelerate English language development?  
The ENL teacher uses an array of instructional strategies to effectively teach ELL-SWDs.  She starts every lesson by activating 
students’ prior knowledge and encouraging students to be actively engaged in the learning process.  She designs lessons that 
include various entry points and opportunities for individual, paired, and group work.  Instruction is differentiated in order to 
address students’ individual academic needs.  Total body response, technology and visual aids are used to illustrate challenging 
and abstract concepts.  The ENL programs use the following grade-level instructional materials to advance the academic 
performance of ELL-SWDs:  Awards Reading Program, Reading Instructional Roles for Older Readers (RIGOR), Into English, 
Hampton-Brown High Point, Achieve 3000, ReadyGen and Scholastic Code X.  These instructional strategies and academic 
programs teach ELL-SWDs grade-level academic content and accelerate the students’ English language development. 
 

7.  How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and 

attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? 
P.S. 138 provides professional development opportunities that address the academic needs of students with disabilities.  The 
interactive professional development sessions give teachers an opportunity to log into SESIS. As teachers navigate the SESIS 
website, they can read their students’ IEP goals and develop an instructional plan of action.  Teachers are encouraged to 
discuss and present best practices for achieving IEP goals.  On a regular  basis, classroom teachers log into SESIS in order to 
document student progress in regards to attaining the IEP goals.  The school uses Common Core State Standard curricular in 
math, ELA, social studies and science in order to enable the diverse ELL-SWD population to achieve their IEP goals.  Since 
teachers monitor the academic progress of ELL-SWDs, instructional and scheduling flexibility are used to address the students’ 
academic needs.  Adaptive instruction focuses on developing the following cognitive skills: increasing reading of informational 
text comprehension, academic vocabulary and language, writing text-based answers from sources and building knowledge in 
the disciplines.  The school provides ample narrative and informational texts, home language text and visual tools for 
thinking.  The ENL teachers and classroom teachers have all the necessary resources to effectively teach and ensure student 
achievement.  The curricular explicitly incorporate writing assignments with clear rubrics for summative and formative 
assessments for ELLs at various levels of English proficiency.  These actions enable the ELL-SWDs to attain English proficiency in 
the least restrictive environment.  
 

8.  Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups 

targeted).  List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which 
they are offered. 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          64 

 

P.S. 138 targeted invention program is designed to ensure that all ELLs receive and comprehend grade-level curriculum 
instruction.  Scaffolded instruction is at the foundation of the targeted invention program.  Here are examples of scaffolding 
strategies for ELLs: use text-dependent questions, carefully create and choose graphic organizers, use various reading 
strategies and use carefully constructed visual and linguistic tools.  ELL-SWDs, long-term ELLs and SIFEs actively participate in 
the program. 
We implement the following targeted intervention programs: Awards Reading, Reading Instructional Roles for Older Readers 
(RIGOR), Phonic and Friends Reading Program, Interactive Reader, Into English and the Thinking Reader Technology 
program.    The content of the book entitled, Interactive Reader presents text related to science and social studies.  Go Math 
and CMP3 math programs are used to enhance the ELLs mathematical skills and abilities.  The magazine, Time for Kids, is also 
used for the elementary students.  The targeted intervention programs are presented in the English language.  
 

9.  Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year?    

We are considering utilizing the Read Theory online reading program.  This program is a K-12 online reading comprehension 
program with embedded assessments.  The program enables students to read text at their “just right” reading level.  ELLs are 
able to utilize the program at school and at home.  The “at home” component of the Read Theory program, will develop family 
literacy.  Students will be able to open free accounts for their parents and siblings.  The Read Theory online reading program 
will enhance the ELLs academic performance across the curriculum. 
 

10.  If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? 

N/A 
 

11.  How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs?  Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in 

your building. 
ELLs have equal access to all school programs at P.S. 138.  The ELLs actively participate in the following exciting programs: New 
Victory Performing Arts Program, Beyond an Hour of Code, Medgar Evers Beacon After School and Saturday Programs. 
New Victory Performing Arts Program introduces students to a broad spectrum of dance, theater, music and circus production 
from around the world.  This dynamic program offers a unique chance for students and their families to experience live 
performances at the New Victory Theatre.  The New Victory program sends letters and brochures to the parents in their home 
language(s).  The Beyond an Hour of Code program has a multilingual online component that empowers all the ELLs to code in 
English or their home language.   The Medgar Evers Beacon After School and Saturday Programs provide small group assistance 
with homework.  The homework assistance enables students to complete assignments and further understand concepts and 
information presented in class.   Extracurricular activities enable students to explore a variety of interests in the field of arts 
and sports.   
Parents of ELLs receive letters and permission slips for students to participate in the Medgar Evers Beacon programs.  ELLs are 
welcome to participate in all program activities.   
Title III AM Academy is a supplemental service offered to all ELLs.  This supplementary service is designed to increase the 
students’ English language proficiency and academic achievement.  Our program supplements mandated instruction for ELLs in 
general education and special education classes.  Students actively attend our before-school program, Title III AM 
Academy.  The Title III program enables certified teachers to provide standard-based instruction that addresses each student’s 
academic and linguistic needs.  Balanced literacy and second language acquisition methodologies are used to develop the 
students’ skills in listening, speaking, reading and writing. This intensive instructional approach strives to develop the linguistic 
and literacy skills of students by incorporating research-based activities such as read-aloud, shared reading, guided reading, 
interactive reading, phonics, writing mechanics, shared writing, modeled writing and independent writing. In addition, 
students are engaged in standard-based activities in order to build upon their social, academic and cultural 
experiences.  Students at different levels of language acquisition work together in groups. In this cooperative learning setting, 
not only is the group assessed as a whole, but students are also individually accountable for their works.  Students will receive 
supplementary instruction in the following academic subjects: ELA, math, social studies and science. 
 

12.  What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language 

materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. 
The following instructional materials are used to support ELLs: Awards Reading Program, Reading Instructional Roles for Older 
Readers (RIGOR), Phonic and Friends Reading Program, Interactive Reader, Into English and the Thinking Reader Technology 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          65 

 

program.   The English language arts anthology, Interactive Reader, presents a collection of poems, short stories, plays, songs, 
excerpts as well as nonfiction science and social studies texts.  The CMP3 math program is used to enhance the ELLs 
mathematical skills and abilities.  The magazine, Time for Kids, is also used for the elementary students.  
The following technological instructional programs are accelerating learning: Achieve 3000, Starfall, Hour of Code and 
Myon.  The ENL classroom has three desktop computers, five laptops and a Smartboard.  The interactive Smartboard 
accommodates the academic needs of different types of students: visual learners respond well to the visual projection 
elements, while tactile learners benefit from going up front and interacting directly with the Smartboard.  The ENL classroom 
also has an extensive multilingual library that contains reference books, fiction books,  nonfiction books and software. 
 

13.  How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? 

In the ENL instructional classroom, home language support is utilized to make content comprehensible.  Students are taught to 
identify cognates during speaking, listening, reading and writing activities.  The ENL teacher builds upon the ELLs’ rich linguistic 
background in order to develop their vocabulary and comprehension of complex texts.  The ENL classroom also has an 
extensive multilingual library that contains reference books, glossaries, fiction books and nonfiction books.  The multilingual 
library has books, software and audio materials in the following languages: Arabic, Bengali, Spanish, French, Haitian Creole, 
Fulani and Twi.  Technology is also used to provide home language support.  Students are allowed to use translation apps on 
their cell phones and/or devices.  
 

14.  Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels.  

P.S. 138 ensures that our ELLs and former ELLs receive all required services support by carefully constructing the ENL teacher’s 
schedule.  Students enrolled in grades K to 8 who score at the entering and emerging stages of English language acquisition on 
the NYSITELL/NYSESLAT receive 360 minutes of ENL instruction each week.  Students enrolled in grades K to 8 who score at the 
transitioning and expanding stages of English language acquisition on the NYSITELL/NYSESLAT receive 180 minutes of ENL 
instruction each week.  Former ELLs receive 90 minutes of supportive ENL instruction per week for two years.  The ENL 
instructional program provides rigorous, academic content-area instruction in English.  The teacher incorporates ENL strategies 
through Common Core State Standards.  Students from the age of five to approximately thirteen are taught using ENL and ELA 
methodologies.  Home language supports are utilized to advance the students’ academic performance across the content 
areas.  
 

15.  If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the 

ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met?   
P.S. 138 co-locates with Success Academy Charter School.  The schools will communicate in order to ensure that the academic, 
linguistic and socioemotional needs of ELLs are met.  Instructional and compliance resources will be shared at meetings and/or 
via emails.  
 

16.  Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for 

new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, 
parent coordinator).  
P.S. 138 currently does not have an activity that assists newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year.  
 

17.  What language electives are offered to ELLs?  

French is the language elective offered to ELLs.  
 

18.  For schools with dual language programs: 

a.  What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day 

(percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. 
In which language(s) is each core content area taught? 

b. 
c.  How is each language separated for instruction? 
d. 

Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same 
time (simultaneous)? 

N/A 
 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          66 

 
 

Professional Development and Support for School Staff 

1.  Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic 

staff.)  What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs 
as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? 
Relevant professional development sessions are presented to all administrators and ELL personnel throughout the academic 
school year.  The professional development sessions are designed to assess, monitor and improve instruction for ELLs and 
former ELLs.  Professional development sessions will be held during Monday PD sessions and the Chancellor Conference 
days.  Each professional development session will last at least one hour.  As teachers attend sessions, they will meet the 
professional development requirement: 15% total hours ELL-specific PD for all teachers.  The professional development 
sessions are designed to enhance teachers’ ability to effectively instruct English language learners.  The PD session will 
emphasize the importance of reflective instruction.  As teachers reflect on their instructional practices, they will discuss 
effective teaching strategies they have used in the classroom.   
During the first Chancellor Conference day, teachers will attend a professional development session entitled “Datawise: 
Effectively Analyzing ELL Data.”  This session will focus on the implementation of the Datawise protocol.  Participants will learn 
the step-by-step process of using a wide range of data resources to improve instruction and students' academic performance.  
During the second Chancellor Conference day, the ENL teacher will present a professional development session entitled, 
“Reflective Teaching and Best Practices for ELLs.”  The participants will review the Common Core document entitled, 
"Application of Common Core State Standards for English Language Learners."  This session will answer the question -  How 
can we help English language learners successfully meet the Common Core State Standards?  The participants will discuss the 
strengths and challenges of the implementation of CCSS.  Participants will also compile a list of the best practices for ELLs.  The 
discussion about these best practices will focus on strategies used to integrate language and content instruction for English 
language learners.  This session will focus on the following components of standard-based instructions for ELLs: developing 
literacy-rich school environments, instruction that develops foundational skills in English, opportunities for classroom 
discourse and ongoing assessment and feedback to guide learning. 
 

2.  Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all 
teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include 
how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance).  Refer to ELL Policy and Reference 
Guide, Professional Development section. 
The ENL teacher will attend professional development sessions offered by the Field Support Center and DELLS.  Fifty percent of 
her professional development hours will be ELL-specific.  The professional development topics will include “language 
acquisition in alignment with core content area instruction. 
All teachers and administrators are scheduled to attend the required ELL training.  At least 15% of professional development 
hours presented at P.S. 138 will focus on language acquisition for ELLs.  These training sessions will be provided to teachers of 
ELLs and non-ELL teachers.  ELL training will take place during scheduled professional development sessions.  The professional 
development sessions will focus on the following topics:  “Best Practices for Co-teaching Strategies,” “Datawise: Effectively 
Analyzing ELL Data,” “Integrating Language and CCSS Content for ELLs,” “Preparing ELLs for an Hour of Code,” “Effective 
Reading Strategies for ELLs” and “Reflective Teaching and Best Practices for ELLs.” 
Professional development training session requirements:                                                                                                                         
•       15% total hours ELL-specific PD for all teachers 
•       50% total hours ELL-specific PD for ESL/ENL teachers 
Dates                                  Titles 
September 6, 2017         “Best Practices for Co-teaching Strategies”   
 November 7, 2017          “Datawise: Effectively Analyzing Data Generated from the ELL Data Analysis Tool” 
December 11, 2017          “Integrating Language and CCSS Content for ELLs” 
February 5, 2018              “Preparing ELLs for an Hour of Code” 
      March 12, 2018                 “Effective Reading Strategies for ELLs” 
      June 7, 2018                     “Reflective Teaching and Best Practices for ELLs” 
 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          67 

 

 

During the 2018 - 2019 school year, teachers will actively participate in the Teq online professional development program.  Its 
course library includes sessions that targets effective instructions for English language learners at every stage of English 
language acquisition.  Records of the professional development activities will be kept in the ENL Administrative binder.  These 
records will include the agendas and attendance sign-in sheets. 
   September 4, 2018          “Lesson Planning for ENLs”                      
   November 7, 2018            "Google Tools to Support English Language Learners” 
   January 7, 2019                 “Resources for Teaching Idioms and Colloquialisms to ELL Students” 
   March 11, 2019                   “Listenwise for ELL Instruction” 
   April 8, 2019                      “Project Based Learning for ENL/ELL” 
   June 2019                           “Web Resources for ELL Teachers” 
 
 
 
 

Parental Involvement 

1.  How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language 
development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? 
Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent 
orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences?  
P.S. 138 conducts annual meetings for parents or guardians of ELLs to discuss the ENL program goals and language 
development progress.  At least one individual parent meeting is scheduled for the academic year.  This meeting is in addition 
to parent-teacher conferences, initial parent orientations and quarterly progress meetings.  The agenda includes a 
presentation of the language proficiency assessment results, goals of the program, language development progress and 
language development needs in all content areas.  The presentation consists of an interactive discussion and technological 
displays on a laptop.  The ENL teacher schedules appointments to meet with parents individually.  Appointments are scheduled 
via emails, telephone calls and parent letters.    
Parents’ involvement is encouraged at all school activities, workshops and programs.  Parents of ELLs are invited and 
encouraged to attend all workshops.  The principal and the assistant principal attend all the workshops and are available to 
translate the content into both Spanish and Haitian Creole.  Five to six parent workshops are held each year.  The parent 
coordinator, Ms. Marthone has presented the following workshops this year: “How to Use Dial-a-Teacher,” “Legal Shield,” 
“Science Project Night,” “Understanding the Common Core Standards,” “Reading & Math Workshop” and “Preparing your 
Child for the State Assessments.”  In addition to attending workshops, parents of ELLs attend orientation sessions and actively 
participate in award ceremonies for their children.  Attendance for parents of ELLs is extremely high at the award ceremonies.  
The parent notification letters and flyers will be distributed in English and the parent preferred language.  The tear-off section 
of the letter will give parents opportunities to respond to the letters.  Parents can communicate their attendance and their 
need of an interpreter.  Members of the language access team are scheduled to participate in the workshops.  The language 
access team members, ENL teacher and/or parent coordinator will review the information presented on the tear-off section of 
the letters.  If a member of the LAC team does not speak a requested language, an interpreter will be hired from a contracted 
vendor. 

2.  Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. 
Our school fosters parental involvement by creating a welcoming environment during office and school visits.  ELL parents are 
actively involved in the following parent activities: parent workshops, celebrations of student work, special events and award 
ceremonies.  Written communication for all parent involvement activities are translated into the following languages: Arabic, 
Bengali, French, Haitian Creole and Spanish.  Parents are informed that translators are available at parent involvement 
activities.  Our translators consist of members of the language access team, contracted interpreter from a contracted vendor, 
parent volunteers and community volunteers.  Every Tuesday, members of the Language Access Team are available to confer 
with parents.  The ENL department conducts two parent orientation sessions for parents of ELLs.  These sessions provide 
parents with pertinent information about the NYC school system, academic and graduation requirements for all students.  At 
these sessions, parents are given the opportunity to network and establish a multilingual support system.  The ELLs 
department also hosts an annual Multicultural Day Celebration.  At this celebration, students are given the opportunity to 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          68 

 

 

present works in their home language and English.  When each parent hears their children speak English and their home 
language in an academic environment, they are welcomed.  
 

Additional Information 

Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for 
ELLs.  You may attach/submit charts.   This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted.   
N/A 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          69 

Part V: ELL Identification Attestation 

Principal Certification 

2. 

3. 

4. 

5. 
6. 

7. 

8. 

9. 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 

In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL 
Policy and Reference Guide, I, Marie Chauvet-Monchik, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities 
are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 
 
1. 

The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for 
students entering with IEPs). 
Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined 
a. 

If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status 
relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level.  

The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue.   
a.  The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services 
are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality 
translation service.   

Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined.   
a. 

If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility 
to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. 

Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible.   
Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language.  
a.  Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. 
If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish 
LAB.  
Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources 
available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-
education-sife.  
If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting.  
a.  Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent 

video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask 
questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided 
throughout the meeting. 

10.  ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected.  

a. 

b. 

If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program 
in accordance with DOE transfer policies. 
If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent 
choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice.   

11.  Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process).  
12.  If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose 

ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 
 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          70 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 

Part VI: LAP Assurances 

School Name:   P.S. 138                                                                              School DBN: 17K138 
Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate.  Names listed in Part A, should align with this 
section.  

Name (PRINT) 

Title 

Signature 

Date (mm/dd/yy) 

Marie Chauvet-Monchik 

Principal 

Lewis St. Victor 

Assistant Principal 

M. Marthrone 

Parent Coordinator 

Wendy Charles 

ENL/Bilingual Teacher 

B. Cayard 

Parent 

Michelle Hird 

Teacher/Subject Area 

Claudette Robinson 

Teacher/Subject Area 

Marie Letang 

J. Cuyson 

Coach 

Coach 

Carla Robinson 

School Counselor 

Mr. Clarence G. Ellis 

Marie Bastien 

K. Domitrz 

Ms. Mason 

Superintendent 
 
Field Support Center Staff 
Member 
Marie Bastien  
Other Related-Service 
Provider 

Other Parent 

Ms. Y. Cellius-Guillaume 

Other Parent 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

09/05/17 

09/05/17 

09/05/17 

09/05/17 

09/05/17 

09/05/17 

09/05/17 

09/05/17 

09/05/17 

09/05/17 

09/05/17 

09/05/17 

09/05/17 

09/05/17 

09/05/17 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          71 

 

 
 

2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS 

Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools 

 

DBN: 

17K138 
 

School 
Name: 

P.S. 138 
 

Superintendent:  Mr. C. Ellis 

 

 
The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. 
If there is more than one LAC, list all. 
 

First Name  

Last Name  

Title  

Has the LAC attended a 

2018-19 training 

The LAC was involved in 
the development of this 

conducted by the Field 

plan? Yes/No  

Language Access 

Coordinator? Yes/No  

Mardianiva 

Marthone 

Parent Coordinator 

Wendy 

Charles 

ENL Teacher 

Yes 

No 

Yes 

Yes 

   

 
* The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs 
on translation,  
interpretation, compliance and budget.  
 

School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful 
opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's 
Regulation A-663).  
 
By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and 
interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). 
 
Part A:  Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 
 
1.  Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written 

and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from: 

  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS) 
  Automate The System (ATS) reports 
  Student Emergency Contact cards 
  Surveys conducted by your school. 

 

Parent engagement is the methodology used to assess the language preference(s) of our parent community. As 
parents enter the school building, they can read translated information, multilingual signs and posters. Every 
parent who speaks a language other than English is presented with a language preference card. The language 
preference, “I speak….” card allows the parent to communicate with a trained member of the language access 
team in his/her language of choice. In the event that a member of the language access team is not fluent in a 
requested language, the over-the-phone interpretation service is used. Every parent's language requests is 
documented and filed. 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          72 

 

We actively collect data about the primary language spoken by parents of every child enrolled at P.S. 138. During 
the data collection process, we also determine if parents need language assistance in order to communicate with 
school staff members. Throughout the academic year, home language data is collected from ATS documents and 
Home Language Surveys, as well as, through anecdotal records from the pupil accounting secretary and teachers. 
Within 5 days of student enrollment, the parent coordinator reviews the ATS language and geographic reports, 
RCPL, RPOB and UPPG, in order to determine the primary language spoken by the parent of each student. After 
reviewing the ATS documents, the number of home languages represented in your school community is 
identified. The following non-English home languages are spoken by parents: Arabic, Bengali, Haitian Creole, 
French, and Spanish. The staff confirms the ATS report by reviewing the students’ cumulative records. 

 

The staff distributes the DOE’s language preference letters to parents in order to assess their language. Part III of 
the HLIS gives parents an opportunity to identify their written and spoken language preference. This information 
is also found on multilingual emergency cards. The ENL teacher compiles a four column table with the following 
headings: Student’s Name, Parent’s Name, Language Preference for written information, and Language 
Preference for oral communication. The complete table is used by the parent coordinator, pupil accountant 
secretary, homeroom teacher and ENL teacher. The table is disseminated to the school community and filed with 
the pupil accountant secretary. 

 

 
 
2.  List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, 

which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language 
Report (RCPL) ATS report. 
 

Language  

Written Preferred  

Percent Written  

Oral Preferred  

Percent Oral  

English 

Spanish 

Haitian Creole 

Arabic 

   

 

580 

40 

35 

34 

85.88 

4.12 

3.61 

3.51 

580 

43 

37 

32 

85.98 

4.43 

3.81 

3.3 

3.  From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at 

least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, 
French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. 
 

N/A 

 

 
 
Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 
 
1.  List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be 

distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents.  
 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          73 

 

Document Name  

Month/Frequency Distributed to 

How do you plan to translate? 

Families  

Notification of 4 Parent Conferences 

September 7 

Title III AM Academy 

October 30 

November 1 

Parent Conference Reminders 

March 1 

May 1 

Trip Slips New Victory Program 

October 16 

   

 

Include procedures to ensure timely 
provision of translated documents 

to parents.  

The notification letter will be 
translated by the NYCDOE 
Translation Unit. The letters will be 
translated at least three weeks prior 
to the event.  

The notification letter will be 
translated by the NYCDOE 
Translation Unit. The letters will be 
translated at least three weeks prior 
to the event.  

The notification letter will be 
translated by the NYCDOE 
Translation Unit. The letters will be 
translated at least three weeks prior 
to the event. 

The notification letter will be 
translated by the NYCDOE 
Translation Unit. The letters will be 
translated at least three weeks prior 
to the event.  

2.  List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as 

parent-teacher  
conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings.  
   

Meeting Name  

Month/Frequency of Meetings  

How does your school plan to provide 

Parent Teacher Conferences 

Parent Workshops 

September 12 

November 1 

March 1 

May 1 

October 1 

January 8 

March 15  

interpretation service(s)?  

Members of the LAC team are 
available to provide interpretation 
services in the following languages: 
Haitian Creole, French, and Spanish. 
An Arabic interpreter will be 
contracted through a vendor. Over-
the-phone interpretation services will 
be available.  

Members of the LAC team are 
available to provide interpretation 
services in the following languages: 
Haitian Creole, French, and Spanish. 
An Arabic interpreter will be 
contracted through a vendor. Over-
the-phone interpretation services will 
be available.  

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          74 

 

Parent Orientation Sessions 

September 6 

Throughout the school year 

Student Award Ceremonies 

June 6 

   

 

Members of the LAC team are 
available to provide interpretation 
services in the following languages: 
Haitian Creole, French, and Spanish. 
An Arabic interpreter will be 
contracted through a vendor. Over-
the-phone interpretation services will 
be available.  

Members of the LAC team are 
available to provide interpretation 
services in the following languages: 
Haitian Creole, French, and Spanish. 
An Arabic interpreter will be 
contracted through a vendor. Over-
the-phone interpretation services will 
be available.  

3.  Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of 

a school emergency.  
 

In the event of a school emergency, parents/guardians will hear a clear and concise message from P.S. 138 via the 
robocall system. Parents will be informed about the incident and the safety of their children. The message will be 
clearly presented in English, followed by a French, Spanish, Haitian Creole and Arabic. Members of the language 
access team will interpret the message and be available to communicate with parents in the following languages: 
French, Spanish and Haitian Creole. Over the phone translation services will be available for parents who apt to call 
the school for additional information. Students will take home translated letters that detailed the school emergency.  

 
 

 
 
Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure

 
Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and 
what resources are available to meet compliance.  
 

Every year, the parent coordinator/ language access coordinator conducts a professional development session that 
addresses the school’s role in facilitating the provision of language access services to parents. At the professional 
development session, teachers are informed about Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and the available services available 
to parents. The professional development facilitator presents pertinent information about resources and multilingual 
services offered by the over-the-phone interpretation and Translation and Interpretation Unit. Teachers receive 
contact information, website and telephone numbers. Teachers are also given a language ID guide, language palm 
cards, along with the translation and language brochures. The facilitators also identify strategic locations of 
multilingual signs and posters in parent’s preferred language.  

 

 

 
 
Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services 
 
Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive 
information. Include any: 
2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          75 

 

 

  Translated signage 
  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents 
  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) 

P.S. 138 fulfills Section VII of Chancellor’s Regulations A-663 regarding parent notification requirements for translation 
and interpretation by following the guidelines stated in the regulations. We provide translation and interpretation 
services to parents who require language assistance in order to communicate effectively with the school staff 
members. The oral and/or written language assistance is provided in a timely manner. 

Letters and documents are emailed to the Translation Unit at least seven days prior to the school’s distribution date.  

 

Interpretation services are provided by a NYCDOE contracted vendor. The interpretation services are scheduled for 
parent-teacher conferences and workshops. The vendor can also be contracted for oral interpretation services during 
IEP meetings. Over-the phone interpretation service is also provided to non-English speaking parents. P.S. 138 has 
updated the multilingual information signs by posting new signs near the primary school entrance and in the main 
office. The “Notice for Parents Regarding Language Assistance Services” is posted at the main entrance. The school 
safety officers and office staff use the language ID guide during the communication process. Parents also receive a 
translated version of the Parents' Bill of Rights and Parents' Guide to Language Access. 

 

 
 
Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services 
Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the 
language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services?   
 

The administration plays an active role in monitoring the quality and availability of language access services to 
parents. Members of the language access team are required to maintain an interpretation log. The interpretation log 
documents telephone calls made and face-to-face meetings. Completed interpretation logs are filed in the language 
access coordinator’s binder.  

 

Parent school surveys are used as a mechanism to gather feedback from parents for the school to analyze the 
availability and quality of language access services.  

 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          76 

