 
 

 

 
 

 
  
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

2018-19 

COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN 

(CEP) 

 
 
 
 

 

DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 

14K147 

School Name: 

P.S. 147 ISAAC REMSEN 

Principal: 

SANDRA NOYOLA 

 
 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                          
 

 

 

 

 1 

 

Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline  

 
 
Section 1: School Information Page 
 
 
Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page  
 
 
Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) 
 
 
Section 4: CEP Overview  
 
 
Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  

  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction 
  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment 
  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers 
  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership 
  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties  

 
 
Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS)  
 
 
Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) 
 
 
Section 8: Title I Program Information  
 
 
Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 
 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          2 

 

 

 
School Name: 

BEDS Code: 

Grades Served: 

School Address:  

Section 1: School Information Page 

 

School Information 

 

PS 147 Isaac Remsen 

 
331400010147 

 
Elementary Pre-K to Five 

School Number (DBN): 

 

14K147 

 
325 Bushwick Avenue, Brooklyn, NY 11206 

 
718 497 0326 

Phone Number: 

 

718-628-4988 

Fax: 

 

Jahaira Falero 

jfalero@schools.nyc.gov  

Email Address: 

 

School Contact Person:  

 

Principal: 

UFT Chapter Leader: 

Parents’ Association President: 

SLT Chairperson: 

Title I Parent Representative (or 
Parent Advisory Council 
Chairperson): 

Student Representative(s): 

 

CBO Representative: 
 

Sandra Noyola 

 

Mark Levine 
 
Paul Hogan 

 
Shannon Ham 

 

Lourdes Santiago 

 

Not applicable 
 

 
Roberto Serrano 

 

 

District Information 

 

Geographical District: 

14 

 

Alicja Winnicki 

Superintendent: 
215 Heyward St, Brooklyn, NY 11206 

 

Superintendent’s Office Address: 

 
awinnic@schools.nyc.gov  

Superintendent’s Email Address: 

 

718 302 7689  

Phone Number: 

 

718 302 7977 

Fax: 

 

 
 

Field Support Center (FSC)  

 

Brooklyn North Field 
Support Center 

Bernadette Fitzgerald 

FSC: 

 

Executive Director: 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          3 

 

Executive Director’s Office Address: 

131 Livingston Street, Brooklyn, NY 11201 

 
BFitzge2@schools.nyc.gov  

Executive Director’s Email Address: 
347-225-5119 

 

Phone Number: 

 

718-935-4456 

Fax: 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          4 

 

Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page  

 

All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this 
Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to 
support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention 
Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal 
number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with 
Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. 
 
Directions: 

 

1.  List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 
2.  Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization 
(CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an 
asterisk*. 

3.  SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member 

does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, 
which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT 
member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval.   

4.  The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file 

in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. 

 

Name 

Position and Constituent Group 

Represented 

Signature 
(Blue Ink) 

Sandra Noyola 

 
Mark Levine 

 
Paul Hogan 

 

 

NelidaRodriguez 

 

 

 

Shannon Ham 

 
Joyann Reid 

 
TessLeavay 

 
Jennifer Grimm 

 

*Principal or Designee 

*UFT Chapter Leader or Designee 

*PA/PTA President or Designated Co-
President 

DC 37 Representative (staff), if 
applicable 

Title I Parent Representative or 
Parent Advisory Council Chairperson  

Student Representative  
(optional for elementary and middle 
schools; a minimum of two members 
required for high schools) 

Student Representative  
(optional for elementary and middle 
schools; a minimum of two members 
required for high schools) 

Member/Elected UFT 

 
Member/ Elected UFT 

 
Member/ ElectedUFT 

 
Member/ Elected UFT 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          5 

 

Name 

Position and Constituent Group 

Represented 

Signature 
(Blue Ink) 

AnnamariaLepore 

 
Melissa Villalona 

 
Brenda Rivera 

 
Jessica Ralli 

 
Lara Warren 

 
John White 

 
Stacy Grenia 

 
NelidaRodriguez 

 
 

 

Member/ ElectedUFT 

 
Member/ ElectedUFT 

 
Member/ Elected Parent 

 
Member/ Elected Parent 

 
Member/ Elected Parent 

 
Member/ Elected Parent 

 
Member/ Elected Parent 

 
Member/ Elected Parent 

 
Member/ 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          6 

 

Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan  

 

The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to 
support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing 
school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, 
monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. 
This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the 
school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, 
Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. 

Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools 

The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect 
the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms 
where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity 
and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and 
classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more 
attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and 
Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our 
families and students. 

Strong Schools, Strong Communities  

The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, 
educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school 
prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult.  

The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers 
and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of 
schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, 
school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that 
all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New 
Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students.  

The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development 

The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and 
external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase 
learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently 
ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan 
(CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school 
community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and 
address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for 
students. 
 

Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish 
high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the 
Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community 
members concrete ways to improve. 
 
In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in 
consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to 
participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a 
comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          7 

 
the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all 
the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements 
work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing 
that it likely addresses other elements as well. 
 

The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools  

Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards 
are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical 
thinking skills. 
Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, 
and challenged by their teachers and peers. 
Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. 
They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous 
improvement. 
Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, 
developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. 
Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by 
welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. 
Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school 
and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value 
each other. 

 

The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools 

In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in 
improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative 
and qualitative data. 

NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) 

The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by 
coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality 
Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 
Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below:  

I.       Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) 
II.    School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4)  
III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and 

Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) 

  
School Quality Guide  

The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to 
set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to 
accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also 
available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s 
practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. 
For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. 
The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of 
similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set 
based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. 

 

Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          8 

 
Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, 
professional development, and parent and family engagement. 
 
To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in 
improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will 
serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the 
administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish: 
 
 
 
It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School 
Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the 
joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% 
parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% 
budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent 
and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on 
establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. 

a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; 
a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) 

 
Next Steps for CEP Development 

School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  

  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the 

requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655. 

  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability 

status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year. 

  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed 

by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are 
SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you 
monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school 
community know when you’ve reached your goal. 

  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action 
plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement. 

  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I 

schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). 

  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall 

cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action 
plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. 

Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful 
implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to 
accomplishing desired results. 

Section 4: CEP Overview 

 

1.  What is your school’s mission statement? 

The Mission of Public School 147 is to provide authentic learning experiences that foster the development of the 
“whole” child. By creating a child centered environment that utilizes workshop model teaching while serving and 
supporting individual needs and learning styles we will improve student achievement. We are committed to building a 
caring community of learners that work hard to excel, where the entire school community works collaboratively to 
ensure all its members grow as learners.  

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          9 

 

2.  Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, 

including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented.  

Public School 147K is an elementary school located in East Williamsburg section of Brooklyn, New York. Presently, 
there are 375 students enrolled at our school beginning in Pre-Kindergarten through Grade 5.  

 

The Vision of Public School 147 is to create a caring community of learners that values diversity, equity, and life-long 
learning. Through reflection and the sharing of ideas, teachers, parents, and staff will work collaboratively to ensure 
that each individual achieves his/her fullest potential. We believe individuals learn best in a nurturing environment 
where language, culture, and individual differences are celebrated. Through authentic learning experiences, students 
will become independent lifelong learners who think creatively, critically and analytically. We want to empower our 
students with the dispositions and abilities needed to build a better society. The school community is committed to 
ensuring all students achieve high levels of success by establishing clear expectations within a standards-based 
curriculum that strives for rigor in all aspects of teaching and learning.  

Our rigorous instruction, informed by student data, and school activities are planned with the success of each child in 
mind in order to improve student achievement. We are a Teachers College Reading and Writing Project school. 
Classroom teachers work collaboratively alongside Staff Developers, Literacy Specialist, and School Building Leaders. 
Teachers share best instructional practices geared towards ensuring that our students meet the expectations of the 
Next Generation Standards. Teachers collaboratively examine the units of study in order to customize the academic 
materials. Teachers are identifying learning gaps and adjusting curricula and pedagogy to improve student 
achievement and create a supportive environment. As a collaborative community, teachers create data-informed 
scaffolds to support our students through small group instruction that is targeted to meet their individual needs. Our 
instructional program engages students with arts experiences in visual thinking strategies, music, physical education 
and wellness programs. Students investigate and explore Mathematics using the “Go Math” program.  

 

Building strong family community ties is a priority for us as we know that the home/school partnership is essential for 
the success of our students. One example of the home/school partnership is an event held every last Wednesday of 
every month titled, “Parents in the Classroom." The goal of this event is to create opportunities where parents can 
engage in academic activities alongside the children. Other parent engagement opportunities such as the Learning 
Leaders Parent volunteer program, Cookshop for Families and twice per month workshops for families led by teachers 
are some of the opportunities that we provide to strengthen the home/school connection. Furthermore, our Parent 
Coordinator, Guidance Counselor, Staff Developer, Literacy Specialist, and School Building Leaders host Parent 
Workshops on topics such as Getting to Know the Next Generation Standards, Forming Study Habits and Homework 
Routines, and Character Education. Classroom teachers invite families to celebrate our young writers for “Publishing 
Parties” and other classroom celebrations. Parent Teacher Conferences and Parent Engagement Tuesday’s allow for 
opportunities for parents and teachers to communicate with one another and engage in important conversations 
about students ‘ academic progress.  

 

Our school recognizes that in order to meet the diverse needs of our students and families, our role should expand 
beyond traditional definitions of teaching and learning. Through the Leader In Me (7 habits) program, we actively seek 
opportunities for student social, emotional, and academic growth. We are committed to the well-being of the “whole 
child” and support our students through our unique Character Education Program. During weekly periods and 
assemblies, classes explore topics through children’s literature including: building community, being team members, 
showing responsibility, cooperation, self- control, telling the truth, making problems smaller, staying safe, and never 
giving up.  

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          10 

 

3.  Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. 

We will provide rigorous instruction through our units of study across the content areas. We will use the workshop 
framework, to teach explicit mini lessons, inquiry based learning and offer differentiated, small group instruction in 
varying modalities to increase student understanding, engagement, and achievement. We will continue the "Johnny 
Can Spell" program to support phonemic awareness and oral language development. In response to specific areas of 
need, we will use Response to Intervention to scaffold instruction and support academic needs. We will implement 
Engageny, NYReady, strategies, as well as incorporate Project Based Learning within a student centered classroom to 
continue improving success for struggling students, including but not limited to ENLs, students with disabilities, and 
students performing in the lowest third. This will enable us to continue addressing gaps in student performance 
leading to an increase in overall achievement. 

 

4. 

Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over 
the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. 

A key area of focus for PS147 this year is to increase academic vocabulary, so that it helps build comprehension, oral 
language and elaboration in both reading and mathematics. 

 

Our C.E.P goals are designed to help us meet the instructional needs of our students. Our collective goal is to strive 
towards ensuring that our students are strong readers, writers, and mathematicians and that the work in our 
classrooms (Pre-K-5) shows transference into improved outcomes on State Assessments and content area curricula, as 
well as applying the skills to real life situations. Attendance is also an area of focus for our school community with a 
current average of 95%. Our goal is to continue improving our attendance average by creating a supportive school 
environment, build Strong Family- Community ties and incorporate more project based inquiry work that sparks 
students interest. The entire school community is invested in working together to bring our school mission to life each 
and every day.  

Effective school leaders have empowered teachers and staff members to share best practices amongst each other in 
order to enhance the academic achievement for all learners through common planning, learning walks, inter-
visitations, professional development, establishing professional learning communities, data talks, and individualized 
planning conferences . 

 

 

 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          11 

 

 

School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 14K147 

School Configuration (2018-19) 

Grade Configuration 

PK,0K,01,02,03,04,
05 

Total Enrollment (2017-
18) 
English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 

360 

SIG Recipient (Y/N) 

Transitional Bilingual 

N/A 

Dual Language 

YES 

Self-Contained English as a Second 
Language 

Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) 

# Special Classes (ELA) 
# Special Classes (Math) 

# Visual Arts 
# Foreign Language 

% Title I Population 
% Free Lunch 
% Limited English Proficient 

31 
29 

18 
 

% American Indian or Alaska Native 
% Hispanic or Latino 
% White 

# SETSS (ELA) 
# SETSS (Math) 
Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) 
# Music 
# Drama 
# CTE 
# Dance 

18 
18 

18 
18 

# Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) 
# Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) 

School Composition (2017-18) 

71.0%  % Attendance Rate 
69.2%  % Reduced Lunch 
10.8%  % Students with Disabilities 

Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) 

% Black or African American 

0.0% 
60.8%  % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 
11.1%  % Multi-Racial 

Personnel (2015-16) 

Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) 
% of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate 
% Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 

7.09 
0% 
9% 

# of Assistant Principals (2016-17) 
% Teaching Out of Certification 
Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) 

Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) 

ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 

48.5%  Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 

Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 

97% 

Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-
17) 

Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) 

ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 
Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 
4 Year Graduation Rate 

Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 

N/A 
N/A 
N/A 

N/A 

Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 
US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 
6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) 
% ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures 
(2015-16) 

Reward 
In Good Standing 
Focus District 

Priority School 

Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) 

No 
Yes 
Yes 

Recognition 
Local Assistance Plan 
Focus School Identified by a Focus District 

No 

Focus Subgroups 

N/A 

Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) 

Elementary/Middle School 

Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) 

American Indian or Alaska Native 
Hispanic or Latino 
White 
Students with Disabilities 
Economically Disadvantaged 

American Indian or Alaska Native 
Hispanic or Latino 
White 
Students with Disabilities 
Economically Disadvantaged 

American Indian or Alaska Native 
Hispanic or Latino 
White 
Students with Disabilities 
Economically Disadvantaged 

American Indian or Alaska Native 
Hispanic or Latino 
White 
Students with Disabilities 
Economically Disadvantaged 

American Indian or Alaska Native 
Hispanic or Latino 
White 
Students with Disabilities 
Economically Disadvantaged 

American Indian or Alaska Native 
Hispanic or Latino 
White 
Students with Disabilities 
Economically Disadvantaged 

N/A 
NO 
N/A 
N/A 
NO 

Black or African American 
Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander 
Multi-Racial 
Limited English Proficient 
ALL STUDENTS 

Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) 
Black or African American 
Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander 
Multi-Racial 
Limited English Proficient 
ALL STUDENTS 

N/A 
NO 
N/A 
N/A 
NO 

Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) 

N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
High School 

Black or African American 
Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander 
Multi-Racial 
Limited English Proficient 
ALL STUDENTS 

Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) 

N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 

Black or African American 
Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander 
Multi-Racial 
Limited English Proficient 
ALL STUDENTS 

Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) 
Black or African American 
Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander 
Multi-Racial 
Limited English Proficient 
ALL STUDENTS 

N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 

Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) 
Black or African American 
Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander 
Multi-Racial 
Limited English Proficient 
ALL STUDENTS 

N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 

No 

N/A 

8 
8 

18 
 

91.8% 
1.7% 
15.8% 

19.2% 
3.6% 
5.3% 

2 
0% 
6 

47.3% 

N/A 

N/A 
N/A 
N/A 

N/A 

N/A 
No 
No 

N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
NO 

N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
NO 

N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
NO 

N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 

N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 

N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          12 

 

 
 

Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans 

 

Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, 
motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged 
in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. 

Part 1 – Needs Assessment   

Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and 
formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not 
limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. 
Number responses accordingly. 
 
1.  What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element?  Indicate the data trends, source and year. 
2.  What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? 

Indicate the data trends, source and year. 

 
 

We continue to work towards our goal for the 2018-2019 school year, as measured by specific Mathematical 
Benchmark Assessments of our K - 5 Grade Students.  

 

Our school community recognizes that a solid literacy foundation is critical to students’ success in Math, since the 
Math test became a comprehension test. Therefore, we must instruct and guide students with analysis and 
interpretative skills, whereas students distinguish relevant from irrelevant information as they solve word problems. 
In order to demonstrate proficiency on the New York State exams, students need to meet grade-level math 
benchmarks from Kindergarten to Fifth Grade.  

 

NYS ELA data, NYSESLAT data and Quality Review feedback also helped inform our decision-making around 
establishing this goal and creating an action plan aligned with our instructional focus. NYS Math Data showed that the 
majority of our students did not meet grade level standards, scoring Level 2, or lower when measuring the problem 
solving component. State testing data, confirmed by school level data, that our students are struggling with part two 
of the math state exam, which asks our students to analyze and solve multistep word problems. If we can increase 
student conversation about Mathematics, increase ways to visualize and connect mathematical data, and show a 
detailed process of critical thinking among our students by asking and answering higher order questions this will 
increase key math vocabulary, and enhance state test scores. 

 

According to our Quality Review, we are Proficient in 1.1 and we are working on further developing our work by 
aligning instruction to the Next Generation and consistently emphasizing higher order thinking skills across the grades 
for all students through critical thinking questions and rigorous culminating activities. 

Our instructional focus was developed in response to our State Math Data, School level Math Data, our NYSESLAT 
data and our P.P.O Feedback. This instructional focus aligns with the goal that follows which emphasizes instruction 
that centers on Student Engagement in order to improve student outcomes in Mathematics.  

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          13 

 

 

Isaac Remsen (147) Elementary Instructional Focus:  

To improve math problem solving beginning in early childhood through grade 5, leading to student readiness for high 
school, college and careers. 

If teachers increase academic vocabulary and critical thinking by using higher order thinking questions, students will 
be able to identify relevant information and the correct math operation to solve multi-step word problems.  

 

Students will... 
Utilize critical thinking to make their ideas visible in conversation with peers, in conferences with teachers, and in 
their mathematical writing. By participating in higher order thinking questions and discussions to deepen their insight 
within the curricula areas they will show increased proficiency in communicating their own ideas and understanding 
around a Math using reciprocal teaching methods. 

 

Teachers will… 
Strategically plan opportunities for balancing teacher talk and student discussion. We will build student capacity to 
engage in meaningful conversation through explicit modeling, inquiry based learning, and daily word problem solving 
that reflects, not only the answer, but the process as well.  

 

Administrators and Staff Developers will empower our staff... 
Study best practices and support student and adult learning. We will provide actionable feedback and opportunities 
for collaborative study and planning for refining environmental supports and pedagogical decisions in service of 
cohesive school-wide practices aligned with our instructional focus quarterly throughout the 2018- 2019 school year. 

Problem-solving is not only one of the most important components of the study of mathematics; it permeates all 
aspects of life, including the professional world. Problem-solving teaches students to be critical out-of-the-box 
thinkers, hone organizational skills, and build a rational thought process required for making logical decisions.  

 

However, our P.S 147 students struggle with problem-solving. When we analyzed the data of 2016-2017, and 2017-
2018 State Exams our proficiency rates of students in grades 3-5 who met or exceed expectations in math fell under 
52 %. We were able to see that it is the word-problem portion (Part 2) open response that often confuses students. 
Our students have difficulty with key math vocabulary, removing and identifying relevant and irrelevant information, 
and finding ways to identify which operation to use to solve the mathematical word problem.  

 

In addition, after examining the end of unit Go Math assessments, and completing our problem solving procedure at 
our school, we have observed that our students are choosing the incorrect operation. Students are leaving the 
problems blank, showing no illustrations that demonstrates their thinking, therefore, not meeting state standards.  

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          14 

 

Word problems tend to be complicated in part because of their descriptive language. Students often don't understand 
what exactly they're being asked, especially when the problem includes abstract concepts. Other issues arise when 
students lack the fundamentals of math and cannot formulate a plan for solving multi-step problems.  

 

The students scored below 65 % on part two of the state exam, and got only 1 or 0 correct out of 5 word problems or 
gained partial credit during formative assessments. In addition, we have also observed that our teachers have to assist 
our students through the problem solving component through whole class discussion. Students are not independently 
developing plans on their own, which holds them back when they have to perform on state exams.  

 

This outward solving behavior at PS 147 school students strongly suggests a lack of  

hands on, meta-cognitive, and effective aspects of mathematical competence. Many students do not apply useful 
hands on strategies and meta-cognitive skills (e.g., drawing of the problem situation, in order to decompose the 
problem into parts, or checking the answer) in their solution. 

 

 
Part 2 – Annual Goal 

Indicate  your  school’s  2018-19  goal  for  improving  student  outcomes  and  school  performance  that  addresses  this 
element  of  the  Framework  for  Great  Schools–Rigorous  Instruction.  Your  goal  must  be  responsive  to  the  identified 
priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-
bound.  
If students in grades k-5 complete daily single and multi-step math word problems by building key vocabulary and using 
specific strategies such as identifying relevant information, and the correct operation, then the students will solve the 
problems correctly 3 out of 5 times 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          15 

Target 
Group(s) 
Who will be 
targeted? 

Timeline 
What is the 
start and 
end date? 

Key Personnel 
Who is responsible 
for implementing 
and overseeing the 
activity/strategy? 

Students 

2018-2019 

Staff Developer 

SWDs 

 

Literacy Specialist 

ENLs 

Sept.-Nov.  

Teachers 

 

Speech Teacher 

Dec.-Feb..  

ENLTeacher 

 

Paraprofessionals 

Mar.-April  

S.E.T.T.S Teacher 

 

Technology Teacher 

May-June  

 
Part 3a – Action Plan 

Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies 
your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for 
this Framework for Great Schools element, including: 

  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional 

 

development, and/or systems and structures needed to 
impact change. 
Strategies to address the needs of students with 
disabilities, English language learners, and other high-
need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, 
SIFE, STH). 

In order to reach our student achievement goal we will continue 
to provide rigorous instruction through the use of the Go Math 
Program, PBL learning, Reciprocal Teaching Instruction and daily 
problem solving activity during mathematical instruction. 
Through consistent implementation of Go Math mini-lessons,, 
R.t.I instruction and Reciprocal Teaching in varying modalities, 
student engagement, comprehension and Mathematical critical 
thinking skill achievement will increase. In response to specific 
areas of student need, we will use Response to Intervention (RtI) 
to scaffold instruction and support their academic needs. In 
addition, we will continue the use of NYReady Mathematics and 
Engageny resources in an effort to create improved success for 
struggling students, including but not limited to: English 
Language Learners, students with disabilities, and students 
performing in our lowest third. This will enable us to better 
address word problem solving gaps in student performance 
leading to an increase in overall achievement. 

 

 

Students will take part in daily word problems and show 
their thinking using a specific template designed by our 
school. One strategy is to use a process chart, which can 
guide students as they tackle a new problem. It helps to 
focus on how each step of the process supports students 
as they work to access the problem. An example 
problem-solving process is provided below: 

  Read the problem, then reread it and highlight key words 

and numbers. Reading the problem a second time with 
annotations helps students sort out the core information 
from the background noise. 

  Draw a picture of the situation that the problem 

presents. It may be helpful to first visualize a story or 
imagine a movie scene. Visualizing a story can be a 
powerful strategy that helps students create a picture or 
diagram of the problem. 

  Determine the goal of the problem. 
  Establish a strategy or write an equation to represent the 

picture. Estimate an answer, if possible. Estimating or 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          16 

 

 

approximating an answer helps students decide if they 
are on the right track. 
Solve the problem and check the reasonableness of your 
answer. Reminding students that it is rare to complete a 
problem correctly on the first attempt encourages them 
to embrace mistakes and errors. 

  Explain your solution method using the C.U.B.E.S (Circle, 

Underline, Box, Extract, Solve) strategy. 

  P.S 147 will use the Reciprocal Teaching in grades 3-5 to 
enhance mathematical thinking by utilizing key roles and 
a collaborative approach to solve word problems 2-3 
times a week. 

  PS 147 will conduct bi-weekly assessments and quizzes 

that will have word problem solving questions with 
multi-steps. 

  PS 147 will develop pre/post word problem on demands 

based on specific word problem deficits. 

  R.t.I occurring three times a week in small groups, 

focusing on analyzing and interpreting information of 
text so it can enhance the problem solving in 
Mathematics. 
Increased math read alouds to show connections of 
math concepts to the world so the mathematical 
language can be transferred and applied in other areas. 

 

  Math Games will be used to reinforce specific operations 

and strategies, 1x a week as well as for parents in the 
classroom. 

  Provide students with guided experience by practicing a 

 

variety of problems from the web, and standardized 
tests from engageny.com. 
Sort the problems into levels of difficulty or themes, and 
start with a one-step problem before moving to those 
with two or three steps. 

PS 147 will provide problems that may even contain intentional 
mistakes for students to find and resolve. 

To begin, the basic procedures: 

1. Read the problem  

2. Understand what is being asked  

3. Make a plan to solve the most difficult step using a 
mathematical vocabulary. 

4. Execute the plan  

5. Check your solution for reasonableness 

  PS 147 classrooms will also have a specific math word 

wall with the word, pictorial support, and definitions to 
assist our student’s academic achievement. 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          17 

 

  You should also never underestimate the computer as a 

powerful instructional tool. Students must learn to 
translate words into a series of steps toward a solution 
by applying informational cues, identifying variables, 
recognizing the unknowns in expressions, and explaining 
their reasoning. One way to do this is by thinking about 
how the word problems might connect to problems in 
their daily lives. By creating realistic content based on 
real-world problems, computers tend to hold the 
interest of students longer than lecture. Computers can 
generate questions tailored to the needs and capabilities 
of individual students and provide immediate feedback 
and correction before students make numerous errors of 
the same type. 

  The representation of mathematical concepts in 

illustrations can also foster deeper understanding. Use 
drawings, figures, or symbols to show the visual 
connection between the data and the unknown. Make a 
conceptual map and practice outlines of the necessary 
steps. Students should also have the opportunity to 
explain their own problem-solving strategies to others in 
the classroom as they develop the strategies that work 
best for them. 

  This ability can be achieved by reading word problem 

texts attentively and paying attention to all relevant 
aspects of the problem description. To gain 
understanding of the context of word problems is an 
important step in the modeling process before one can 
construct a proper situation model. 

  Application word problems are similar to non-routine 

word problems. 

  One additional requirement is the use of non-direct 
translation of the word problem texts on the basis of 
real-world knowledge and assumptions into the 
mathematical model and apply it to the real world. 

  Teacher-student interaction will help you differentiate 

instruction. Ask students to compare and contrast 
different approaches, and then summarize their 
responses for them. Students should understand what 
works and does not work (and why); which methods are 
more efficient; and how models differ encourage your 
students to use pictures, diagrams, charts, expressions, 
and equations as part of the problem-solving process. 
Discuss with them how their picture, diagram, chart, 
expression, or equation relates to the situation in the 
problem. Ask them to explain why they chose it and why 
they think it is a good mathematical expression to use 
for the problem they are tackling. 
For our SWD and ENL students, will be provided with 
prompts, graphic organizers, color coded text, modified 
vocabulary and numbers, picture support and 
manipulatives. As well as using computer programs to 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          18 

 

 

assist their learning, and key websites that helps 
visualize step by step instructions. 

During the first quarter, we expect our students to become 
familiar with various mathematical operations and key 
vocabulary strategies to enhance mathematical problem solving 
skills. For SWD and ELL's many additional mathematical read 
alouds will be shared illustrating mathematical concepts and 
how it relates to the real world. We will also use the "Visual 
Thinking Strategies" approach to enhance our students to 
analyze mathematical illustrations and key information in the 
text. The 3 questions and prompts will assist SWD and ELL's to 
critically think beyond the mathematical word problem. SWD 
and ELL students will use different color highlighters to code the 
word problems so they can distinguish relevant from irrelevant 
information, and synthesize the details, that assist in the specific 
question that is being asked.  

 

During the second quarter, we expect our students to be able to 
connect their knowledge, demonstrate their knowledge of 
various genres through citing textual evidence and express their 
thoughts orally, distinguish relevant and irrelevant information 
from word problems to support their thinking while working 
independently. SWD and ELL students will use various graphic 
organizers, and colored highlighters to distinguish information 
from the problem and categorize the information using distinct 
prompts. 

 

During the third quarter, we expect our students to synthesize 
key information by connecting key mathematical elements as 
they analyze and interpret the math word problem. SWD and 
ELL's will synthesize key information by examining the problem 
like a puzzle. Each piece will be solved and drawn out as a visual 
using manipulatives. As the pieces come together, the students 
will sketch their thoughts, and match the illustrations and discuss 
how it can help solve the math problem.  

 
During the fourth quarter, students will become proficient with 
inferential and critical analysis comprehension that goes beyond 
the text.  

 

Teachers 

 

Administration 

We focus our professional development on using data to inform 
instruction in all instructional areas. This year as a school 
community, we are focusing on Danielson Domain 1: Planning 

2018-2019 

Teachers 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          19 

 

 

Staff Developers 

Literacy Specialist 

Sept.-Nov.  

Data Specialist 

 

Parent Coordinator 

Dec.-Feb..  

 

Mar.-April  

 

May-June 

 

 

Families 

2018-2019 

S.L.T Members 

Teachers 

Parent Coordinator 

 

and Preparation. We will explicitly plan instructional outcomes 
that challenge student thinking and invite students to show that 
thinking using a variety of mathematical procedures and charts, 
culminating activities and formal periodic assessment. We will 
continue to encourage asking and answering higher order 
thinking (HOT) questions and support oral language 
development by front loading key mathematical academic 
vocabulary prior to the implementation of the math activity 
across the curriculum. 

These actions will take place during Monday PD sessions, full day 
professional development seminars, in weekly collaborative 
planning sessions, and via coaching sessions with staff 
developers and lead teachers. During these meeting teachers will 
use multiple data sources to plan instruction responsive to 
student needs and reflect on their practice. 

Specific professional activities will include: 

1.  Professional development centered on elements of 

Danielson's Domain 1: Planning and Preparation. 

2.  Grouping students in preparation for Math Instruction.  
3.  Gathering relevant resources to support rigorous Math 

instruction as students learn how to distinguish relevant 
from irrelevant information as they analyze 
mathematical multi-step word problems.  

4.  Analysis of student fluency and interpretations based on 

evidence that supports comprehension. 

5.  Designing data-informed, skill specific goals for English 

Language Learners, students with disabilities and general 
education students. 

Information pertaining to our Math goal is shared with our 
families in a variety of ways. Our collaborative efforts with the 
School Leadership Team serves as a monthly platform to share 
this information with families. In addition, families are invited to 
participate in ”Parents in the Classroom” on the final Wednesday 
of each month, where they can see their children engaged in 
Mathematical practices. Curriculum Conferences, Parent Teacher 
Conferences, and Tuesday parent engagement/ outreach time 
are ideal structures for shared dialogue between families and 
teachers on how to support their students in Mathematics. 
Teachers develop various parent workshops to share tools and 
resources and build a stronger home-school connection so that 
families can better assist their children with academic tasks at 
home. 

Families will be supported through workshops provided by 
teachers and Staff Developer, and sample description of 
modeled problems in their news letters to show how the 
problem is solved. Families will also gain support as they do 
specific activities during Parents in the Classroom. 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          20 

Teachers  

2018-2019 

Administration 

September-
June 

Staff Developer 

Literacy Specialist 

Data Specialist 

 

 

In order to oversee these activities administrators will utilize 
ADVANCE and One-Drive to observe, provide feedback and 
address next steps for teacher practice to promote student 
progress and performance. The Staff Developer will facilitate 
weekly common planning sessions in order to maintain 
coherence and rigor around word problem solving, where 
students will cite key vocabulary, and distinguish relevant from 
irrelevant information in order to identify the key operations 
that are needed to solve the single or multi-step problem. The 
Data Specialist will conduct regularly scheduled data talks as well 
as provide grade wide and school wide snapshots of student 
progress and performance with end of unit math assessments 
and problem solving tasks. As a collaborative community we will 
engage in scheduled learning walks and cycles of observations to 
inform future professional development opportunities. 

 
 

 
3b – Parent and Family Engagement 

How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York 
State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible 
for implementation and oversight. 
We will continue to foster a welcoming school environment for our families during the 2018-19 school year as the 
priority has been identified as strengthening parental ability to engage and support students academically, socially 
and emotionally with the help of the school community. As part of our school culture, we believe in not only 
educating the students, but educating the family on best practices. Because of this, we invite our families to a 
monthly "Parents in the Classroom" event held on the last Wednesday of every month. During this time, teachers and 
parents have the opportunity to collaborate on best teaching practices with the students. Parents can take full 
advantage of learning skills and strategies too help assist/teach his/her child at home. This event also provides regular 
opportunities to address student attendance. At PS147, we take full advantage of our parent outreach time on 
Tuesday's from 2:20 p.m. - 3:40 p.m. During this time, teachers lead parent workshops to further develop 
understanding of the concepts and skills presented during "Parents in the Classroom." Additional parent workshops 
will be offered by an educational consultant and various partner C.B.Os. Parents will also develop a partnership with 
their children as they work on multi-step word problems across the year, and learn through workshops various ways 
to question, solve word problems, and distinguish information that assists our students what operations are need to 
be utilized so their mathematical comprehension increases. 

 

 
Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 

Part  4a.  Indicate  resources  you will  leverage  to  achieve  this  annual  goal  and  implement this  action  plan,  including 
human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 
1. School budget allocation funded Data Specialist position to support teacher use of data. School schedule 
programmed to maximize opportunity for grade level common planning through aligned preparation periods. School 
based option used to establish 155 minutes for professional learning opportunities / data inquiry time. 

2. School budget allocations funded an on site staff developer to support teachers with implementing data driven and 
planned instruction. School schedule program to maximize opportunities for grade level common planning through 
aligned preparation periods one time per week for each teacher. School budget allocations used to provide substitute 
teacher coverage for teachers attending professional development away from school site. 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          21 

 

 

Instructional Resources: 

 Demonstration and active engagement materials from engageny.com  

 ●  Go Math reteach and differentiated instruction guides 

 ●  Scaffolds that are meant to be lifted (e.g. graphic organizers not whole class and not forever)  

 ●  Read Aloud (also shared reading/close reading) that allow for practice of priority  

 ●  Differentiated checklists 

 ●  Tactile resources/tools (manipulatives) 

 

 

 
Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 
Title III, 

X 

Tax Levy 

X 

Title I SWP 

 

Title I TA 

 

Immigrant 

Title II, 
Part A 

 

Title III, 
Part A 

 

 

C4E 

 

21st Century 

Grant 

 
Part 5 – Progress Monitoring  

 

SIG 

 

PTA Funded 

 

In Kind 

 

Other 

Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement 
planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 
Progress monitoring for Math is conducted using end of unit GoMath assessments, Problem Solving Procedure 
Assessments, B.O.Y, M.O.Y and E.O.Y assessments and teacher conferencing, which are administered, collected and 
analyzed in September, November, January, May, and June and then contrasted with teacher observations over the 
course of the school year.  

Our midpoint benchmark will take place in February 2019 and will be measured via teacher monitoring progressions 
with End Unit Assessments from Go Math showing levels. If teacher grade teams meet and analyze math data for 
their classes with the goal of identifying those students who are meeting or not meeting grade-level standards and 
adjust instruction to target struggling problem solvers, then students will show an increase of at least two math levels 
using the GoMath assessments and teacher observations by June 2019. 

 
Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January 
Regents, etc.) 
We will use the Go Math end of unit assessments every 6 weeks, and examine the B.O.Y, M.O.Y and E.O.Y to progress 
monitor the growth of our students. 

 
Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action 
plan, if applicable. 

 

 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          22 

 

Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans 

 
Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and 
school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. 

Part 1 – Needs Assessment   

Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and 
formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not 
limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. 
Number responses accordingly. 
 
1.  What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element?  Indicate the data trends, source and year. 
2.  What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? 

Indicate the data trends, source and year. 

3.  What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? 
After analyzing the learning environment survey, attendance data as measured by our peer groups of schools, referral 
rates to guidance counselor we saw the need for students to have personal and academic behaviors that would foster 
lifelong habits to prepare them for college and beyond. In order for this to happen, all stakeholders of our community 
must be on board. This was done through the entire staff Leader In Me training one year ago by Franklin Covey 
Institute. Attendance data has also improved in the year of implementation of TLIM.  

We also analyzed teachers and their actions throughout the year based on the LIM training and realized that staff 
would benefit from this program as it carries from the school to the home environment.  

 

 

 

 

 
Part 2 – Annual Goal 

Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this 
element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the 
identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, 
and Time-bound. 
By June 2019, P.S.147 will make a 2% increase by continuing to implement The Leader In Me (TLIM) process using the 
Path to Lighthouse Self-Evaluation rubric to identify areas of celebration and areas of focus for a safe and supportive 
environment, so that we can demonstrate effective maintenance and the ability to sustain the program in order to be 
designated a Lighthouse School.  

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          23 

 
Part 3a – Action Plan 

Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies 
your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for 
this Framework for Great Schools element, including: 

Target 
Group(s) 
Who will be 
targeted? 

Timeline 
What is the 
start and end 
date? 

  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional 
development, and/or systems and structures needed 
to impact change. 
Strategies to address the needs of students with 
disabilities, English language learners, and other high-
need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-
credited, SIFE, STH). 

 

  All staff trained in the Leader in Me process and the 7 

Teachers 

2018-2019 

Key Personnel 
Who is 
responsible for 
implementing 
and overseeing 
the 
activity/strategy? 

habits. 

  50% of new parents will be introduced to the process 

 

and the habits. 
Light-House Team and Action teams will meet monthly 
and do specific workshops on the habits and goal 
settings for staff and parents. 

  Examining the resource tools for enhancing the 

classroom curriculum 

  Tracking binders and student goals to see if they are 

met 

Staff 
Developer 

 

****Column is 
missing for 
personnel for 
implementation 
over seeing.  

Administration 

Staff Developer 

 

Light-House 
Team Members 

Literacy Coach 

Light-House 
Team 

Parent 
Coordinator 

Para-
Professionals 

Administration 

 

Pre-K to Grade 
5 

 

 
 

 
3b – Parent and Family Engagement 

How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to 
support  the  whole  child?  Include  the  timeline  and  identify  key  personnel  and  stakeholders  responsible  for 
implementation and oversight. 
Monthly Assemblies  

A Home-School Connection (LIM) activity 

Beginning to implement WIGs (Widely Individual Goals) transferring from the school to the home for reinforcement. 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          24 

 

Leadership Day and Classroom leadership events 

Parent (LIM) Workshops by the lighthouse committee 

 

 
Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 
Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including 
human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 
Yearly Consultant for (LIM) Training Rate 

Boosters Training Staff Developer for Professional Learning Updates 

Binders and other supplies purchased for students in grades k-5 to support LIM 

Student led Conferences 

Light-House Training of data collection 

 

 
Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 

X 

Tax Levy 

X 

Title I SWP 

 

C4E 

 

21st Century 

Grant 

 
Part 5 – Progress Monitoring  

 

 

Title I TA 

SIG 

 

 

Title II, 
Part A 

PTA Funded 

 

 

Title III, 
Part A 

In Kind 

 

 

Title III, 

Immigrant 

Other 

Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement 
planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 
Bi-Monthly Meetings each month 

Full staff booster meeting in the fall 

Light-House committee check in with LIM coach in December and April 

Binder observation and review of students and LIM Coordinator 

 
Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 
Self-evaluation Checklist rubric and Student binders 

 

Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action 
plan, if applicable. 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          25 

 

Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans 

Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success 
and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional 
development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. 

 

Part 1 – Needs Assessment   

Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and 
formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not 
limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. 
Number responses accordingly. 
 
1.  What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element?  Indicate the data trends, source and year. 
2.  What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? 

Indicate the data trends, source and year. 

According to the School Quality Snapshot, research-based, effective instruction that yields high quality student work 
needs to take place across the curriculum to show common threads of instructional practices. Rigorous, engaging and 
coherent curricula aligned to the common core learning standards are practiced in our Teachers College and Go Math 
Programs. Although our students strive to meet these instructional expectations, we as a school community wish to 
increase the level of quality evident in student work across disciplines to demonstrate that students can exceed, and 
show transference of the knowledge across all subjects according to the Common Core Learning Standards. As a 
result, we have chosen to focus on Danielson's Domain 1: Planning and Preparation in the area of Writing. 

 

Based on 2018-2019 data and teachers assessments of On-Demand writing around Narratives, Informational and 
Argumentative writing we have concluded that our students are scoring a level 2 on the TC Rubric. In addition, 2016- 
2017 school year, our students scored below grade level on the ELA extended and short response questions on the 
State Exam. Therefore, if our teachers work collaboratively to examine student pre/post on-demand writing samples , 
we can target specific instructional needs. 

 

Based on evidence gathered through comprehensive research, Professional learning such as teachers collaborating on 
writing using a variety of lenses has shown to improve effective instruction, student achievement and writing 
performance will increase.  

 

The goal is to improve writing development using specific strategies and graphic organizers to improve student 
outcomes while gathering a cohesive set of evidence that will work towards enhancing student learning by critical 
teacher analysis.  

 

Understanding what students know and still need to learn is a pre-requisite for planning where to go next 
instructionally. This will allow us to utilize writing standard indicators to move a student towards proficiency. Though 
teachers have always examined student work as part of their grading process, the new focus on accountability and 
standards has driven a more structured and collaborative examination of student work. This examination of student 
work protocol will develop our teachers to understand what students know and still need to learn. The examination 
focuses teachers on three critical areas:  

1. 

Identification of targeted areas of need based on TC rubrics and checklists. 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          26 

 

2.  Teachers will assess that area of need collaboratively through rubrics and checklists. 
3.  Teachers will then, decide on the next steps and collaborate on various teaching practices that have worked 

for them in the past in an effort to enhance students’ writing. 

This process requires teachers to shift their mindset from scoring (a summative examination) to diagnosing (a 
formative examination) student performance. In many cases teachers have spent a great deal of time sorting student 
writing (either by grades or by rubric scores) which will still occur, but by examining the writing development 
objectively and collaboratively with many eyes we will increase student performance and teachers instructional 
practices.  

 

 

 
Part 2 – Annual Goal 

Indicate  your  school’s  2018-19  goal  for  improving  student  outcomes  and  school  performance  that  addresses  this 
element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified 
priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-
bound. 
If our teachers engage in collaborative assessments of Teacher's College Writing student work products during the 2018-
2019 school year, then by June 2019 students will show improvement of 1.0% grade Level as measured by examining 
pre/post on-demands focusing on the Informational genre "Development Portion" of the TC Writing Rubric/Checklist.  

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          27 

 
Part 3a – Action Plan 

Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies 
your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for 
this Framework for Great Schools element, including: 

  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional 
development, and/or systems and structures needed 
to impact change. 
Strategies to address the needs of students with 
disabilities, English language learners, and other high-
need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, 
SIFE, STH). 

 

Common planning teams will build capacity through 
collaboration by sharing ideas and concepts as well as analyzing 
data in relation to the development section of written 
instruction.  

Target 
Group(s) 
Who will be 
targeted? 

Timeline 
What is the 
start and 
end date? 

Key Personnel 
Who is responsible 
for implementing 
and overseeing the 
activity/strategy? 

Grades K-5 

 

Teachers 

2018-2019 

Staff Developer 

 

Literacy Specialist 

Sept.-Nov.  

Data Specialist 

 

Dec.-Feb..  

 

Mar.-April  

 

May-June 

Teachers 

2018-2019 

Staff Developer 

Administration 

 

Literacy Specialist 

Sept.-Nov.  

S.E.T.S.S Teacher 

 

Dec.-Feb..  

 

Mar.-April  

 

May-June 

Professional Development will aid teachers in the process of 
planning next steps. Through the use of protocols we will utilize 
writing standard indicators to promote student growth using 
the Teachers College Rubrics. Sharing ideas in an objective way 
will allow teachers to monitor their instruction accordingly to 
the needs of specific child since the learning process is 
internalized in a variety of ways. Therefore, multiple entry 
points, progress monitoring notes will be accessed during lesson 
planning and instruction. 

 

Activities: 

  Professional Development around protocol 

  Ways to enhance the writing development component 

must be modeled and discuss Best practices using 
acronyms to structure student writing. 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          28 

 

  Data Talks around the students writing analysis 
  Common Planning meetings to form directed lesson 
planning around subject, subtopics, sharing factual 
details that support text-based evidence, word choice, 
projection of tone within our writing styles. 

  Professional Development showing ways to develop 

multiple entry points for instruction with students with 
disabilities. We will model by using writing prompts, 
various leveled books, computers to assist structure and 
organization using graphic organizers to assist all 
subgroups as we adjust language and vocabulary usage.  

Strategies: 

  Collaboration Protocol around writing samples 
  Reviewing how to use the rubrics 
  Teaching into the checklist at the beginning of the unit 

of study, and used consistently throughout the students 
work cycle. (Student Reference) 
Setting up a school/home connection whereas the 
writing can be reinforced (H.W) 

 

  Explicit Modeling and observations of Exemplary work 

 

samples 
Free Writing must occur for 5-7 minutes daily around 
each specific development theme. Daily focus in place- 
Teacher models organization, voice, emphasis of topics 
and subtopics, use of figurative language to stress 
points of view each day of the week.  

S.L.T Members will be informed about the protocol and how 
students are performing based on the grading shifts on a 
monthly basis. 

Parents will also have the opportunity to attend workshops 
once a month presented by their classroom teachers, and 
attend Parents in the Classroom, where they can take part in 
the process of writing activity with their child. 

Presentations at Multi-cultural Fairs & Science fairs exhibiting 
the PBL project designs to students and family members. 

Teachers 
Targeted 
Students 

2018-2019 

Classroom Teachers 

 

Staff Developer 

Sept.-Nov.  

Literacy Specialist 

 

Dec.-Feb..  

 

Mar.-April  

 

May-June 

Parents 

2018-2019 

Administrators 

U.F.T Chapter 
Leader 

S.L.T Members  

Teachers 

 

Sept.-Nov.  

 

Dec.-Feb..  

 

Mar.-April  

 

May-June 

 
 

 
3b – Parent and Family Engagement 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          29 

 

How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies 
to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and 
identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. 
Parents in the Classroom Activities- Teachers/Parents 

Parent Workshops on Tuesday's for parent outreach- Teachers 

Parent Coordinator sending fliers informing step by step models on how to use the writing checklist/rubric to increase 
writing performance. 

Consultant/Staff Developer Workshops on the writing process and grading according to the Teacher College Rubrics. 

 

 
Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 

Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including 
human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 
Literacy Specialist, Staff Developer, and Lead Teachers will analyze student work during common planning time, so 
specific multiple entry point can be achieved.. Teacher's College Writing Project Rubrics and Checklists, and 
collaborative planning using the Atlas protocol will be utilized during common planning after specific professional 
development discusses how the protocol operates.. We will have our staff developer model key lessons in classroom, 
as we do inter-visitations to meet our goal. The instructional resources Writing Pathways/writing progressions will be 
used a measurement tools for our teachers to reference as we learn about our students academic behavior.  

 
Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 

X 

Tax Levy 

X 

Title I SWP 

 

C4E 

 

21st Century 

Grant 

 
Part 5 – Progress Monitoring  

 

 

Title I TA 

SIG 

 

 

Title II, 
Part A 

PTA Funded 

 

 

Title III, 
Part A 

In Kind 

 

 

Title III, 

Immigrant 

Other 

Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement 
planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 
After analyzing student work using the development components provided in the Teacher’s College Writing Rubric 
Checklist, if 100% teachers spend 45 minutes aligning their instructional plans to meet the needs indicated every 
week, during planning time, then student writing will improve by 0.5% by the mid-point assessment period in 
February 2019, and 1% by June 2019.  

 

 
Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 
Teachers College Writing Rubrics, Checklists, progress monitoring sheets and Writing Progression Indicators. 

 

Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action 
plan, if applicable. 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          30 

 

Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans 

 

Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and 
nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional 
support that drives student achievement. 
 
Part 1 – Needs Assessment   

Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and 
formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not 
limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. 
Number responses accordingly. 
 
1.  What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element?  Indicate the data trends, source and year. 
2.  What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? 

Indicate the data trends, source and year. 

 

Needs Assessment: 

Throughout our collaborative work and building capacity of leaders and teachers through many instructional 
initiatives, we have made progress because we have been focused, collegial, and always looking for ways to improve 
our schools way on building rigor in our classrooms. 

During the PPO visits and conversations that provided us with a way to build a common language and knowledge 
based about pedagogy. For the 2018-2019 school year we want to apply the application of rigor in every classrooms 
instruction with a toolbox of strategies to critically reflect on instructional practices through Project Based Learning.. 

In our collaborative inter visitations and leadership walk through and professional development, we examine best 
practices and identified those grounded in the action research of thinking demand within the classrooms, how strong 
impact towards improving teachers learning and instruction. Leading our thinking in making connections between 
rigorous tasks and practices and assessment all ties together for coherent academic movement for student growth. At 
our PPO visits we discussed getting deeper in looking at student work and embedding it in feedback to teachers and 
students as our PPO conversations often lead to next steps in use of assessment within instruction that is built around 
rigorous activities. PBL as a component to student centered learning will be an area where students will receive peer 
to peer feedback and increase rigor by creating projects and solving problems that relate to the real world.  

 

NYS ELA Assessment Data – 2016 - 2017: Results on the 2016 - 2017 ELA State Assessment indicate that while 
students have made progress, many of our students tested lower in expressing answers on short and extended 
responses. We received a rating of Developing in the areas of written response that illustrate the thinking demand of 
answering the questions with textual evidence and connections. Despite the fact that data was collected on an 
ongoing basis, the school failed to utilize the data to develop strategic action plans to improve student achievement 
on how to analyze questions, and know how to correctly give detailed answers to open ended questions. In 
connection with the Capacity Framework (Rigorous Instruction), the PPO notes that we have to get our students to dig 
deeper in sharing thoughts and patterns within various types of questions as they work collaboratively in groups to 
solve and construct plans that can resolve real life issues.  

Weakness: The school’s curriculum is implemented consistently across all grades, However, we need to hold our 
students accountable to meeting learning expectations, including students with disabilities and English language 
learners, even though scaffolds are provided as needed. To ensure high levels of thinking all teachers need to apply 
the cognitive rigor matrix to instructional practices as well as in task design. In addition, all students are now 
programmed for reading classes and intervention math courses that require them to engage in practical analysis, 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          31 

 

synthesizing, and supporting their opinions and thinking with evidence. Teachers work to provide students with daily 
opportunities to hone their critical thinking skills need to increase, thus preparing them for the rigor and demands of 
higher education and provide them with the skills they will need to be successful in a global and competitive 
workforce and society.  

 

Based on the 2016-2017 PPO, there is inconsistency in the implementation of strategies for extending higher-order 
thinking in a number of classrooms. This results in diminished opportunities for all students to engage in challenging 
tasks that offer opportunities to extend their thinking. The school must regularly track progress towards meeting 
these goals. A comprehensive system of data analysis leading to strategic action planning must be put in place to 
improve student achievement using the Webb’s Depth of Knowledge.  

 

Based on PPO’s results, there is inconsistency in the implementation of agreed-upon strategies for extending higher-
order thinking in a number of classrooms. This results in diminished opportunities for all students to engage in 
challenging tasks that offer opportunities to extend their thinking and make their thinking visible. Teachers must 
implement lessons that include differentiated and scaffold instruction to meet the needs of all students. Students, 
across all grade levels, must be provided with opportunities to answer and formulate higher order thinking questions 
and explain the process of getting to that answer.. Groupings of students within classes should be flexible, based on 
needs or abilities, with differentiated activities/tasks assigned to each group. The Next Generation aligned lessons and 
daily instruction does not include the implementation of differentiated instruction, or ensue multiple entry points for 
all students.  

To ensure the achievement of targeted goals daily instruction must include:  

● Implementation of differentiated tasks/activities for groups of student’s 
● Lessons should include multiple entry points for all students, taking in the needs of ELLs and SWD as they use 
multiple modalities to learn material through a student centered approach. 

Administration and teachers will use the Danielson Rubric domain for planning & preparation and student 
engagement as a means to target student involvement and best instructional practices through an inquiry style 
learning environment. 

As per the 2015-2016 Quality Review, indicator 1.1 (Ensuring there is rigor, engagement and coherence in the 
curricula) yielded a developing rating.  

-As per the 2016-2017 P.P.O, although 1.1 yielded an average rating, our area of focus was to implement the 
instructional shifts, as well as making adjustments to the curriculum on a need by need basis.  

- As per data derived from Advance for the 2017-2018 school year, 98% of teachers fell into the effective category in 
1e: Designing Coherent Instruction. Subsequently, 60% of teachers fell into the effective category in 3c: Engaging 
students in learning.  

-Results of the above mentioned assessments support the need for our school to implement changes in the delivery 
of instruction, specifically focusing on a student centered approach to learning with the PBL component that will 
enhance student engagement.  

 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          32 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Part 2 – Annual Goal 

Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this 
element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the 
identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, 
and Time-bound. 
By June 2019, 100% of teachers in grades k-5 will demonstrate their ability to implement Project Based Learning (PBL) 
activities and tasks into their daily content instruction. As a result, teachers overall rating in domain 1e and 3c will 
increase to the highly effective rating based on the Advance system. 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          33 

 
Part 3a – Action Plan 

Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies 
your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for 
this Framework for Great Schools element, including: 

  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional 

 

development, and/or systems and structures needed to 
impact change. 
Strategies to address the needs of students with 
disabilities, English language learners, and other high-
need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, 
SIFE, STH). 

Target 
Group(s) 
Who will be 
targeted? 

Timeline 
What is the 
start and 
end date? 

Key Personnel 
Who is responsible 
for implementing 
and overseeing the 
activity/strategy? 

Action Plan (Effective School Leadership) 

Teachers 

2018-2019 

Administration 

 

SETTS 

 

Teachers 

Sept.-Nov.  

Staff Developer 

 

Literacy Specialist 

Dec.-Feb..  

 

Mar.-April  

 

May-June 

A. Unpack Learning Centered Initiatives (LCI) Trifold within a 
three month time frame during Professional development and 
common planning, as well as unfold the Berkley Institute 
workshops and materials. 

 

 

 

 

 

B. Improving our questioning in groups by altering convergent to 
divergent questioning through PBL group work. 

C. Student Exploration and formulating questions needs to be the 
driven force in ones lesson 

 

D. How to use essential questions vs Guided questioning in our 
planning and execution of a lesson 

Professional Learning opportunities, focusing on PBL, UDL, 
differentiation and scaffolding for the ELLs, SWDs, and general 
education subgroups. 

- Teacher teams will work collaboratively to analyze the units of 
study in Go Math, and adapt the PBL’s to address the 
achievement gaps. 

-During teacher data meetings, each teacher will be able to look 
at their specific data to identify trends of improvement and 
progress. 

-Teacher Teams will meet to develop protocols for looking at 
student work, analyzing GoMath student assessments and 
monitoring student progress. 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          34 

 

-Use of formative data to help drive differentiated instruction. 

- Smartboard technology used to create interactive PBL lessons. 

Classroom teachers will have ongoing reflection opportunities 
and will make modifications and adjustments on curricula to 
reach the high level of performance that the CCLS demands. 

 

 

Teachers will analyze the progression of the key standards, and 
determine the skills that the students need to master at each 
grade level. 

- Teacher teams will continue aligning the Next Generation 
curriculum to the instructional shifts by adapting PBL’S to 
everyday instruction. 

-Instructional coaches will work with teacher teams to develop a 
deeper understanding of the instructional shifts in order to make 
coherent adjustments to curriculum and instruction based upon 
student data. 

-Teacher teams will use rubrics to assess student learning in 
order to make meaning 

Throughout the 2018-2019 school year, teachers will collaborate 
to ensure that the level of rigor through PBL activities are 
extended to allow all students to engage in higher-order thinking, 
creating, problem solving aligned to Webb’s Depth of Knowledge 
(DOK), the Cognitive Rigor, and the Danielson Framework during 
questioning and completion of assigned PBL tasks.  

 

Teacher's 

2018-2019 

Parent Coordinator 

K-5 Students 

 

School Support Staff 

Sept.-Nov.  

Guidance Counselor 

 

Teachers 

Dec.-Feb..  

 

Mar.-April  

 

May-June 

Action Plan (Effective School Leadership : Family Engagement) 

Students 

2018-2019 

Parent Coordinator 

 

Families 

 

School Support Staff 

A. Parent engagement workshops showing what rigor looks like 
in the classroom and how it aligns to the Next Generation 
Standards. 

Sept.-Nov.  

Guidance Counselor 

 

Teachers 

B. The application of rigor during Parents In The Classroom show 
parents how to help students when they are working at home. 

 

Dec.-Feb..  

 

 

Mar.-April  

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          35 

While acknowledging the special needs of SWDs and ENLs, school 
administration continues to provide clear expectations regarding 
student punctuality and attendance which remain consistent 
regardless of the classification of the student.  

decisions when planning for instruction with the focus on 
alignment to the Next Generation standards, student data, and 
coherence across the grade. 

Administration and the School Leadership Team (SLT) will 
collaborate to schedule monthly inter-visitation within the school 
building and with other schools to share best practices and to 
provide professional learning opportunities for teachers to 
observe the way rigorous PBL activities looks within a variety of 
contexts. Teacher Lesson Plans will then be reviewed bi-weekly 
in order to evaluate the rigor of teaching and viewing how they 
are getting students to transfer the knowledge through 
constructive projects using the HEDI Advance Rubric. 

Teachers will open up their classrooms for inter-class visitations 
to share best instructional practices. 

-Teachers will participate in Environment Walks. 

-Teachers will deliver best practice PDs during Monday afternoon 
professional learning component, as well as lunch and learns 

May-June 

Students, 

2018-2019 

SETSS Teacher 

SWD, and 
ENL 

 

ENL Teacher 

Sept.-Nov.  

Guidance Counselor 

 

Dec.-Feb..  

 

Mar.-April  

 

May-June 

Teachers 

2018-2019 

Administration 

 

Staff Developer 

Sept.-Nov.  

 

 

Dec.-Feb..  

 

Mar.-April  

 

May-June 

 

 
 

 
3b – Parent and Family Engagement 

How  will  your  school  engage  parents/families  and  support  their  understanding  of  Effective  School  Leadership  and 
strategies  to  promote  parent  leadership  and  engagement  in  order  to  support  their  children  at  home?  Include  the 
timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. 
For the 2018-2019 school year, through Parent Engagement Workshops, conducted every last Wednesday of each 
month, for one hour (Parents in the Classroom), we will model PBL activities in the classroom and it's alignment to the 
Next Generation Standards. The application of rigor and PBL during Parents In The Classroom will demonstrate to 
parents how to assist their child further at home. Parents will also create a project based on a book that was chosen 
for their book club to high-light for the students. 

Teachers will communicate expectations during the Parent Engagement component on Tuesday afternoons  

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          36 

 

-Workshops to keep the parents informed of the new standards, as well as how they can assist in their child’s 
academic careers  

- Monthly PBL Workshops to keep the parents informed of the instructional focus for the 2018-2019 school year  

 

 

 
Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 
Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including 
human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 
Meetings and Discussions, Pre-observation meetings, Post-observation meetings, Common Planning with Staff 
Developers. Consultant Workshops from the Buck Institute  

 
Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 

X 

Tax Levy 

X 

Title I SWP 

 

C4E 

 

21st Century 

Grant 

 
Part 5 – Progress Monitoring  

 

 

Title I TA 

SIG 

 

 

Title II, 
Part A 

PTA Funded 

 

 

Title III, 
Part A 

In Kind 

 

 

Title III, 

Immigrant 

Other 

Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement 
planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 
 

By February 2019, 100%) of teachers will have an overall rating of effective or highly effective in which they 
demonstrate the attributes modeled during PD and outlined in the Danielson Rubric for component 1e and 3c.  

 
Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 
Project Based Learning Rubrics to measure the units of study culminating activity monthly 

 

Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action 
plan, if applicable. 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          37 

 

Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans 

 
Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a 
welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. 
 
Part 1 – Needs Assessment   

Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and 
formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not 
limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. 
Number responses accordingly. 
 
1.  What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element?  Indicate the data trends, source and year. 
2.  What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? 

Indicate the data trends, source and year. 

 

P.S. 147, The School for Environmental Engineering, received a rating of “Well Developed” in the area of Establishing a 
culture for learning, as identified in component 3.4 of the 2014-2015 School Quality Review. Most notably our rating 
on the School Survey Report for Strong Family-Community Ties improved from 89% in the 2014-2015 survey to 96% in 
the 2015-2016 survey. According to results on the learning survey parents strongly believe that our school regularly 
communicates and works closely with families to meet students' needs and 90 % of parents strongly believe that they 
are welcomed to visit classrooms to observe instruction. We believe that through celebrations and specific modeled 
instruction in the classrooms for development can enhance parents understanding of curriculum to assist their 
children at home. The goal is to strengthen and support our schools culture and sense of pride for the love of learning. 
However, according to the 2017-2018 school year there has been a decrease in parent involvement for grades 3-5 for 
our parents in the classroom events.  

 

 

Initiatives that have contributed to the marked increase in Parental Satisfaction include: 

  Parents in The Classroom (k-5) 
  Parent Book Club 
  P.S. 147 Multicultural Event 
  Monthly Character Education Assemblies 
  Parent Cook Shop 
  Career Week 
  Parent Engagement "Tuesdays" 

In order to continue to foster a welcoming school environment for our families the aforementioned outreach 
activities will all take place again during the 2018-2019 school year as the priority need has been identified as 
strengthening parental ability to engage and support their children academically, socially and emotionally with the 
help of their school community. Therefore, we want to increase parents in the classroom in grades 3-5 by making the 
experience an engaging tutorial experience, where parents can transfer the learned information to their home 
environment so that their children's academic skills can increase for classroom, as well as State exams. 

 

 
Part 2 – Annual Goal 

Indicate  your  school’s  2018-19  goal  for  improving  student  outcomes  and  school  performance  that  addresses  this 
element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          38 

 

identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and 
Time-bound.  
By June 2019, we will see a 2% increase in parent participation for Parents in the Classroom, measured by attendance 
sheets.  

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          39 

 
Part 3a – Action Plan 

Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies 
your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for 
this Framework for Great Schools element, including: 

  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional 

 

development, and/or systems and structures needed to 
impact change. 
Strategies to address the needs of students with 
disabilities, English language learners, and other high-
need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, 
SIFE, STH). 

Target 
Group(s) 
Who will be 
targeted? 

Timeline 
What is the 
start and 
end date? 

Key Personnel 
Who is responsible 
for implementing 
and overseeing the 
activity/strategy? 

 

Parents 

2018-2019 

Administration 

As part of our school culture, we believe in not only educating 
the child but educating the family on best practices. Because of 
this, we invite our families to “Parents in the Classroom” on the 
last Wednesday of each month. During this time, teachers and 
parents have the opportunity to collaborate and view best 
teaching practices for his/her child. Parents can take full 
advantage of learning skills and strategies to help assist/teach 
his/her child at home. It also provides regular opportunities to 
address student attendance. 

At PS 147, we take full advantage of our parent outreach time on 
Tuesday from 2:20-3:40pm. During this time, teachers are 
holding parent workshops to further develop understanding of 
the concepts and skills presented during Parents in the 
Classroom activities. We could produce a parent survey to gage 
parent interest and availability. Nevertheless, hearing the 
workshop compared to participating with your child in the 
learning process is what will make the learning stick. Parents in 
the classroom is the way to experience and absorb the learning, 
so it can be applied and transferred at home to enhance study 
and homework. 

 

Parent Coordinator 

Sept.-Nov.  

Teachers 

 

Guidance Counselor 

Dec.-Feb..  

Staff Developer 

 

School Support Staff 

Mar.-April  

 

May-June 

Parents 

2018-2019 

Parent Coordinator 

 

Teachers 

Sept.-Nov.  

Literacy Specialist 

 

Staff Developer 

Dec.-Feb..  

 

Mar.-April  

 

May-June 

In order to monitor participation we will analyze sign in sheets 
issued for "Parents in the Classroom" grades 3-5 events. In an 
effort to better memorialize parent participation we are 

Parents 

2018-2019 

Administrators 

 

Parent Coordinator 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          40 

 

instituting new record keeping protocols to keep more accurate 
counts.  

Sept.-Nov.  

Teachers 

 

Staff Developer 

Dec.-Feb..  

 

Mar.-April  

 

May-June 

Parents 

2018-2019 

Administration 

 

Parent Coordinator 

Sept.-Nov.  

S.L.T Members 

 

Teachers 

Dec.-Feb..  

 

Mar.-April  

 

May-June 

Increasing our awareness of "Parents in the Classroom" for 
grades 3-5 to be more successful we will allow teachers to design 
experiences more valuable to families. We will also survey our 
families to give them a greater voice in the types of classroom 
lessons or presentations they would like us to provide for them. 

 

 
 

 
3b – Parent and Family Engagement 

If  any,  list  the  Community  Based  Organizations  or  other  partnerships  that  support  parent/family  and  community 
engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. 
St. Nicks Alliance 

P.T.A 

 

 
Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 

Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including 
human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 
Parent Coordinator, Classroom Teachers, Staff Developer, Parent in the Classroom Rosters, reflection tools, and 
surveys. 

 
Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 

X 

Tax Levy 

X 

Title I SWP 

 

Title I TA 

 

Title II, 
Part A 

 

Title III, 
Part A 

 

Title III, 

Immigrant 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          41 

 

 

C4E 

 

21st Century 

Grant 

 
Part 5 – Progress Monitoring  

 

SIG 

 

PTA Funded 

 

In Kind 

 

Other 

Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement 
planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 
In an effort to foster a positive, supportive learning environment and strengthen our community ties to increase 
student achievement we we would like to see a 1% increase in family participation as measured by sign in sheets 
from previous Parents in the Classroom events by February 2019. As such, we set a target for parents to attend at 
least seven out of the nine parents in the classroom events. We will progress monitor these events monthly so we can 
make proper adjustments along the way. This action will build a stronger learning community that allows, high 
expectations of the school, to communicate throughout with the intention of ensuring a shared vision with staff, 
families, and students on how to improve student outcomes in literacy, mathematics, content area instruction as its 
reinforced and guided through explicit instruction. As a result, this event will aid the increase of attendance for our 
upper grade students.  

 
Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 
Progress will be monitored by gathering and comparing sign-in sheets to reflect the Parents in the Classroom events 
for grades 3-5. 

 

Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action 
plan, if applicable. 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          42 

 

Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS)  

(Required for All Schools) 

  

Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services 
(AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records 
need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area 
listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. 
 

Type of program or 
strategy (e.g. 
repeated readings, 
interactive writings, 
etc.) 

Method for delivery 
of service (e.g. small 
group, one-to-one, 
tutoring, etc.) 

When the service is 
provided (e.g. during 
the school day, 
before or after 
school, etc.) 

Reading Rescue 

Pull-out 

A-Z Reading Program 

Small Group 

Wilson Foundation 

One on One Sessions 

Service is provided 
during the school 
day. 

 

 

Small Group 

One on One Sessions 

Service is provided 
during the school 
day. 

 

 

TCRWP 

Guided Reading 

Strategy Lessons 

F&P Running Records 

 
Direct explicit 
instruction by 
teachers, SETTS, 
Clusters, Data 
Specialists and Para-
professionals 

 

Type of Academic 
Intervention Service 
(AIS) 

English Language 
Arts (ELA) 

Criteria for 
determining AIS 
services (For 
additional guidance, 
refer to NYSED’s 
memo.) 
Running Record 
benchmarks. 

I.E.P. 

Inquiry 

State Exam 

 

Mathematics 

Go Math! Chapter 
test performance 

I.E.P. 

Inquiry 

State Exam 

Mathletics 

 
Assessment by 
classroom teachers 

 

Science 

Integrated into ELA 

Small group 

 

One on One 

 
Small Group 

One on One 

 
Small Group 

Service provided 
during the school 
day. 

 
Service provided 
during the school 
day. 

 
Service provided 
during the school 
day. 

Social Studies 

Assessment by 
Classroom teachers 

Integrated into ELA 

 

 

Referrals from 
classroom teachers 

Career Day 

At-risk services (e.g. 
provided by the 
Guidance Counselor, 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          43 

 

 

Counseling 

One on One 

 

 

School Psychologist, 
Social Worker, etc.) 

and Pupil Personnel 
Team 

Character Education 

 

Inter-visitations 

Behavior 
Modifications that 
can be used at home 
and at school 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          44 

 

Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH)  

 

Directions: 
-  All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. 
-  All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. 
 
Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) 
As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the 
federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and 
report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support 
your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: 
http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf   

Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 

 

1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your 
school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE 
systems and may change over the course of the year.) 

41 
students 
are 
currently 
attending 
P.S. 147.  

 

2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. 

Services include academic intervention which include A-Z (Raz-Kids), Mathletics, Great Leaps, Wilson Reading and 
Johnny Can Read to address academic deficits. Using Title 1 funds, students in need will receive school supplies, 
uniforms and payments for trips. We currently have a partnership with the St. Nick's Alliance after-school program 
which provides homework help, a hot meal and resource referrals to community based organizations. 

 

Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 

1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school 
(please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). 

Not 
applicable 

 

2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          45 

 

Not applicable 

 

3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary 
housing.  If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation 
Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question.  If your school did not receive an allocation 
and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. 

Not applicable 

 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          46 

 

Directions: 

Section 8: Title I Program Information  

 

  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1. 
  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2. 
  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3. 
  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4. 
 

If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response 
can be found. 

  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. 

 
Part 1: Title I Status 

Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. 

X 

Schoolwide Program (SWP) 

 

Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools  

 

Non-Title I 

 
Part 2: All Title I Schools 

2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) 

Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support 
including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. 
We convene with our PS 147 Cabinet Committee for hiring. We carefully review all of the resumes that we maintain in 
our resume file and the credentials of Open Market Transfer candidates. Top candidates are invited for interviews 
with our committee. At the interview, teachers present their portfolios which are filled with artifacts that speak to 
who each individual is as an educator. We then ask a series of questions which the committee crafts each year. These 
questions are consistently used for all candidates and address teacher qualifications and capabilities in the following 
areas: lesson planning and instructional practices, data driven instruction, collaboration with parents/guardians and 
colleagues, teaching philosophy and knowledge of our school community, conflict resolution strategies, and 
professional contributions.  

The Committee members collaborate based on their resume information and their instructional beliefs on how 
students learn best. The candidates who demonstrate a commitment and passion for children, teaching and learning 
are invited back to the school to meet with the committee, often demonstrating a lesson. After all parties determine 
that the teacher is a great fit for our school community, we offer the position to the teacher. All new hires receive a 
welcome from staff and a professional development survey, so we can gain additional insight on that new hired 
individual. We support new teachers with common planning. We survey and invites teachers to self-identify areas 
where they need support as well as areas of expertise. Teachers meet one on one and with their grade level colleague 
and staff developer to study the curriculum maps and Units of Study for their grade/program, and to review the 
Employee Handbook. We retain our teachers by having them choose the grade they feel most comfortable and 
motivated to instruct by having them fill out a preference sheet at the end of the school year. We also empower our 
teachers to take on leadership roles, and share their expertise by providing workshops. We examine these expertise 
as we place teacher to specific grades, so they can execute those strategies within thier classrooms. 

 

 
2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development 

Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, 
paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS).  
Our teachers participate in rigorous, reflective and differentiated professional development which include ample 
opportunities for teacher leadership and development. Teachers also receive feedback on their practice from peers 
and School Building Leaders. For the past three years, we have had support from Teachers College Staff Developers 
and On-site Staff Developer to model, debrief on our classroom practices, plan lessons and units of study.  

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          47 

 

New and returning teachers are supported in a variety of ways. All new teachers are matched to one of our lead 
teachers as a mentor. Partners meet for weekly meetings that support best practices. New teachers also are 
mentored by grade leaders, Literacy Specialist and the Staff Developer. Our teachers also take advantage of learning 
from their peers, conducting inter-visitations over the course of the year to observe best practices taking place in our 
classrooms. The teachers who attend the Teachers college calendar days and conference day turn-key the information 
to the staff in a vertical and horizontal planning format during our professional 80 minute times on Monday and 40 
minutes on Tuesdays with support of our staff developer. We also adopted a phonetic awareness program called 
Johnny Can Spell. Paraprofessionals as well as teachers were trained on the program, and in turn can help meet 
common core standards. Paraprofessionals were also trained by our ENL instructor using the A-Z Program and Great 
Leap Program to help aid student achievement.  

 

 
Part 3: TA Schools Only 

3a. Use of Program Resources 

Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. 
N/A 

 

 
3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program 

Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., 
providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from 
the regular classroom during regular school day). 
N/A 

 

 
 
 
 
 
Part 4: SWP Schools Only 

4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only)  

Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary 
school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early 
intervention services, etc.). 
Our Parent Coordinator and teachers visit local preschool programs to share information about our school. Then, 
families are invited to our school for Open House tours. Families are invited for an orientation to ensure that home 
and school are connected in supporting the social-emotional and academic needs of transitioning Kindergarten 
students. In June, registered students are invited to come in and meet some of our teachers and to take part in a 
preliminary assessment of academic performance. All of these structures have been established to help all of our 
families’ transition as new members of our school community and ensure that families are welcomed as active 
partners in education process. Meetings are facilitated by Social Workers and teachers and paraprofessionals. 

● Pre-K orientation for Incoming Parents June/August using a staggered schedule to meet the needs and questions of 
all incoming families. At this time, we review the parent/school handbook and have an open forum of questions and 
answer period. Next year we will have orientation in the summer prior to our school opening, so families prepare 
themselves for the exciting school year. 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          48 

 

● Pre-K Open House/Tours/Collaboration with CBO’s occurs ongoing throughout the year and private tours can be 
arranged at our school. Our Pre-K team leaders go with the CBO with district leaders to enhance their knowledge 
about their grade specific topics and to keep abreast with changes within the curricula. 

● Pre-K to Kindergarten transition workshops occur during May/June. Our pre-k teachers work along side 
kindergarten teachers to help orient the pre-k children for the upcoming school year by giving tours of the school, as 
well as having pre-k children sit in on a learning experience within a kindergarten classroom environment.  

● Staggered Schedule first week for social and emotional adjustments for children and their families occur using a 
staggered schedule, so our children learn to condition themselves to their new environment, and lesson separation 
anxiety with the children and parents. 

● Monthly Parent Activities include parents in the classroom every last Wednesday of the month. At this time 
students and their parents work together on projects/activities and have the opportunity to experience along side 
their children the actual learning experience so they can emulate it at home for consistency.  

● Transition Workshops by Kindergarten grade leader are given to assist parents with adjusting to the change in core 
curriculum from the pre-k experience to their new grade, so the transition can be seamless and non-threatening. 

● Inter-visitations from pre-k – kindergarten occurs throughout the year, so teachers can grasp higher order thinking 
that occurs in the kindergarten class and incorporate it into the pre-k class for preparation to the new school year. 
Inter-visitations also allows the teacher to challenge their students with more challenging materials for enrichment 
purpose.  

● Visits from lead teacher assessing the Readiness of moving up to kindergarten is ongoing through out the school 
year. At this time, we review report cards and portfolios and use our discussion protocol to see if that student is a 
candidate for the new grade and specific teacher.  

● Special Moving up to Kindergarten Lessons/Read Aloud Materials occur as we approach the fourth quarter of the 
school year. It's a time where we read aloud specific Kindergarten books, have them mingle with kindergarten 
students, and experience gym, library, music and computer labs. It's all about the transition process, so our children 
feel relaxed and confident when the begin the new year.  

● Progress/Parent Teacher Conference are documented through ATS sign in sheets and are scheduled by 
appointments, so teacher and parent can maximize the time to enhance and structure learning according to that 
students individual needs.  

 

 
4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments 

Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate 
multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to 
improve instruction.    
At PS147 teachers are involved in decisions regarding assessment in several key ways. First, they are involved in MOSL 
selection through our MOSL Committee. Secondly, when teachers collaboratively felt that Fountas and Pinnel Running 
Records were not yielding enough usable data they elected to add the Scantron Performance Series to the 2017-2018 
school assessment calendar. Grade level teams collaborate to provide meaningful formative assessment based on 
extended response questions.  

 

Professional development regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction is provided during Monday 
Professional Learning time. Workshops are strategically designed around how to look at test results from an item 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          49 

 

analysis point of view to inform instruction. Our school data specialist provides digital tools and training to help 
teachers more quickly collect data, analyze data, and spot trends across classrooms, grades and the entire school. 
Based on cycles of observations and walk throughs, areas of need will be determined. We will grow capacity by 
empowering our teachers to share their best practices and act as models for inter-visitations. 

 

 
4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools 

Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and 
Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible 
for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide 
plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the 
consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and 
purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, 
and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount 
each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the 
intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. 
Program Name 

Fund Source 
(i.e. Federal, 
State or Local) 

Funding Amount 
Indicate the amount 
contributed to 
Schoolwide pool. 
(Refer to Galaxy for 
school allocation 
amounts) 

Place an (X) in Column A below to verify 
that the school has met the intent and 
purposes of each program whose funds are 
consolidated.  Indicate in Column B, section 
references where a related program activity 
has been described in this plan. 

Column A 

Verify with an (X) 

Column B 

Section Reference(s) 
X 

 
X 

 
X 

 
n/a 

 
X 

Title I Part A (Basic) 

Title II, Part A 

Title III, Part A 

Title III, Immigrant 

Tax Levy (FSF) 

Federal 

Federal 

Federal 

Federal 

Local 

203,015 

 
42,330 

 
12,366 

 
0 

 
2,227,899 

X 

 
X 

 
X 

 
n/a 

 
X 

 

 

 

 
1Explanation/Background: 
Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and 
programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and 
advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools 
may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, 
State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This 
gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students.   
 
Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a 
single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual 
identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool 
to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds 
used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from 
which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to 
combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used 
conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the 
dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds.  

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          50 

 
 
Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages: 

  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program 

separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different 
sources when accounting for their use. 

  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the 

statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., 
semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent 
and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended 
beneficiaries are met. 

 
2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as 
follows: 

  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to 
improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes 
provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH). 

  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement 

plans that aims to  improve instruction and address the identified needs  

  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in 

grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not 
available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional 
program. 

  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, 
develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and 
achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another 
purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-
quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in 
effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the 
participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language 
instruction programs. 

  Title III Immigrant:  Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of 

English language acquisition and content area achievement. 

 
Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated: 

  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and 
programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent 
representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities 
funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with 
student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. 
IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education 
designed to meet their individual needs. 

 

  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by 

the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 

 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          51 

 

Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)  

 (Required for All Title I Schools) 

 

Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and 
representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will 
participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I 
program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson 
that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the 
parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school 
will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic 
achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family 
Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. 
 
The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current 
S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent 
Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent 
involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen 
family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy.  
 
Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample 
Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) 
as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. 
 
 

Parent and Family Engagement Policy 

Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. 
The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of 
parents and community in the school. P.S. 147, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every 
Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen 
the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is 
designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the 
education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent 
Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. 

 

PS147 will support parents and families of Title I students by: 

Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students 

 

● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., 
literacy, math, and use of technology; 

● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision 
making in support of the education of their children; 

● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor 
their child’s progress; 

● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 

● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in 
languages that parents can understand; 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          52 

 

● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve 
outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other 
members of the school community; 

The school’s Parent Involvement  

 

Parental Involvement and School Quality 

The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all 
parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The 
school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement 
policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school 
surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and 
enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school.  

 

In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the 
school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership 
Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for 
additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: 

● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I 
program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title 
I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; 

● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated 
directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; 

● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as 
described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; 

● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent 
Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support 
and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills;  

● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. 
The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the 
parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and 
inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents 
each month and file a report with the central office.; 

● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, 
grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and 
technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home;  

  provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State 

accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality 
Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; 

  host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1st of each school year to advise 

parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          53 

 

to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 
and other applicable sections under the ESSA; 

● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning 
or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and 
allow parents to provide suggestions; 

● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed;  

● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and 
workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; 

 

 

The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: 

Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement 

 

● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; 

● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; 

● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher 
Association) and Title I Parent Committee; 

● supporting or hosting Family Day events; 

● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; 

● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; 

● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their 
children’s progress; 

● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school 
activities and student progress; 

● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, 
and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. 

 

 

School-Parent Compact (SPC) 

 

School-Parent Compact (SPC) 

P.S. 147, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is 
implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between 
the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, 
agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          54 

 

improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure 
that all children achieve State Standards on assessments 

 

 

I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum 

Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating 
children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: 

 

● using academic learning time efficiently; 

● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; 

● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; 

● offering high quality instruction in all content areas;  

  providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required 

by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); 

 

 

I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships 

Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: 

 

● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be 
discussed as well as how this Compact is related; 

● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students 
participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to 
be involved; 

● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds 
are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; 

● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation 
services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education;  

● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of 
participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; 

● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent 
Involvement Policy and this Compact; 

● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results 
for each child and other pertinent individual school information;  

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          55 

 

● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents 
each year; 

 

 

Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: 

I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff 

 

● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited 
English speaking parents;  

● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff 
member; 

● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to 
observe classroom activities; 

● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences.  

 

 

I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents 

Provide general support to parents by: 

 

● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment 
for parents and guardians; 

● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their 
child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of 
parents can attend); 

● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all 
members of the school community; 

● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents;  

● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in 
this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; 

● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and 
consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; 

 

 

 

II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          56 

 

● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate 
procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; 

● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and 
his/her age; 

● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; 

● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes);  

● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; 

● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports 
and/or quality family time; 

● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; 

● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; 

● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education;  

● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by 
prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; 

● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; 

● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy 
and this Compact; 

● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn 
more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; 

● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on 
advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams;  

● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child. 

 

 

Student Responsibilities: 

 

III. Student Responsibilities 

● attend school regularly and arrive on time; 

● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; 

● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; 

● show respect for myself, other people and property; 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          57 

 

 
 
 
 

● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; 

● always try my best to learn. 

 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          58 

 

Division of English Language Learners and Student Support 
Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 
52 Chambers Street, Room 209  
New York, New York 10007 
Phone:  212-374-6072 
http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY 
Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components: 

 

 

  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high 

academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas.  

o  The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need 
o  These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154.  
o  Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. 
o  Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.   

  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on 

the teachers’ performance in classrooms.”  

o  Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term 

workshops and conferences.  

  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet 

community needs.   

o  These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process.  

 
NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional 
development, and 20% to OTPS.   
  
For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and 
Performance Specialist.  Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30.   
 

Part A: School Information 
Name of School:            
This school is (check 
one): 
 

DBN:            

conceptually consolidated (skip part E below)                
NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below)     

 

Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information  
The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): 

Before school                After school             

Saturday academy        

Total # of ELLs to be served:            
Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply):  

1       
7       

2       
8       

K       
6       

4         
10       
Total # of teachers in this program:            
# of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers:            
# of content area teachers:            

3       
9       

5 
11       

12 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          59 

 

 

Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information  
Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the 

rationale 

 
  subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  
  schedule and duration 
 
language of instruction 
  # and types of certified teachers 
 

types of materials  

Begin description here:            
To ensure that our ELLs will increase academic achievement and perform at the proficiency 
levels on the NYSESLAT Exam in May 2019, our school will be providing an ENL after-school 
program.  There will be two groups (flexible groupings), one for grades 1 - 2 and one for grades 
3 - 4.  The total number of students to be serviced is 20 students, 10 students in each group.  The 
program will meet Wednesdays and Thursdays, 2:30 – 4:30 P.M., and will run from January 
2019 to April 2019.  There will be 2 hours of per session activity and approximately 28 
sessions.An ENL teacher, and a content area teacher will teach in the ENL after-school 
program.  50% of the instruction will be done by the ENL teacher and 50% will be done by the 
content area teacher.  The ENL teacher will teach Group 1 from 2:30 - 3:30 while the content 
area teacher will teach Group 2.  During the second hour, the teachers will rotate and switch 
groups.  The primary focus of the program will be the development of English language arts and 
increasing academic language.  All instruction will be conducted in English.  We will provide 
ELLs with experiences that will expand on the themes and topics that are being taught in the 
classroom.  Instruction will utilize sheltered English strategies in order to ensure the 
development of English language skills. Students will be engaging in different activities to meet 
the 4 modalities of English language learner of listening, speaking, reading and 
writing.  Instruction will be in English and native language support will be provided. The native 
language support will be provided by including bilingual dictionaries, a language-rich 
environment, academic language support, word families study, pair work, small group work, and 
bilingual staff.  In order to ensure that these programs support the instruction in the classroom, 
articulation between the ENL teacher and the regular day classroom teachers will be an essential 
component for these programs.  Student assessments will be ongoing and include unit 
assessments, conferring notes, and teacher observations.  Records will be maintained by Ms. 
Cordero in room 210 in a locked file cabinet.  All records of students attendance, activities of 
study and program notification in parents' preferred languages will be stored in binders and in 
that cabinet.Funding will be used towards the purchase of student licenses for educational 
software.  We have found success in using the educational software especially since the software 
programs were designed to help differentiate instruction for ELLs.  In addition, we plan to 
purchase NYSESLAT supplementary materials 1-4, NYSESLAT teacher manual as well, 1- 4 
(publisher and sold by Attanasio & Associates at shop DEO), Bilingual dictionaries English & 
Spanish, English dictionaries, and content area (science) classroom libraries for grades 1 through 
4, computer-related supplies (headset), printer, and supplies to support writing. Our students in 
the Title III program will benefit from the program and will have an access to the computers 
throughout the duration of the program to ensure the preparation of the students for the 
NYSESLAT. 
 
 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          60 

 

 

Part C: Professional Development  
Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as 
other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs.   

rationale 
teachers to receive training  

 
 
  schedule and duration 
 
  name of provider 

topics to be covered 

Begin description here:            
Funding will be used toward  professional development for ENL teacher and parents.   
Ms. Victoria Delgado, LLC Consultant 
Professional Development Spanish Language and Literacy 
Fostering Spanish language and Literacy Development 
Strategies to provide effective academic literacy instruction 4 sessions 
Dates:  Dec 11, 2018, January 16, 2019, Feb 5, 2019, March 27, 2019. 
Teachers will be learning: 
· Modeling lessons for selected teachers. 
· Supported dual language and ENL teachers in differentiating texts for different levels of 
instruction. 
· Revised bibliography aligned to the DOE Citywide shifts 
· Strategies to provide effective academic literacy instruction in a developmental dual 
language/ENL programs 
· Strategies to enrich Spanish as a World Language instruction K-5 
. Funding will be used toward Ms. Victoria Delgado, LLC Consultant services and ENL parents 
workshop. 
Workshops schedules and topics. Each workshop will last 45 minutes (8:15 am to 9:00 am). 
1. Topic: Helping My child: Children Learn In Different Ways. 
    Goal: Help parents learn how to recognize different ways children learn. 
    Objective: Parents will learn about that children are different and they learn in different ways. 
They will be able to identify the          different learning styles. 
2. Topic:Learning English: comprehension of the different levels and the 4 language modalities. 
   Goal: To help parents learn the 4 language modalities (Listening, Speaking, Reading and 
Writing). 
   Objective: Parents will learn about the process of learning English as a second language and 
the 4 modalities of the                             language (Listening, Speaking, Reading and Writing). 
3. Topic: Helping Your Child Become a Reader. 
     Goal: To Help parents improve their child's literacy skills'. 
    Objective: Parents will learn about the process of learning English as a second language, the 4 
modalities of the language (Listening, Speaking, Reading and Writing) and how to improve 
child's literacy skills'. 
4. Topic: Helping Your Child with Mathematics. 
   Goal: To help parents learn how to help their children with Mathematics. 
   Objective: Parents will learn about math is more than numbers. That math is fun. 
All records will be maintained by Ms. Cordero in room 210.  All records will be stored in binders 
and in a locked file cabinet. 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          61 

 

 

Part D: Parental Engagement Activities   
Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact 
higher achievement for ELLs.  NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as 
parent orientation during ELL identification process.   

rationale 

 
  schedule and duration 
 
  name of provider 
  how parents will be notified of these activities 

topics to be covered 

Begin description here:            
PS 147 recognizes that parents are our children’s first teachers.  Research shows that students 
who have involved parents perform better and achieve more academically.  Ms. Victoria 
Delgado will provide our parents with workshops.    
Parents as Partners School and Home Connection 
PS 147 will provide parents workshops monthly during the school year.  
Dates: January 22, February 26, March 26, May 28, 2019. 
The Power of two: Parents and Common Core Learning Standards Literacy 
Parents will receive workshop on the effectiveness of academic literacy in Spanish/English 
Parents will be notify through a phone call, fliers in English and native language,  person to 
person, monthly calendar will be displayed at the entrance by main lobby. In addition, at the 
beginning of the school year parents will be notify by entitlement letter in English and their 
native language, parent orientation, (Invites, Agenda, Sign  In, Video, Survey and Selection, 
Brochure). 
Parents will receive workshop on the effectiveness of academic literacy in English as a second 
language . 
Parents will be given handouts and materials in English or the native language when available 
that they can use at home to support their children.  Ms. Cordero will maintain all records in 
room 210 including agendas, attendance sheets, invitations (in parents' preferred languages).  All 
records will be kept in binders in a locked file cabinet. 
Workshops schedule and topics. Each Workshop will last 45 (8:15 am to 9:00 am). All 
workshops will held in school library.  
. Topic: Helping My child: Children Learn In Different Ways. 
    Goal: Help parents will learn how to recognize different ways children learn. 
    Objective: Parents will learn about that children are different and they learn in different ways. 
They will be able to identify the different learning styles. 
. Topic: Learning English: comprehension of the different levels, and the 4 language modalities. 
    Goal: To help parents learn the 4 language modalities (Listening, Speaking, Reading and 
Writing). 
    Objective: Parents will learn about the process of learning English as a second language and 
the 4 modalities of the language        (Listening, Speaking, Reading and Writing). 
. Topic: Helping Your Child Become a Reader. 
    Goal: To help parents improve their child's literacy skills'. 
    Objective: Parents will learn about the process of learning English as a second language, the 4 
modalities of the language                (Listening, Speaking, Reading and Writing)and how to 
improve child's literacy skills'. 
. Topic: Helping Your Child with Mathematics. 
   Goal: To help parents learn how to help their children with Mathematics. 
   Objective: Parents will learn about math is more than numbers. That math is fun. 
    

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          62 

Part E: Budget  
FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY.  Ensure that your 
Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. 
Allocation Amount: $           
Budget Category 

Budgeted Amount 

Explanation of expenditures in this 
category as it relates to the 
program narrative for this title. 
           
n/a 

 

 
 
 
 

Professional salaries 
(schools must account for 
fringe benefits) 

           
n/a 

  Per session 
  Per diem 

Purchased services 

  High quality staff 

and curriculum 
development 
contracts. 

Supplies and materials 

  Must be 

supplemental. 

  Additional 

curricula, 
instructional 
materials. 

  Must be clearly 

listed. 

Educational Software 
(Object Code 199) 
Travel 

Other 

TOTAL 

           
n/a 

           
n/a 

           
n/a 
           
n/a 
           
n/a 
           
n/a 

 

           
 
n/a 

           
n/a 

           
n/a 
           
n/a 
           
n/a 
           
n/a 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          63 

 

DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT 

GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY 

SUBMISSION FORM 

2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR 

 

DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information 

necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English 

language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a 

part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the 

services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should 

be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily 

available on file in the school.  When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces.  For 

additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. 

Part I: School ELL Profile 

 

 

 
 

A. School Information 

District  14 
School Name   The Isaac Remsen School 

Borough  Brooklyn 

School Number   147 

 
B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant 

principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. 
 

Principal   Sandra Noyola 
Coach  Mark Levine 
ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher  
 Rosa Fernandez 
Teacher/Subject Area Nadine 
Blackman/SETSS/IEP 
Teacher/Subject Area type here 
Related-Service Provider type here 
Superintendent type here 

 

Assistant Principal  Eliza Figueroa 
Coach type here 
School Counselor  
Joyann Reid 

Parent  Sharon Caraballo 

Parent Coordinator Lourdes Santiago 
Field Support Center Staff Member type here  
Other (Name and Title) type here 

C. Teacher Qualifications  
Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section.  Press TAB after each number entered to calculate 
sums and percentages.  
     
Number of certified 
ENL teachers currently teaching in the 
ENL program 

Number of teachers who hold both content 
area/common branch and TESOL certification 

0 

0 

0 

Number of teachers who hold both a 
bilingual extension and TESOL 
certification 

Number of special education teachers 
with bilingual extensions 

0 

0 

1 

0 

Number of certified 
bilingual teachers not currently 
teaching in a bilingual program  
Number of certified foreign 
language/world language teachers 
providing home language arts 
(HLA) to students in bilingual 
programs [applicable to grades 7–
12] 
Number of teachers currently 
teaching a self-contained ENL class 
who hold both a common branch 
license and TESOL certification 
[applicable to grades K–6] 

Number of certified 
bilingual teachers currently 
teaching in a bilingual program 

Number of certified ENL teachers 
not currently  teaching in the ENL 
program  

 

0 

0 

D. Student Demographics  

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          64 

 
Total number of students in 
school (excluding pre-K) 

277 

Total number of ELLs 

29 

ELLs as share of total student population 
(%) 

10.47% 

 
 
 
Part II: ELL Demographics 
 
 
 
 
 
A. ELL Programs 

This school serves the following grades (includes 
ELLs and non-ELLs) 
Check all that apply 

 
 
This school offers (check all that apply): 

K

    1

    2

     3

     4

     5

 

6

   7

     8

    9

     10

     11

    12

 

Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) 

Yes

             No

Dual language program (DL) 

Freestanding ENL 

Yes

             No

Yes

             No

 

 

 

If yes, indicate language(s):            

If yes, indicate language(s): Japanese 

 

 
Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a 
separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. 
 

Bilingual Program Breakdown 

School 
Year 

Lang. 

Opened 
(e.g., 2013-14) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

K 

1 

2 

4 

 
 

3 

 
 

         

         

         

         

         

Program 
TBE 
TBE 
TBE 
DL 
DL 
DL 
Total 
 
 
 
Part III: Assessment Analysis 
 
 

 
 
9 
 
 
9 

 
 
1 
 
 
1 

 
 
7 
 
 
7 

       

       

 
 
0 

5 

6 

7 

8 

9 

10 

11 

12 

         

         

         

         

         

         

         

         

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

       

       

       

       

       

       

       

       

 
 
0 

 
 
0 

 
 
0 

 
 
0 

 
 
0 

 
 
0 

 
 
0 

 
 
0 

Tot # 
0 
0 
0 
17 
0 
0 
17 

 
 
0 

After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 

1.  What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, 

teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? 
Literacy skills of all ELLs are assessed through state tests such as the NYSESLAT, ELA exams, and the Fountas and Pinnell 
Benchmark System. An analysis of data from the NYSESLAT is made. Small group instruction for these students is targeted with 
an emphasis on academic and content specific language.  Fountas and Pinnell running records are administered multiple times 
a year. 
 

2.  What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 

P.S. 147 holds monthly data talks with the data specialist, administration, and teachers. 
 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          65 

 

 

3.  What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL 

Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? 
PS 147 evaluates the success of its ELL programs through a review of the New York State assessments of ELA, Mathematics, 
and Science, combined with a review of student performance on the NYSESLAT. The NYSESLAT helps determine the percentage 
of students achieving proficiency. The NYSELAT modality scores, as well as, scores on other tests are used to determine areas 
of weakness for each student which should be addressed. ATS reports such as the RLAT and RNMR are utilized to track 
progress of a three year period and determine which modalities should be focused on during direct instruction.  
 

4.  What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered?  

RtI services are provided utilizing various resources including Reading A-Z, IXL Math, and Imagine Learning. 
 

5.  How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-
5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.]  
ELL students take part in RtI screening to assess whether their literacy skills and competencies are meeting grade level 
benchmarks. If ELL students are flagged as at-risk or below-benchmark on a particular skill or competency, the students 
receive targeted instructional support in this area. Tier 1 instruction is delivered to all students in the general education 
classrooms by qualified teachers. Strong classroom instruction is a key step to supporting our ELLs at-risk. The instructional 
core is tailored to the needs of the classroom population especially the needs of ELLs. Tier 2 instruction is provided to support 
ELLs who are not showing adequate progress on the skills and competencies measured. ELLs receive instructional 
interventions that utilize strategies that are research-based. Progress monitoring data is used to make decisions about changes 
in goals, instruction, and services. When progress is monitored, an ELL’s language development is taken into account when 
analyzing an ELL’s progress.  
 

6.  What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? 

([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS].  
The NYSESLAT data reveals the following: 
•               The overall results reveal that one out of thirteen students tested in Kindergarten are functioning at the Entering 
level, one out of thirteen students are functioning at the Emerging level, one out of thirteen students are functioning at the 
Transitional level, nine out of thirteen students are functioning at the Expanding level, one out of thirteen students is 
functioning at the Commanding level.•               The overall results reveal that three out of four students tested in first grade 
are functioning at the Transitional level, one out of four students is functioning at the Expanding level.•               The overall 
results reveal that two out of ten students tested in second grade are functioning at the Entering level, one out of ten students 
is functioning at the Emerging level, two out of ten students are functioning at the Transitional level, three out of ten students 
are functioning at the Expanding level, two out of ten students are functioning at the Commanding level. 
                 The overall results reveal that two out of six students tested in third grade are functioning at the Entering level, three 
out of six students are functioning at the Expanding level, one out of six students is functioning at the Commanding 
level.•               The overall results reveal that one student tested in fourth grade is functioning at the Expanding level. 
 

7.  What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? 

These findings are disseminated to teachers at the beginning of the year during a faculty conference and during data talks. 

 
 
 
Part IV: ELL Programming 
 

Programming and Scheduling Information 

1.  How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented 
as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students 
regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in 
one class]).  

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          66 

 

 

a.  Freestanding ENL program. 

ELLs are heterogeneously grouped across grade bands and participate in a pullout ESL instructional model. 
Students, inclusive of ELLs, who are experiencing difficulty in meeting the standards in Literacy receive Academic 
Intervention. These services are provided in small groups and students are pulled out receiving instruction through 
the utilization of programs such as Words Their Way and the Wilson Reading System. Ungraded and heterogeneous 
models are utilized at PS 147. In ungraded and heterogeneous groups, students benefit from the opportunity to guide 
or be guided by students and/or the ESL teacher at various levels of proficiency. Activities are differentiated based on 
appropriate expectations for each child. 

b.  TBE program.  If applicable.   

Paste response to questions here:    

c.  DL program.  If applicable.    

Ungraded and heterogeneous models are utilized at PS 147. In ungraded and heterogeneous groups, students benefit 
from the opportunity to guide or be guided by students and/or the ESL teacher at various levels of proficiency. 
Activities are differentiated based on appropriate expectations for each child. 

2.  How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each 

program model? 

a.  How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 

below)? 

           Our school ensures the mandated number of instructional minutes are provided to all ELLs by adhering to the following: 
Beginner/Entering students receive 360 total minutes of of ENL, consisting of 180 minutes of standalone ENL and 180 minutes 
of integrated ENL/ELA. 
Low Intermediate/Emerging students receive 360 total minutes of of ENL, consisting of 90 minutes of standalone ENL, 180 
minutes of integrated ENL/ELA, and 90 minutes of standalone or integrated ENL (with ELA or any other content area). 
Intermediate/Transitioning students receive 180 total minutes of of ENL, consisting of 0 minutes of standalone ENL, 90 
minutes of integrated ENL/ELA, and 90 minutes of standalone or integrated ENL (with ELA or any other content area). 
Advanced/Expanding students receive 180 total minutes of ENL, consisting of 180 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA or other 
content area. 
Proficient/Commanding students receive 90 total minutes of ENL, consisting of 90 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA or other 
content area.  
 

3.  Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and 

methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core 
Learning Standards.  
   When students are pulled out for small group or individualized instruction, content specific vocabulary is explicitly taught, as 
well, as strategies for figuring out the meaning of unfamiliar words. Our program utilizes realia, engages students in specific 
vocabulary activities incorporating the various learning styles,  focuses on non-fiction and incorporates a literacy skill of the 
week. This makes content comprehensible for ELLs and creates entry points for them to make sense of what is being taught. 
High interest, low level texts are also utilized to support students when grade level text may be incomprehensible due to lack 
of language. Reading websites, technological supports, i.e. Smart Boards, laptops, desktops support this initiative. 
 

4.  How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? 

   Since ELLs at PS 147 are second generation, they speak Spanish at home and English in school. As a result, most students are 
not literate in their native language and therefore native language tests are not administered regularly. However,  for Spanish 
speaking ELLs, their native language is assessed via the Spanish LAB shortly after registration. Classroom teachers and the ESL 
teacher also evaluate reading, writing, listening and speaking skills during direct instruction and document their observations 
via conference notes that are shared and discussed with the Instructional cabinet comprised of the Principal, the Assistant 
Principal and the Literacy Consultant. After the level of native language abilities has been established, data ascertained from 
these assessments drive instruction. 
 

5.  How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          67 

 

SIFE   

a. 
b.  Newcomer  
c.  Developing   
d. 
e. 

Long Term 
Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status  

a.           PS 147 does not maintain a SIFE population of ELLs. If a student were to register, they would participate in the same 
instructional models as other ELLs, with the addition of a buddy assigned to help them transition. Additionally teachers will 
modify their instruction in order to accommodate a SIFE student. Small groups would be utilized, as well as, supplemental 
visual aids and hands-on activities. Vocabulary, phonics, and letter activities would be central to SIFE language acquisition. The 
programs available to newcomers would also be available to SIFEs.  
b.     Newcomers at PS 147 are served with the intention of giving them the language skills they need to function successfully in 
their new country, community and school. Vocabulary, phonics, and letter activities are utilized to start from the very 
beginning of language acquisition. Our plan for academic language development is to provide students with extra 
opportunities of support. Those opportunities come from Academic Intervention in which teachers pull out ELLs to provide 
individualized or small group support.  
c.     The content-oriented focus of the ESL program helps to accelerate academic language proficiency in 4-6 years ELLs by 
teaching English and content simultaneously. The ESL Program also integrates content and language instruction to promote 
academic language development. Additionally, classroom teachers and educational support staff play a vital role in the 
development of academic language through their content area instruction. NYSESLAT data for each modality are used to 
determine areas to focus on with each student. Focused NYSESLAT test preparation helps bolster students in the areas in 
which they need to improve in order to test as “proficient.” 
d.     PS 147 does not maintain a Long-Term population of ELLs. If there were to be long term ELL students, they would receive 
specialized instruction in which their areas of weakness are identified and directly addressed in a small group setting, in order 
to provide them with specific skills they need to master in order to attain English Language proficiency. 
e.          ELL students who have reached proficiency on the NYSESLAT continue to receive transitional support for two years 
including all testing modifications provided to current ELLs on state exams.  In addition, these former ELLs continue to receive 
support from the ESL teacher. 
 

6.  What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic 

content areas and accelerate English language development?  
Teachers at PS 147 receive continuous professional development specific to differentiation of instruction to meet the needs of 
all learners. As a result, teachers place special emphasis on vocabulary development during the instructional day and have 
incorporated UDL strategies into daily practices. Technology, such as laptops, desktops and smart boards are utilized regularly 
in most classrooms creating entry points for ELLs to make sense of the content. Computer software such as Imagine Learning, 
Reading A-Z, and IXL Math are used to support ELLs. Internet-based activities are utilized to support the ELLs. Enrichment 
activities focusing on Science and Social Studies instruction have also allowed teachers to explicitly model strategies to aid in 
unpacking non-fiction content. Such research based strategies include previewing text with an emphasis on vocabulary prior to 
introducing any new concept, facilitating accountable talk conversations in which students are exposed to content-specific or 
academic vocabulary prior to the start of any unit/lesson, performance based assessments to check for understanding, on-
going student conferences to monitor progress, visual and auditory aids, peer tutoring to build confidence and native language 
support through providing texts in the native language. Small group instruction is also provided by the ESL teacher. Since IEPs 
dictate that students are only required to participate in special education classes for core subjects, they engage in learning 
with general education students during art, music, enrichment, structured recess and gym. To address social/emotional 
disabilities, our school adheres to the Character Education initiative where we determine the positive behaviors we want 
students to consistently exhibit and acknowledge them when these behaviors are demonstrated. Various interventions are 
embedded within our Character Education framework. The guidance counselor's schedule has been designed to serve any 
students in need of immediate at-risk counseling. The PPT examines ELLs with SWDs regularly to ensure that teachers are 
working arduously to address their IEP goals. 
 

7.  How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and 

attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          68 

 

All pedagogues working with ELL-SWDs plan collaboratively, inclusive of the classroom teacher and the SETSS teacher. 
Instructional  plans are reviewed regularly to ensure that all goals identified are being met. All students, including ELL-SWDs, 
receive daily instruction which address using key literacy strategies to support their language development. Enrichment 
activities focusing on all learning styles allow teachers to further differentiate to meet the needs of all students.In order to 
ensure that ELL-SWDs engage in all school initiatives, administration strategically programmed the school this year allowing for 
all cluster teachers to be available first period daily so that they can participate in enrichment activities with all students. Our 
cluster teachers also engage students in projects and performances in which all students, ELLs, ELL-SWDs, and general 
education students practice/prepare collaboratively and simultaneously. 
 

8.  Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups 

targeted).  List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which 
they are offered. 
ELLs with IEPs receive the mandated instructional minutes of ESL. Students, including ELLs, having difficulty meeting expected 
standards in the area of reading and written expression receive Academic Intervention Services in English Language Arts and 
Mathematics. These services are provided on a small group pull-out basis. Special emphasis is placed on assisting in classrooms 
where students are taking State mandated assessments. Each student’s strengths and areas of improvement are 
collaboratively viewed by the classroom teacher, ESL teacher, and the supervising administrator in order to determine the 
students' level of service and instructional support. Students who are close to meeting our learning standards are monitored 
through regular meetings between the classroom teacher and instructional cabinet. They are given direct service if necessary. 
Targeted interventions in Social Studies instruction are provided in English by the ESL teacher to those students reading below 
grade level. Research based scaffolding strategies such as the utilization of cognates, summarizing textbooks using words more 
conducive to students' book levels, and incorporating activites in which students must demonstrate their understanding of a 
concept (e.g., debating a topic or creating a tableau). Visual aids are used to introduce topics/units of study such as teacher 
made powerpoint presentations and engaging smartboard activities. These strategies aid in making content-specific 
vocabulary more comprehensible for students. Targeted interventions in Science instruction are also provided by the ESL 
teacher and clasroom teachers. All teachers utilize the Scientific Investigative Method to deliver all science lessons. Students 
participate in hands-on experiments in alignment with the NYS Science Scope and Sequence. Bilingual glossaries are available 
for students. The incorporation of cognates supports the introduction of Native Language Academic vocabulary prior to the 
introduction of any unit of study. ELLs performing at the beginner level on the language continuum are sometimes paired with 
intermediate or advanced ELLs while conducting hands-on experiments to support reading directions and recording findings. 
This initiative targets all four language modalities. Professional development for all teachers has addressed effectively 
facilitating accountable talk conversations while simultaneously incorporating language scaffolds ensuring all students, 
inclusive of ELLs, engage in content-specific conversations.  
 

9.  Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year?    

This year PS 147 is using GO MATH, a math curriculum adhering to Singapore Math principles aligned to the Common Core 
Learning Standards (CCLS). This program was identified after researching a plethora of math curriculums. This comprehensive 
curriculum incorporates daily scaffolding strategies to support ELLs and students performing below grade level. The classroom 
teachers meet with the instructional cabinet to discuss the progress of implementation and instructional next steps. 
 

10.  If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? 

There are no programs/services for ELLs being discontinued. 
 

11.  How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs?  Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in 

your building. 
ELLs are afforded equal access to all programs. We partner with various arts organizations such as St. Nick's, KinderDance, 
STREB, Nurture Art and City Lore. These programs expose students to specific NY landmarks, cultural institutions, African 
dance, drama and the visual arts.  
Due to budgetary constraints, after school programs haven't been offered this school year. We are, however, planning to 
launch a ELA and Mathematics test preparation after school program for all students placing special emphasis on ELLs and 
students in need of Academic Support. We currently do not offer Title III programs as we do not have enough ELLs to qualify as 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          69 

 

a sub group. ELLs, however, participate in all  of our programs and residencies such as our Enrichment program focused on the 
research based Independent Investigation Method,  STREB, Nurture Art, City Lore, and Music in the Brain.   
 

12.  What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language 

materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. 
Instructional materials used to support ELLs include big books, magnetic letters, Words their Way, the Fountas and Pinnell 
Phonics program, word games, maps, graphics, pictures, realia, graphic organizers, KWL charts, word walls with picture 
supports, labeled objects and interactive writing. Technology available to support ELLs includes the Imagine Learning Program, 
laptops in the library/media center, laptops in mobile carts, desktops in classrooms and smart boards. Websites commonly 
utilized by students to support CCLS standards based objectives are Reading A-Z, Pebble Go, and Brain Pop. 
 

13.  How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? 

Native language instruction is delivered by the ESL teacher. The ESL teacher utilizes bilingual glossaries, leveled bilingual texts 
and data ascertained from initial and on-going assessments to customize instruction to meet the varied needs of this 
population. Native language support for families with students receiving ESL instruction is provided through translated 
documents and meetings that are conducted bilingually. The ESL teacher also facilitates professional development to all 
classroom teachers equipping them with Tier 1 and Tier 2 intervention strategies to support language acquisition. The parent 
coordinator hosts weekly book club sessions with parents of ELLs exposing them to the curriculum, standards, and bilingual 
texts utilized in classrooms. She also models reading strategies parents can emulate at home as they support their childrens' 
language acquisition. Special emphasis is placed on using "realia" and visual aids to build upon what students already know 
and introduce new words. Translation office services are utilized whenever necessary.  
 

14.  Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels.  

Required services support ELLs of all ages and grade levels via placement in groupings which meet needs in age bracket and 
developmental stages. 
 

15.  If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the 

ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met?   
Instructional materials used to support ELLs include big books, magnetic letters, Words their Way, the Fountas and Pinnell 
Phonics program, word games, maps, graphics, pictures, realia, graphic organizers, KWL charts, word walls with picture 
supports, labeled objects and interactive writing. Technology available to support ELLs includes the Imagine Learning Program, 
laptops in the library/media center, laptops in mobile carts, desktops in classrooms and smart boards. Websites commonly 
utilized by students to support CCLS standards based objectives are Reading A-Z, Pebble Go, and Brain Pop. 
 

16.  Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for 

new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, 
parent coordinator).  
All newly enrolled students, prior to the start of the school year, receive a blue folder inclusive of all pertinent school 
information, such as school start and end times, the discipline code, a newsletter, a welcome letter from the principal, a 
sample schedule of instructional activies, the DOE Respect for All trifold, procedures specific to citywide emergencies, 
attendance requirements, a lunch application, as well as a copy of the Citywide Standardsof Intervention and Discipline 
Measures: The Discipline Code Bill of Student Rights and Responsbilities, K-12. 
 

17.  What language electives are offered to ELLs?  

Currently no language electives are offered at PS 147.  
 

18.  For schools with dual language programs: 

a.  What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day 

(percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. 
In which language(s) is each core content area taught? 

b. 
c.  How is each language separated for instruction? 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          70 

 

 

d. 

Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same 
time (simultaneous)? 

The self-containged dual language model is utilized in the school.  100% of the instructional day EPs and 
ELLs are integrated.  Core content areas are taught in Japanese and English.  English language arts is 
taught in English.  Japanese language arts is taught in Japanese.  Math is taught in English only.  Emergent 
literacy in Japanese is taught at the same time as English.   
 

Professional Development and Support for School Staff 

1.  Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic 

staff.)  What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs 
as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? 
Anticipated measurable outcomes for Professional Development will allow for the ESL teacher to gain a deeper understanding 
of supporting ELLs within their classrooms and improve administrative capacity for supporting effective ELL instruction. On-
going professional development for our ESL teacher will be provided by the following:  
•     Intervisitation opportunities to visit various ESL programs within the school district to view best practices in action.  
•     Workshops offered by the NYC DOE DELLSS 
•     Common planning during which the ESL teacher confers about best practices with other teachers of ELLs  
•     Teacher training provided by Teachers College. 
•     Any other available professional development opportunities 
             All other teachers of ELLs will receive training from the ESL teacher based on knowledge gained through the above 
professional development opportunities. The ESL teacher will present specific workshops to teachers addressing the 
integration of scaffolding strategies into instruction, i.e., the utilization of cognates, visual aids, and listening supports. Please 
see question 3 for more details about the structured record keeping of these training sessions. The Assistant Principal and the 
Literacy Consultant meet weekly to plan, monitor and revise Professional Development for all teachers of ELLs. 
The Assistant Principal participates in monthly workshops in which current research based instructional trends are shared 
specific to the Citywide Instructional Expectations. Several paraprofessionals have received training in Reading Rescue, an 
intervention program focused on building phonemic awareness to aid our beginner ELLs. The SETSS teacher and classroom 
teachers receive on-going professional development to support ELLs provided by the Instructional Cabinet. The Principal 
receives on going professional development at monthly Principal meetings. The Parent Coordinator participated in a citywide 
training which addressed improving parental involvement. This workshop has enabled the parent coordinator to engage more 
of our Ell parents as well as others. PS 147 has structured an Assessment/Professional Development schedule so that teachers 
participate in common planning on a weekly basis. Each week has a specific focus including ELA, Math, ESL, Technology, and 
Inquiry. This cycle rotates and includes opportunities for intervisits to classrooms, as well as, looking closely at data to drive 
and differentiate instruction.  
Professional Development will be facilitated by the ESL teacher. Topics presented will include second language development, 
demystifying ELL data including analysis, CALP (Cognitive Academic Language Proficiency versus BICS (Basic Interpersonal 
Communicative Skills), stages of language development as it relates to literacy development, content based instruction and ESL 
strategies and methodologies. Teachers will also elaborate on their best practices to support ELLs in the classrooms by tapping 
into James Asher’s approach: TPR (Total Physical Response). Attendance is recorded at each session to ensure that each staff 
member in the school has received the requisite amount of training. 
 

2.  Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all 
teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include 
how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance).  Refer to ELL Policy and Reference 
Guide, Professional Development section. 
Staff will be provided with additional workshops to assist ELLs as they transition from elementary to middle school pertaining 
to the Middle School Application process. This will be facilitated by the guidance counselor. 
The guidance counselor participates in all staff professional development opportunities offered by the Instructional Cabinet. 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          71 

 

 

She also meets regularly with classroom teachers and administration to discuss transitioning ELL students on a case by case 
basis. Possible ways in which the guidance counselor supports this initiative is by providing counseling specific to acclimating to 
new settings and situations, reaching out to the receiving school and providing information pertinent to our ELLs' success in 
Middle School. 
Our school provides professional development to all teachers and administrators that specifically addresses the needs of 
English language learners. A minimum of fifteen percent (15%) of the required professional development hours for all teachers 
prescribed by CR Part 80 is dedicated to language acquisition, including a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and 
integrating language and content instruction for English language learners. For English as a new language teachers, a minimum 
of fifty percent (50%) of the required professional development hours are dedicated to language acquisition in alignment with 
core content area instruction, including a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and 
content instruction for English language learners. A portion of the Professional Learning Sessions on Monday and Tuesday 
afternoons are dedicated to meeting these requirements.  The ESL teacher, Ms. Rosa Fernandez, facilitates the meetings and 
maintains all records including agendas, handouts, and sign-in sheets.   
 
 

Parental Involvement 

1.  How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language 
development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? 
Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent 
orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences?  
Annual individual meeting with parents of ELLs are held during Parent Outreach afternoon sessions on Tuesdays of each week 
to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language 
development needs in all content areas. The Parent Coordinator serves as Spanish translator. Over-the-phone interpretation 
services are utilized through the DOE’s Translation and Interpretation Unit so that parents can receive language assistance and 
have their questions answered in their preferred languages.   

2.  Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. 
At PS 147, parent and community involvement is of the upmost importance. We acknowledge that parents and the community 
at large, in which students live, have the potential to be a strong influence upon student growth. Parents have been and will 
continue to be given the opportunity to learn and discuss different ways to support language at the home and the community 
level. The parent coordinator conducts workshops and supports parents, providing outreach into the school community. 
Parent involvement activities include a weekly book club, monthly Parent-in-the-Classroom activities, Core Curriculum 
information sessions, and State Exam information sessions. The parent coordinator also serves as a translator for all paperwork 
and interactions required for parent involvement, so that parents of ELLs may participate fully. All paperwork sent home is 
bilingual in English and Spanish as are automated calls home.  
 

 

 

Additional Information 

Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for 
ELLs.  You may attach/submit charts.   This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted.   
Paste response here:    
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          72 

 
 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          73 

Part V: ELL Identification Attestation 

Principal Certification 

2. 

3. 

4. 

5. 
6. 

7. 

8. 

9. 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 

In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL 
Policy and Reference Guide, I, Sandra Noyola, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered 
to and staff are trained on the following: 
 
1. 

The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for 
students entering with IEPs). 
Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined 
a. 

If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status 
relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level.  

The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue.   
a.  The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services 
are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality 
translation service.   

Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined.   
a. 

If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility 
to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. 

Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible.   
Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language.  
a.  Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. 
If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish 
LAB.  
Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources 
available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-
education-sife.  
If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting.  
a.  Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent 

video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask 
questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided 
throughout the meeting. 

10.  ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected.  

a. 

b. 

If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program 
in accordance with DOE transfer policies. 
If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent 
choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice.   

11.  Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process).  
12.  If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose 

ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 
 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          74 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 

Part VI: LAP Assurances 

School Name:   P.S.147                                                                              School DBN: 14K147 
Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate.  Names listed in Part A, should align with this 
section.  

Name (PRINT) 

Sandra Noyola 

Title 

Principal 

Eliza Figueroa 

Assistant Principal 

Lourdes Santiago 

Parent Coordinator 

Rosa Fernandez 

ENL/Bilingual Teacher 

Sharon Caraballo 

Parent 

Nadine Blackman/SETSS/IEP 

Teacher/Subject Area 

           

Mark Levine 

           

Teacher/Subject Area 

Coach 

Coach 

Joyann Reid 

School Counselor 

           

           

           

           

           

Superintendent 
 
Field Support Center Staff 
Member 
               

Other            

Other            

Other            

 

Signature 

Date (mm/dd/yy) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

           

 

           

 

           

           

           

           

           

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          75 

2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS 

Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools 

 

School 
Name: 

 

The Isaac Remsen School  

Superintendent: 

A. Winnicki  

 

 
 

DBN: 

14K147  

 

 

 
The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. 
If there is more than one LAC, list all. 
 

First Name  

Last Name  

Title  

Has the LAC attended a 

2018-19 training 

The LAC was involved in 
the development of this 

conducted by the Field 

plan? Yes/No  

Language Access 

Coordinator? Yes/No  

Lourdes 

Santiago 

Parent Coordinator 

Yes 

Yes 

   

 
* The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs 
on translation,  
interpretation, compliance and budget.  
 

School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful 
opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's 
Regulation A-663).  
 
By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and 
interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). 
 
Part A:  Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 
 
1.  Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written 

and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from: 

  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS) 
  Automate The System (ATS) reports 
  Student Emergency Contact cards 
  Surveys conducted by your school. 

 

Results of the Home Language Survey (HLIS) remain in the office to indicate parents' preferred languages of 
communication. This data is entered into ATS and confirmed with the ATS home language report. In addition, 
preferred languages for written and oral communication are indicated on Student Emergency Contact cards. 
Records of translation/interpretation needs are maintained. The Parent Coordinator inquires regularly with 
parents/families regarding languages of communication. These findings are communicated with administration.  

 

 
 
2.  List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, 

which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language 
Report (RCPL) ATS report. 
 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          76 

 

Language  

Written 
Preferred  

Percent 
Written  

Oral Preferred  

Percent Oral  

Pertinent information culled from Part III 
of the HLIS and the Student Emergency 
Contact Cards show that parents' 
preferred languages for both written and 
oral communication are English and 
Spanish. 

 

   

 

 

 

 

3.  From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at 

least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, 
French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. 
 

 

 

 
 
Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 
 
1.  List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be 

distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents.  
 

Document Name  

Month/Frequency 

How do you 

Distributed to 

plan to 

Families  

translate? 

Include 

procedures 
to ensure 

timely 

provision of 
translated 
documents 
to parents.  

The documents our school typically disseminates every year that 
require translation are monthly events calendars, parent-teacher 
conference announcements, after-school program information, 
letters from school leadership, testing announcements, holiday 
reminders, and student survey informational letters. 

 

 

   

 

2.  List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as 

parent-teacher  
conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings.  
   

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          77 

 

Meeting Name  

Month/Frequency 

of Meetings  

How does 
your school 

The formal face-to-face meetings our school typically has with 
parents throughout the school year include parent-teacher 
conferences in November and March and two curriculum nights in 
September and May. Other anticipated informal interactions include 
IEP meetings, home calls by the attendance teacher, guidance 
counselor, or teachers, PTA meetings, parent workshops, monthly 
parents-in-the-classroom sessions, and school assemblies. 

 

plan to 
provide 

interpretation 

service(s)?  

Staff 
members that 
will translate. 

 

Parent 
volunteers 

 

DOE 
Translation 
Unit 

   

 

3.  Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of 

a school emergency.  
 

 

 
 

 
 
Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure

 
Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and 
what resources are available to meet compliance.  
 

 

 

 

 
 
Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services 
 
Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive 
information. Include any: 

  Translated signage 
  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents 
  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) 

 

Our school provides each parent whose primary language is a covered language and who requires language assistance 
services with a copy of the Bill of Parent Rights and Responsibilities which includes their rights regarding translation 
and interpretation services. Our school posts in a conspicuous location at or near the primary entrance a sign in each 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          78 

 

of the covered languages, or most prominent covered languages, indicating the availability of interpretation services. 
Parents are directed to the Department of Translation and Interpretation Unit's website which provides information in 
each of the covered languages concerning the rights of parents to translation and interpretation services and how to 
access such services. The Language ID Guide is available at the security desk and main office.  

 

 
 
Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services 
Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the 
language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services?   
 

The school gathers feedback from parents on the quality and availability of services by administering a parent survey 
in June. 

 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          79 

