 
 

 

 
 

 
  
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

2018-19 

COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN 

(CEP) 

 
 
 
 

 

DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 

20K186 

School Name: 

P.S. 186 DR. IRVING A GLADSTONE 

Principal: 

BAYAN (EBEID) CADOTTE 

 
 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                          
 

 

 

 

 1 

 

Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline  

 
 
Section 1: School Information Page 
 
 
Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page  
 
 
Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) 
 
 
Section 4: CEP Overview  
 
 
Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  

  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction 
  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment 
  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers 
  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership 
  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties  

 
 
Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS)  
 
 
Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) 
 
 
Section 8: Title I Program Information  
 
 
Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 
 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          2 

Section 1: School Information Page 

 

School Information 

 

Dr. Irving A. Gladstone 

20K186 

 

 

 
School Name: 

BEDS Code: 

Grades Served: 

School Address:  

Phone Number: 

 

 
332000010186 

 
Pre-K - 5 

 
7601 19 th Avenue 
 
718-236-7071 

School Number (DBN): 

 

718-331-9181 

Fax: 

 

BayanEbeid-Cadotte 

bcadotte@schools.nyc.gov 

School Contact Person:  

 

Principal: 

UFT Chapter Leader: 

Parents’ Association President: 

SLT Chairperson: 

Title I Parent Representative (or 
Parent Advisory Council 
Chairperson): 

Student Representative(s): 

 

CBO Representative: 
 

Geographical District: 

20 

 

Superintendent’s Office Address: 

 

Email Address: 

BayanEbeid-Cadotte 

 
JoanneCarillo 

 
DanielleLamanna 

 
Danielle Lamanna 

 

Lisa Grefig 

 
n/a 

 

 
Vivian Barreto 

 

 

District Information 

 

Karina Costantino 

Superintendent: 
415 89 th Street 

 

 
Kcostantin@schools.nyc.gov  

Superintendent’s Email Address: 

 

718 759-4908  

Phone Number: 

 

718-759-3920 

Fax: 

 

 
 

Field Support Center (FSC)  

 

Brooklyn South 

Cheryl Watson-Harris 

FSC: 

 

Executive Director: 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          3 

 

Executive Director’s Office Address: 

415-89 th Street 
 
cwatsonharris@gmail.com 

Executive Director’s Email Address: 
718-759-4862 

 

Phone Number: 

 

718-759-3930 

Fax: 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          4 

 

Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page  

 

All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this 
Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to 
support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention 
Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal 
number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with 
Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. 
 
Directions: 

 

1.  List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 
2.  Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization 
(CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an 
asterisk*. 

3.  SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member 

does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, 
which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT 
member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval.   

4.  The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file 

in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. 

 

Name 

BayanEbeid-Cadotte 

 
Joanne Carillo 

 
Danielle Lamanna 

 

 

Lisa Grefig 

 

n/a 

 

n/a 

 

Vivian Barreto 

 
Jennifer Giordano 

 
Jessica Sussman 

 
Megan Louisa 

 

Position and Constituent Group 

Represented 

Signature 
(Blue Ink) 

*Principal or Designee 

*UFT Chapter Leader or Designee 

*PA/PTA President or Designated Co-
President 

DC 37 Representative (staff), if 
applicable 

Title I Parent Representative or 
Parent Advisory Council Chairperson  

Student Representative  
(optional for elementary and middle 
schools; a minimum of two members 
required for high schools) 

Student Representative  
(optional for elementary and middle 
schools; a minimum of two members 
required for high schools) 

CBO Representative, if applicable 

 
Member/ Teacher 

 
Member/ Teacher 

 
Member/ Teacher 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          5 

 

Name 

Position and Constituent Group 

Represented 

Signature 
(Blue Ink) 

Rosa Landazuri 

 
Barbara Montagna 

 
Sandra Santillo 

 
 

n 

 
n/a 

 
n/a 

 
n/a 

 
n/a 

 

 

Member / Parent 

 
Member/ Parent 

 
Member/ Parent  

 
Member/ 
 
Member/ 

 

Member/ 
 

Member/ 
 

Member/ 
 

Member/ 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          6 

 

Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan  

 

The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to 
support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing 
school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, 
monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. 
This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the 
school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, 
Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. 

Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools 

The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect 
the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms 
where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity 
and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and 
classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more 
attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and 
Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our 
families and students. 

Strong Schools, Strong Communities  

The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, 
educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school 
prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult.  

The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers 
and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of 
schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, 
school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that 
all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New 
Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students.  

The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development 

The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and 
external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase 
learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently 
ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan 
(CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school 
community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and 
address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for 
students. 
 

Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish 
high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the 
Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community 
members concrete ways to improve. 
 
In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in 
consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to 
participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a 
comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          7 

 
the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all 
the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements 
work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing 
that it likely addresses other elements as well. 
 

The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools  

Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards 
are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical 
thinking skills. 
Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, 
and challenged by their teachers and peers. 
Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. 
They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous 
improvement. 
Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, 
developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. 
Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by 
welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. 
Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school 
and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value 
each other. 

 

The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools 

In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in 
improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative 
and qualitative data. 

NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) 

The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by 
coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality 
Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 
Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below:  

I.       Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) 
II.    School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4)  
III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and 

Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) 

  
School Quality Guide  

The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to 
set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to 
accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also 
available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s 
practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. 
For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. 
The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of 
similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set 
based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. 

 

Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          8 

 
Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, 
professional development, and parent and family engagement. 
 
To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in 
improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will 
serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the 
administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish: 
 
 
 
It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School 
Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the 
joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% 
parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% 
budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent 
and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on 
establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. 

a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; 
a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) 

 
Next Steps for CEP Development 

School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  

  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the 

requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655. 

  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability 

status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year. 

  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed 

by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are 
SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you 
monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school 
community know when you’ve reached your goal. 

  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action 
plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement. 

  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I 

schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). 

  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall 

cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action 
plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. 

Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful 
implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to 
accomplishing desired results. 

Section 4: CEP Overview 

 

1.  What is your school’s mission statement? 

The educational community of PS 186 is committed to ensuring that all students strive for and achieve excellence in 
academics, arts and citizenship. We promote strong communication between the home and school and plan for an 
instructional program that challenges and engages students’ thinking and creativity. PS 186’s instructional focus is to 
foster a growth mindset in all students that develops their ability to self-regulate, to persevere through challenging 
problems and texts, and to empathize with their peers in challenging situations.  

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          9 

 

2.  Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, 

including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented.  

Language, ethnic and cultural diversity are respected as enhancements to student learning. To promote and 
strengthen the connection between the home and school, teachers and staff facilitate several parent workshops that 
address the common core standards, grade level expectations, Internet safety, social and emotional development and 
online instructional resources. Teachers also regularly communicate students' academic and social-emotional 
progress during a structured "Tuesday Engagement Time" devoted to parent outreach, via REMIND, School 
Messenger, the School Website, and Pupil Path. Based on feedback from teachers and parents, the school will begin 
full implementation of the Skedula and PupilPath systems in the 2018-2019 school year to further promote open and 
regular communication around student progress.  

The work of our Professional Learning (PL) team and the PL sessions for teachers and families throughout the school 
year directly address this focus. Consistent monitoring of teachers and students' progress within this focus is achieved 
through regular cycles of classroom observation and feedback. Inquiry teams meet regularly to set targeted goals and 
assess the effectiveness of instructional interventions for groups of students around this focus. In addition, we 
strongly believe in establishing a strong culture for learning and a positive, mutually respectful classroom 
environment which is inherent in the belief that all students can be successful.  

The school's Professional Learning (PL) team members meet consistently to analyze data and develop targeted 
professional development sessions that are responsive to the needs of staff, coincide with school-wide goals, are 
based on input from school-developed feedback surveys, and are grounded in the latest educational research. Our 
staff sets professional goals and communicates them during Initial planning conferences. These goals are used to build 
specific professional learning opportunities for individual teachers that relate to improving practice. During teachers' 
post conferences and summative conferences, these goals are revisited in order to determine whether they are 
working towards their goals and/or if their goals have been met. The School Leadership Team supports the entire 
process by making decisions about school-wide goals and the use of resources to advance our action plan. Through 
this structure of interconnected teams, our professional learning plan builds on the capacity of learners by 
encouraging and welcoming a wide range of staff members to become facilitators in areas of best practice. 

Our ExpandED Program, which is in its 8th year at PS 186, calls for an expansion of the school day that is seamless for 
participating students and builds upon academic goals and specific designs for enrichment programs that help 
children acquire persistence, engagement, work habits, collaboration skills, and self-regulation. The program operates 
collaboratively with a partnership with NIA Community Services Network (CBO partner). Currently, there are 
approximately 500 students enrolled in grades 1-5. Pedagogues, along with community educators, teaching artists, 
and community volunteers work to provide standards-based instructional, intervention and enrichment programs 
with input from school data, parent surveys, and student interest. The program offers high performing students, ELLs 
and SWDs avenues to pursue learning activities through S.T.E.M., the Arts, physical activity, and nutrition. The 
position of Educational Liaison serves as a bridge to support lesson planning between our school day and ExpandEd 
activities.  

In coordination with The ExpandED initiative, PS 186 and the NIA staff examine attendance data, student 
participation, and academic trends to identify next steps and areas of focus. The program Instructional Coordinator 
and Educational Liaison work collaboratively with NIA directors and Activity Specialists to provide joint professional 
learning opportunities. As a result of this collaboration, the quality of lesson planning is improved during ExpandED 
program hours through the sharing and communication of monthly goals and the development of thematic units of 
study. School-based pedagogues also work with targeted subgroups to provide test preparation programs in ELA, 
Math, Science, and NYSESLAT exams as part of the ExpandED program. The program has 50 minutes of homework 
support built in so that classroom instruction is supported and reinforced. Students participating in the program 
develop relationships with teachers and peers and have an opportunity to participate in academic and enrichment 
activities. Our school performing arts teacher and grade one teacher work during ExpandED hours to provide 
additional opportunities for students to be involved in additional performing arts activities such as dance and chorus. 
This year, through a Disney grant, our school is once again pleased to collaborate in a musical theatre production. 
Through the partnership with ExpandED, PS 186 is also moving forward with RULER and the Sanford Harmony 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          10 

 

Program, research-based programs intended to target the social-emotional development of all students. In addition 
NIA staff will be trained in Playworks, a program which supports healthy play and relationships during recess and 
during program. As a result, our ExpandED program ensures that the school's goals and practices are followed 
through to support a seamless school culture.  

 

The program, currently serving nearly 500 students daily, offers a wide array of services, including targeted 
academic support for students selected by the school based on need, SEL activities aligned to school SEL goals, 
hands-on STEAM programming, sports and fitness, music , dance, visual and performing arts. Program employs a 
blended staff of CBO community educators and teaching artists, as well as PS 186 teachers and school staff. Staff 
participates in joint PD sessions and co-teaching experiences. School-wide events are hosted collaboratively. Our 
partnership thrives on open communication, building relationships, sharing resources, and working together 
toward shared vision for program participants and their families. 

The partnership between PS 186 and NIA ExpandED is largely successful due to a targeted approach that includes 
the crossover of leadership, school-wide goals, student activities and staff. To begin with, PS 186 and NIA ExpandED 
administration meet frequently on the School Leadership Team, Building Response Team and Safety Committee to 
ensure that there is a unified vision and that school norms are carried over from the school day into the extended 
day. Another aspect that contributes to the success of this partnership is the integration of activities and student 
clubs that thrive on both ends, such as art committee, student leadership, cheerleading, show choir and Playworks. 
Staff that are present during both parts of the school day work with our students during the school regular school 
day by facilitating activities during three lunch periods and then build upon their efforts during the extended day. 
Shared staff has certainly contributed to the success of our seamless day. The crossover in both directions where 
NIA staff assist during recess in Playworks leading SEL inspired games and where PS 186 staff teach activities such 
as STEAM, literacy and cheerleading in the extended day. Ultimately, the PS 186/NIA ExpandED team works well 
together because we do not view ourselves as two separate organizations but as one community. 

 

 

 

3.  Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. 

About 32 % of our student population is made up of English Language Learners (ELLs) and over 20 languages 
represent our community. About 15 % of our student population is comprised of Students with Disabilities (SWDs). 
All of these subgroups struggle with vocabulary development, answering inferential questions and mathematical 
explanations. Staff members and support personnel are committed to planning for the academic and social-
emotional growth of the whole child. Students at PS 186 wear a school uniform to promote community, fairness 
and respect for school and learning. The PS 186 school culture has historically welcomed families to be active 
participants in their child’s education. Throughout the school year, parents are invited to participate in many 
school-wide celebrations that support our school initiative. Such activities include, Family Fun Fridays, Playworks 
Playdates, Pre-K Playdates, Take Dad to Work Day and Career Day. Each grade plans for a minimum of 3 classroom 
celebrations per year.  

 

4. 

Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over 
the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. 

Our instructional focus, devised in conjunction with the Framework for Great Schools, targets the development of 
students' growth mindset so that all students can develop their ability to self-regulate, to persevere through 
challenging problems and texts, and to empathize with their peers in challenging situations. Based on an item analysis 
of NY State Assessments and the NYSESLAT exam, our grade 3-5 students demonstrate a need for support in the areas 
of determining unfamiliar vocabulary and academic-language development. In math, the focus must be to improve 
planning and support for complex mathematical problem solving by understanding vocabulary. These goals are 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          11 

 

specific to our school population of learners but also to our ELL students who have shown declines in achieving levels 
of proficiency on ELA state exams mostly attributed to questions that focus on academic language, their 
understanding of complex text and math word problems. The context of the work for the past four years has been 
rooted in developing a common understanding about how students learn best and is driven by the demographics and 
vast learning needs of the students of PS 186, including statistical results that indicate student progress and 
performance. Moving forward, the school's goals for the 2018- 2019 SY will therefore focus on the modification of 
curricula to better support the needs of these student populations and to ensure rigorous instruction that results in 
student achievement and progress. These goals are rooted in the guidelines set forth in the Framework for Great 
Schools.  

 

 

 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          12 

 

 

School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 20K186 

School Configuration (2018-19) 

Grade Configuration 

PK,0K,01,02,03,04,
05 

Total Enrollment (2017-
18) 
English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 

1032 

SIG Recipient (Y/N) 

Transitional Bilingual 

YES 

Dual Language 

N/A 

Self-Contained English as a Second 
Language 

Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) 

# Special Classes (ELA) 
# Special Classes (Math) 

# Visual Arts 
# Foreign Language 

% Title I Population 
% Free Lunch 
% Limited English Proficient 

42 
42 

 
 

% American Indian or Alaska Native 
% Hispanic or Latino 
% White 

# SETSS (ELA) 
# SETSS (Math) 
Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) 
# Music 
# Drama 
# CTE 
# Dance 

15 
11 

 
 

# Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) 
# Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) 

School Composition (2017-18) 

73.0%  % Attendance Rate 
71.1%  % Reduced Lunch 
35.5%  % Students with Disabilities 

Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) 

% Black or African American 

0.6% 
27.4%  % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 
30.7%  % Multi-Racial 

Personnel (2015-16) 

Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) 
% of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate 
% Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 

13.92 
0% 
11% 

# of Assistant Principals (2016-17) 
% Teaching Out of Certification 
Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) 

Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) 

ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 

53.5%  Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 

Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 

91% 

Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-
17) 

Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) 

ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 
Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 
4 Year Graduation Rate 

Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 

N/A 
N/A 
N/A 

N/A 

Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 
US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 
6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) 
% ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures 
(2015-16) 

Reward 
In Good Standing 
Focus District 

Priority School 

Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) 

No 
Yes 
Yes 

Recognition 
Local Assistance Plan 
Focus School Identified by a Focus District 

No 

Focus Subgroups 

N/A 

Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) 

Elementary/Middle School 

Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) 

American Indian or Alaska Native 
Hispanic or Latino 
White 
Students with Disabilities 
Economically Disadvantaged 

American Indian or Alaska Native 
Hispanic or Latino 
White 
Students with Disabilities 
Economically Disadvantaged 

American Indian or Alaska Native 
Hispanic or Latino 
White 
Students with Disabilities 
Economically Disadvantaged 

American Indian or Alaska Native 
Hispanic or Latino 
White 
Students with Disabilities 
Economically Disadvantaged 

American Indian or Alaska Native 
Hispanic or Latino 
White 
Students with Disabilities 
Economically Disadvantaged 

American Indian or Alaska Native 
Hispanic or Latino 
White 
Students with Disabilities 
Economically Disadvantaged 

N/A 
YES 
YES 
YES 
YES 

Black or African American 
Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander 
Multi-Racial 
Limited English Proficient 
ALL STUDENTS 

Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) 
Black or African American 
Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander 
Multi-Racial 
Limited English Proficient 
ALL STUDENTS 

N/A 
YES 
YES 
YES 
YES 

Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) 

N/A 
YES 
YES 
N/A 
YES 
High School 

Black or African American 
Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander 
Multi-Racial 
Limited English Proficient 
ALL STUDENTS 

Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) 

N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 

Black or African American 
Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander 
Multi-Racial 
Limited English Proficient 
ALL STUDENTS 

Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) 
Black or African American 
Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander 
Multi-Racial 
Limited English Proficient 
ALL STUDENTS 

N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 

Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) 
Black or African American 
Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander 
Multi-Racial 
Limited English Proficient 
ALL STUDENTS 

N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 

No 

N/A 

100 
95 

 
 

95.5% 
1.6% 
17.1% 

0.2% 
40.3% 
1.4% 

6 
3% 
7.4 

55.9% 

N/A 

N/A 
N/A 
N/A 

N/A 

N/A 
No 
No 

N/A 
YES 
N/A 
YES 
YES 

N/A 
YES 
N/A 
YES 
YES 

N/A 
YES 
N/A 
YES 
YES 

N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 

N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 

N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          13 

 

 
 

Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans 

 

Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, 
motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged 
in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. 

Part 1 – Needs Assessment   

Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and 
formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not 
limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. 
Number responses accordingly. 
 
1.  What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element?  Indicate the data trends, source and year. 
2.  What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? 

Indicate the data trends, source and year. 

 
 

The efforts of the members of our school community have been rooted in developing a common framework about 
how students learn best. This work is guided by an understanding of the demographic composition and vast 
learning needs of the students of PS 186, including statistical results that indicate student progress and 
performance. The following is a snapshot of data analysis culled from multiple sources, including state assessments 
in ELA and Math, The Learning Environment Survey, and New York State English as a Second Language Achievement 
Test (NYSESLAT), and Quality Review. 

Data Analysis (2016-2017 School Year) 

  PS 186 fell in the 72nd percentile citywide for the percentage of students earning a proficient score (level 3 

or 4) in grades 3 through 5 on the 2017 state ELA exam. While forty percent of tested students in these 
grades received a proficient grade on this exam in 2015, 52% were tested as proficient in 2017. 

  PS 186 fell in the 70th percentile citywide for the percentage of students earning a proficient score (level 3 
or 4) in grades 3 through 5 on the 2015 state math exam. While 55% were proficient in 2017 and that is up 
from 51% in 2016, 57% of tested students received a proficient grade on this exam in 2015. Performance 
has rebounded from a down year but not entirely. 

  The average proficiency of students the lowest third of the city on the ELA exam outperformed other 

schools in the city in 2017. PS 186 had a metric of 2.27 which was .22 higher than the city.  

  The average proficiency for English Language Learners on the state ELA exam has climbed since 2015 from 
2.43 average proficiency to 2.64, higher than the city by .24. PS 186 outperformed the city on this measure 
in 2013 (by 0.23 points), this gap has widened since 2015, where PS 186 outperformed the city by 0.14 
points. 

  While PS 186 did outperform the city in all areas, the most glaring shortcomings in the Performance data is 
when PS 186 is compared to the comparison group. PS 186 scored 2.32 for the 2017 metric for the average 
proficiency of students the lowest third of the school on the ELA exam which was .09 less than the score of 
the comparison group. In the same metric for math score PS 186 scored .31 less than the comparison group 
to a 2.19. In addition, PS 186 fell from a score of 2.40 in 2015 to a 2.09 in 2017 for students the lowest third 
of the school on the math exam. This narrowed the gap with the city from .23 better to just .02 better. 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          14 

 

Data Analysis Based on Item Analysis (2016-2017 School Year Assessment Analysis and Comparison of the 2016 and 
2017 ELA State Exam Results (comparing the school's’ performance to the city’s performance) 

Grade 3: 

  There was a significant increase in standards testing students’ ability to infer sequence & cause, standard 
RL3.3. (-.01 in 2016 compared to +.04 in 2017), infer connecting sentences, standard RI. 3.8 (+.02 in 2016 
compared to +.05 in 2017) and identifying the central message, RL 3.2 (-.04 in 2016 compared to +.07 in 
2017) 

  However, there was an overall decrease in the standards testing students’ ability to infer and analyze 

events standard RL3.3 (+.04 in 2016 compared to -.03 in 2017) 

Grade 4: 

  Overall, the standards testing students’ ability to infer word meaning, standard RI 4.4 ( +.04 for both 2016 

and 2017) and infer the overall structure, standard RI 4.5 (+.06 for both 2016 and 2017) 

  There was an overall decrease in standards testing students’ ability to infer main idea, standard RI 4.2 (+.10 
in 2016 compared to +.05 in 2017), infer sequence and cause RI 4.3 (+.07 in 2016 compared to +.01 in 2017 
and referring back to details, standard RL 4.1 (+.07 in 2016 compared to -.02 in 2017) 

Grade 5: 

  There was a significant increase in the standards testing students’ ability to identify idioms, adages and 

proverbs, standard L 5.5b (-.06 in 2016 compared to +.02 in 2017) and to infer main idea, standard RI 5.2 (-
.01 in 2016 compared to +.03 in 2017) 

  There was an overall decrease in the standards testing students’ ability to infer main idea, standard RI5.2 
(+14 in 2016 compared to -.01 in 2017), identify theme, standard RL 5.2 and identify literal word meaning, 
standard RL 5.4 (+.10 in 2016 compared to +.04 in 2017) 

Assessment Analysis and Comparison of the 2016 and 2017 Mathematics State Exam Results (comparing the 
school's performance to the city’s performance) 

Grade 3: 

  There was a significant increase in the area of Operations and Algebraic Thinking and Measurement and 

Data specifically in the standards testing students’ ability to solve multi- step word problems/dividing by 0-
100, standard 3.OA A.3 (+.02 in 2016 compared to +.06 in 2017), solving two step word problems, standard 
3.OA. D.8 (+.04 in 2016 compared to +.08 in 2017) and drawing Graphs, standard MD. B.33 (-.01 in 2016 
compared to +.11 in 2017) 

  There was an overall decrease in the area of Measurement and Data, Numbers and Operations and 

Operations and Algebraic Thinking, specifically in the standards testing students’ ability to identify time, 
standard MD.A. 1.3 (+.10 in 2016 compared to -.04 in 2017), rounding to 10 or 100, standard NBT.A,13 (+.04 
in 2016 compared to +.08 in 2017) and dividing with an unknown factor, standard 3.OA.B.6 (+.15 in 2016 
compared to +.06 in 2017) 

Grade 4: 

  There was a significant increase in the area of Measurement and Data and Operations and Algebraic 
Thinking, specifically in the standards testing students’ ability to identify the definition of a degree, 
standard MD.C.5 (+.03 in 2016 compared to +.25 in 2017), use a protractor, standard MD.C.6 (+.10 in 2016 
compared to +.20 in 2017) and finding factor pairs, standard 4.OA.B.4 (+.04 in 2016 compared to +.15 in 
2017) 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          15 

 

  There was an overall decrease in the area of Geometry and Measurement and Data, specifically in the 

standards testing students’ ability to identify line of symmetry, standard 4.G.A.3 (+.19 in 2016 compared to 
+.13 in 2017) and finding the area and perimeter of rectangle, standard 4.MD.A.3 (+.15 in 2017 compared to 
.06 in 2017) 

Grade 5: 

  There was a significant increase in the areas of Measurement and Data, Numbers and Operation in Base 

Ten and Numbers in Operations-Fractions, specifically in the standards testing students’ ability to convert 
measurements, standard MD.A.1 (+.01 in 2016 compared to +.16 in 2017), fractions of 10 or 100, standard 
4.NF.C.6 (-.05 in 2016 compared to +.03 in 2017) and add/subtract Fractions, standard 5.NF.A.1 (+.08 in 
2016 compared to +.14 in 2017). 

  There was an overall decrease in the area of Numbers and Operation in Base Ten, and Operations and 

Algebra, specifically in the standards testing students’ ability to round decimals, standard NBT.A.4 (+.03 in 
2016 compared to -.01 in 2017) and expression with parenthesis, standard 5.OA.A.1 (+.09 in 2016 compared 
to +.03 in 2017) 

MOTP (Measures of Teacher Practice) Data 

  Recent End of Year Danielson Teacher Rating Data averages were calculated across all rated components. 
Teachers had the highest average component ratings for Domain 2 (Classroom Environment and Behavior 
Management). The lowest average component ratings were in Domain 3 (including Questioning and 
Discussion Techniques, Engaging Students in Learning and Using Assessment in Instruction). More 
specifically, 3b, Questioning and Discussion techniques was our lowest component with an average rating 
of 3.29 and Classroom Environment was the highest with an average rating of 3.87. 

  Our school instructional goal of building vocabulary and language through rich tasks and discussion that 

address the needs of all learners including ENL and SWD students will focus on evaluating classroom 
instruction in Danielson framework component areas 3B (Questioning and Discussion Techniques), 3C 
(Engaging Students in Learning) and 3D (Using Assessment in Instruction). Professional Development 
learning opportunities will focus on supporting teachers practice in these specific areas. 

2016 Quality Review 

  PS 186 received a Well-Developed in all rubric components of the quality review with the exception 

indicator 1.2 (Pedagogy). The recommendation in this area was: "While consistent application of scaffolds 
and multiple entry points results in students being engaged in discussions and rigorous tasks across grades 
and content areas, instructional practices reveal missed opportunities to further elevate student thinking 
and promote ownership of learning." 

Learning Environment Survey 

Based on NYC school survey teacher responses, PS 186 lagged behind the city average for Quality of Student 
Discussion (62% vs. 73%), Common Core Shifts in Math (83% vs 91%) and Common Core shifts in Literacy (78% vs. 
90%). 

 
Instructional Focus 

We will foster a growth mindset in all students to develop their ability to self-regulate and persevere within 
interdisciplinary units. Student supports will include the use of instructional protocols, scaffolds, and data driven 
strategy groups. Collaboration, empathy, and leadership will be encouraged in and out of the classroom so we are 
“Heads Above the Rest!” 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          16 

 

Our instructional focus encompasses the school wide vision on how kids learn best. Through extensive sessions 
using the text Teaching Advanced Literacy Skills, focusing on the Hallmarks of Literacy : Work With Engaging Texts 
that Feature Big Ideas and Content, Talk/Discuss, to build language and knowledge, Write to Build Language and 
Knowledge, Study a Small Set of High Utility Vocabulary Words to build breadth and depth of Knowledge and 
School Wide Protocols.  

 

Priority Areas of Need: 

The work of the 2018-2019 school year will focus on building and developing students' ability to self-regulate, self-
assess and persevere through difficult and sometimes novel learning tasks. Additionally, teachers will develop 
practices to support them in creating student centered classrooms through the use of protocols. These goals are 
encompassed under the school's instructional focus of developing students' executive functioning skills.  

Based on the results of the 2018 state ELA and Math exams in grades 3 through 5, we will continue the work from 
prior years to specifically address academic vocabulary acquisition through close reading strategies and guided 
reading approach in ELA and problem solving in Math. This will be achieved through targeted professional learning 
opportunities developed in conjunction with the Professional Learning Team and Vertical Team through the study 
of research-based literature to support planning and curriculum alignment that ensure rigorous instruction which 
results in student achievement and progress. 

 

 
Part 2 – Annual Goal 

Indicate  your  school’s  2018-19  goal  for  improving  student  outcomes  and  school  performance  that  addresses  this 
element  of  the  Framework  for  Great  Schools–Rigorous  Instruction.  Your  goal  must  be  responsive  to  the  identified 
priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-
bound.  
 

By June 2019, all students, including English Language Learners (ELLs) and Students with Disabilities (SWDs) will show 
at least a 4 level increase in independent reading levels measured through Teachers College Reading Writing Program 
(TCRWP) data analysis.Students will engage in data driven instruction and student centered classrooms, protocols 
which promote speaking, listening, reading and writing, through project based learning.Families will be informed and 
encouraged to participate in thematic Family Fun events, workshops and conferences which are based on curriculum. 

 

The following action steps have been taken to provide all of our students, including the ENL and SWDs with 
continuous support in order to meet the English language proficiency and grade level expectations.  

Students will engage in data driven instruction and student centered classrooms. Teachers with use the TCRWP 
benchmark analysis after each class is assessed to plan for small group instruction that is tailored to the needs of the 
students. Small group instruction will include both strategy lessons and guided reading lessons, teaching students to 
use reading skills that involve close reading and using text evidence to support their ideas and theories.  

Student centered classrooms will be evident across all grades, promoting group and partner discussions. Teachers will 
act as facilitators as students work through problems and close read texts. Supports such as sentence starters, 
language note slips and conversation cards will be provided to students in order to guide them in having genuine 
discussions, promoting what research has shown, those who are doing the “talking” are the ones “learning.”  

Protocols will also be implemented into daily instruction to promote speaking, listening, reading and writing. The 
Professional Development Learning Team has and will continue to turn key valuable protocols which support the 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          17 

 

Hallmarks of Literacy such as; Stronger and Clearer, Think Pair Share, Graffiti, Gallery Walk and the Three Read 
Protocols. Common school wide protocols will be used across grades to ensure cohesiveness, which will support 
students in mastering the skills needed to be successful within the Hallmarks of Literacy. 

All classes will be engaged in project-based learning focusing on the SS Passport program. Students will be engaged 
with various text sets, visuals & technology to create a project that is student centered/student choice. 

Families will be informed of and encouraged to attend celebrations as well as, assisting their children throughout 
specific Project-based learning activities. Families will also be invited to many Family Fun events such as Dads & 
Moms take your child to school day , workshops to better their knowledge on the current curriculums and 
expectations for the school year.  

Inquiry teams meet regularly to set targeted goals and assess the effectiveness of instructional interventions for 
groups of students around this focus. In addition, we strongly believe in establishing a strong culture for learning and 
a positive, mutually respectful classroom environment which is inherent in the belief that all students can be 
successful.  

The administration team strategically designated ENL classes on each grade in order to provide students with multiple 
periods of co-teaching where the ENL teacher and general education teacher collaborate together to plan for the use 
of various co-teaching models. In addition, we offer a Saturday Academy to our ELL's for grades K- 5, preparing them 
for the NYSESLAT in addition to after school sessions. Within the school day students have the opportunity to work on 
the various computer programs to support their reading and math skills both in the classroom and also during their 
lunch period.  

Ongoing professional development is provided for both our general education teachers and ENL teachers to support 
them in conducting small group individualized reading and math instruction through guided reading and math 
strategy lessons. In addition to the in school professional development offered by our PD team and the Brooklyn 
South Professional Development session, select teachers have attended trainings and focused classroom inter-
visitations to train staff in strategies around English Language Development in the Content Areas which was 
facilitated by Dr. Rosa Delgado. Lastly, our ELL's are also supported through the use of Student Language 
Ambassadors; students who speak a second language who can go into the classrooms to help our beginner ELLs 
during instruction. 

As nexts steps, our Vertical and Professional Learning Teams will create a School Wide Assessment Plan to streamline 
benchmark assessments. Grade teams will plan collaboratively to create Unit Plans for Journeys which include both 
Science and Social Studies connections. In addition, the Social Studies Passport implementation team, made up of a 
representative from all grades and departments, will turn key planning for project based learning by providing a unit 
sample of the necessary components.  

The Professional Development Learning Team will facilitate school wide PD sessions on the following topics: 

Ongoing: Mentor Pacing Calendar (New Teacher Important Things To Know and Learn) 

Norming Running Records, Guided Reading & Using Data to Group (Strategy) 

Embedding Test Prep into Reading & Writing Workshop, & Math 

Revisit the use of Protocols and Math Talk  

Attacking Word Problems and Station Teaching  

Use of Language Progressions to support planning  

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          18 

 

Social Studies - Project Based Planning  

Administration will monitor the progress of the implementation of the strategies provided to staff through 
observation cycles and inter-vistiations and discussions with Mentor Teams  

All findings will be discussed with the SLT as well as the school PD leaning team in order to make adjustments and 
continue to support the teachers in the implementation of strategies. 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          19 

Target 
Group(s) 
Who will be 
targeted? 

Timeline 
What is the 
start and 
end date? 

Key Personnel 
Who is responsible 
for implementing 
and overseeing the 
activity/strategy? 

All Teachers  Sept- June   Administrators; 

Professional 
Development 
Learning Team; 

Grade Leaders; 

AIS Teachers; 

ENL Teachers; 

Vertical Team 

 
Part 3a – Action Plan 

Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies 
your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for 
this Framework for Great Schools element, including: 

  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional 

 

development, and/or systems and structures needed to 
impact change. 
Strategies to address the needs of students with 
disabilities, English language learners, and other high-
need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, 
SIFE, STH). 

Through ongoing and regular cycles of inquiry, teacher teams will 
analyze student data for trends, TCRWP benchmark analysis and 
identify goals for individual students in targeted subgroups (i.e. 
SWDs and ELLs), and implement instructional strategies that 
address students' academic goals and that are supported by 
current educational research. 

 

Teacher teams will utilize GoalBook (online instructional 
program) to set and monitor student goals for inquiry. 

Teachers will utilize various strategies and protocols presented 
by our Professional Development learning team. 

Administration will monitor the use of these protocols and 
strategies through observation cycles and intervistiations. 

Administration will monitor the student growth by analyzing and 
reviewing data with all teachers in during observation debriefs, 
initial and summative conferences. 

 

Administration will track student progress, 4 times throughout 
the SY ( Nov,Jan, March and May), using TCRWP assessment pro 
to ensure there is growth in independent reading levels and refer 
to professional 

 

Additionally, administration and the AIS team will track I-Ready 
data in order to identify students who are one or more levels 
below grade level. I-Ready data will also be tracked to determine 
the ENL students and SWD who need extra support through 
small group instruction in both and afterschool program and a 
Saturday program. 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          20 

All Staff 

Sept-June 

AIS Teachers; 

Administration; 

Inquiry Teams 

 

 

Administration along with the vertical team will select a school 
wide screener to determine the initial level of performance in 
reading literature - pertinent to the needs of our school 
population - that is available through an online database 
provided through the Department of Education (learndoe.org). 
Teacher teams will also be supplied with professional 
publications that address school-wide goals and the instructional 
focus (i.e. "Coteaching and Collaboration"). 

Classroom-based support personnel (i.e. AIS, ENL and Speech 
teachers) will also be involved in communicating student 
progress toward established goals. Findings from the cycle of 
inquiry will inform changes to curriculum maps, as well as unit 
and lesson plans. Curriculum maps will therefore incorporate 
more regular checks of student mastery of concepts. 

For the 2018-2019 school year we have added an AIS Enrichment 
teacher to support students working at a level 3 and 4. 
Additionally, two full-time 

Academic Intervention Services (AIS) teachers will continue to 
contribute to the work of the inquiry teams in order to support 
students' progress with individualized scaffolds and enrichment 
opportunities. 

 

The three AIS teachers will each work with two grade bands each 
and will meet regularly as a team to plan vertically and discuss 
student progress towards established goals. The AIS teachers will 
utilize various instructional resources, including online-based 
programs such as myON, Mathletics, BrainPOP, Flocabulary, and 
Compass Pathblazer. These programs are personalized to each 
student and adaptive. Students' success in these programs will 
be monitored during inquiry team meetings to gauge progress 
toward individual goals. With the addition of Exemplars, a 
performance assessment bank, AIS teachers will also work 
towards strengthening students' problem solving capacity and 
ability to sho 

The Vertical Team collaborated during bi-weekly meetings to 
pilot the Hallmarks of Literacy from the book,Teaching Advanced 
Literacy Skills: A Guide for Leaders in Linguistically Diverse 
Schools by Emily Phillips Galloway, Nonie K. Lesaux, and Sky H. 
Marietta. The team encompasses representatives from all grades 
and departments who turn key information to their grade and 
department teams. 

The team work through the implementation of various key ideas 
related to the Hallmarks of Literacy, which have now become 
school wide initiatives; identifying benchmark assessments, 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          21 

 

creating a screener, and norming running records for the 
purpose of creating spreadsheets to gather data and plan for 
instruction. 

Additionally, all grade teams used inquiry based protocols to 
identify trends and patterns across grades. Based on data 
gathered the team worked with their grade teams to plan for 
curriculum shifts and small group instruction. 

As a team participants decided upon various school wide 
protocols to use across grades in order to support students in 
mastering specific routines and to ensure cohesiveness across all 
grades and departments. The following protocols will be evident 
across all grades and classrooms: Stronger and Clearer, Four 
Corners, IRADE, Graffitti and Gallery Walk. 

During and End of the Year Planning Retreat, all staff participated 
in Curriculum planning based on the Vertical Teams work during 
the 2017-2018 SY. All curriculum maps will have a strong 
emphasis on Thematic Units embedding Science and Social 
Studies as it relates to the Hallmarks of Literacy : Work With 
Engaging Texts that Feature Big Ideas and Content, Talk/Discuss, 
to build language and knowledge, Write to Build Language and 
Knowledge, Study a Small Set of High Utility Vocabulary Words to 
build breadth and depth of Knowledge and School Wide 
Protocols. 

School Wide Teams drive the instructional cohesiveness of our 
school community, as they are tool forturn keying important 
information to staff in small group settings. The following teams 
meet regularly to discuss areas of success and areas in need of 
improvement: School Leadership Team ,Grade Leaders, Vertical 
Team, Professional Development Team, Passport Social Studies 
Team, Mentor & Mentee Team, Safety Team & BRT. 

w their thinking. 

The Vertical Team has collaborated during bi-weekly meetings to 
pilot the Hallmarks of Literacy from the book,Teaching Advanced 
Literacy Skills: A Guide for Leaders in Linguistically Diverse 
Schools by Emily Phillips Galloway, Nonie K. Lesaux, and Sky H. 
Marietta. The team encompasses representatives from all grades 
and departments who turn key information to their grade and 
department teams. The team will continue their work in their 
grade teams throughout the year as they continue to revise 
curriculum maps to include thematic units and vocabulary 
instruction.  

 

The team works through the implementation of various key ideas 
related to the Hallmarks of Literacy, which have now become 
school wide initiatives; identifying benchmark assessments, 

 

 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          22 

 

creating a screener, and norming running records for the 
purpose of creating spreadsheets to gather data and plan for 
instruction. 

 

Additionally, all grade teams use inquiry based protocols to 
identify trends and patterns across grades. Based on data 
gathered the team worked with their grade teams to plan for 
curriculum shifts and small group instruction. 

 

As a team participants decided upon various school wide 
protocols to use across grades in order to support students in 
mastering specific routines and to ensure cohesiveness across all 
grades and departments. The following protocols will be evident 
across all grades and classrooms: Stronger and Clearer, Four 
Corners, IRADE, Graffitti and Gallery Walk. Students are exposed 
to these protocols across all grade levels, supporting students, 
specifically ENL and SWD, because they are common throughout 
the grade levels.  

 

During and End of the Year Planning Retreat, all staff participated 
in Curriculum planning based on the Vertical Teams work during 
the 2017-2018 SY. All curriculum maps will have a strong 
emphasis on Thematic Units embedding Science and Social 
Studies as it relates to the Hallmarks of Literacy : Work With 
Engaging Texts that Feature Big Ideas and Content, Talk/Discuss, 
to build language and knowledge, Write to Build Language and 
Knowledge, Study a Small Set of High Utility Vocabulary Words to 
build breadth and depth of Knowledge and School Wide 
Protocols. Grade teams continue to create unit plans which are 
shared on Google Drive.  

 

There will be several instructional programs geared towards 
targeted groups of students to address their learning needs. 
These will be planned and carried out in conjunction with our 
ExpandED partners before and after school hours, as well as on 
Saturday. These will include a "Path Blazers" program for 
students who are at-risk in both English and Math. ELLs and 
SWDs will also be invited to participate in our Saturday Academy, 
along with their parents, who will be invited for adult technology 
and English-language classes. The Saturday program will also 
include a home language instruction class for students that will 
be funded through Title III funds. 

An increase in frequency of parental workshops given by 
teachers to support understanding of the curriculum, the 
expectations of the common core standards, and ways that 

Teachers, 
ExpandED 
staff  

Sept- June  Administrators; 

Teachers; 

ExpandED staff  

Parents 

Monthly 

Teachers; 
Administrators; 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          23 

Parent Coordinator 

NIA Expanded 

parents can support their children at home with homework and 
other projects. Increased parent outreach and more seamless 
communication will be achieved through the adoption of 
PupilPath system and continuation of the School Messenger 
system, as well as REMIND. A REMIND class will be set up for 
incoming Kindergarten Families to keep them informed with 
important dates and information regarding the first week of 
school. A Getting Ready for Kindergarten Mommy and Me Class 
will be held over the summer to support families and students in 
becoming familiar with the expectations and the school building. 
ENL workshops will be scheduled to support parents in 
curriculum and state testing. Translators will be provided for 
parents at these meeting and it is expected that all 
communications between staff and families who speak a second 
language, be done using the translation service, to ensure 
families understand expectations and next steps. Workshops for 
our families will be provided on Saturday for our families to learn 
English and learn about important communication items sent 
home, such as monthly letters and the school website.  
 

 

 
 

 
3b – Parent and Family Engagement 

How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York 
State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible 
for implementation and oversight. 
 

Families are engaged through our Family Fun Fridays events bimonthly across all grade levels. These events are 
correlated to the curriculum of each grade Each month the monthly goals are posted on our school website and 
sent via the REMIND APP. Parent workshops are held throughout the year to inform families of the curriculum and 
Common Core standards. The following is a timeline of the parent workshops offered to families throughout the 
year. 

 

September 

Students and parents will engage in Getting Ready for Junior High School, ENL Workshops, Homework help parent 
meetings and Curriculum Night. The staff will also take part in a presentation of Curriculum Expectations across all 
grades including Cluster programs. 

 

October 

Parents will receive a letter regarding Parent Teacher Conferences. This will prepare them for their child’s 
conferences with questions to ask their teachers, clusters and service providers if applicable.  

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          24 

 

November 

The parent coordinator will host a meeting regarding the Middle School Application process with fourth and fifth 
grade parents. Mid-November parents will be invited for Parent Teacher Conferences to review report cards. Some 
students will lead the meeting by having a Student Led-Conferences. With this, students discuss their “glows” and 
“next steps.”  

 

December 

All staff will take part in meetings to discuss progress of select students based on curriculum expectations. 

 

January 

Parents will join us in a New Years Celebration, connecting cultural traditions with Passport to Social Studies 
curriculum. Select parents are invited in January to discuss students who are in doubt of promotion. Teachers 
provide parents with next steps in hopes to further their progress. As a school we participate in College Day, to 
continue college and career focused students. 

 

February 

Students and Parents are expected to participate in Respect for All/Anti-Bullying workshops, Internet Safety and 
Getting Ready for the State Exams. 

April  

Our staff and ENL students will partake in getting Ready for NYSESLAT. 

May  

As a school, students will participate in a “Career Day.” Parents will be invited to present to a class their career. 
Students will be invited to dress up as the career path they would like to be in. Teachers plan for rigorous activities 
such as writing a resume, making a business card, and researching to further spark interest in career readiness. 
Students will also be awarded academic and social emotional awards for their participation in the years instruction.  

 

June 

After registration, incoming kindergarten families will be invited to a Kindergarten Orientation. At this orientation, 
parents will have the opportunity to meet with kindergarten teachers and prepare for the upcoming school year. 
Administration will also host a Summer Skill Book meeting to prepare parents for their summer homework.  

 

 
Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 

Part  4a.  Indicate  resources  you will  leverage  to  achieve  this  annual  goal  and  implement this  action  plan,  including 
human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          25 

 

 

Title 1 funds will be used towards purchase of: 

Skedula and PupilPath  

 
  Copies of aforementioned professional literature to be used during grade team inquiry meetings.  
  Exemplars Performance Bank  
  Contracted external vendors for high quality professional learning opportunities (including TEQ for 

instructional technology, HMH for curricula including Go Math!, Science Fusion, Social Studies Passport and 
Journeys).  
School Messenger 
School Website Management (ECHALK) 

 
 
  Playworks Professional Development  

Tax Levy Fair Student Funding will be utilized towards: 

  Addition of two full-time AIS teachers.  
  Per Session/Per Diem for Professional Learning Team meetings, Saturday Academy, Morning Tutoring 

Sessions and after/before school programs.  

Title III funds will be utilized towards: 

  Per session for after/before school direct instruction programs and Saturday Academy.  
  Home language instruction teacher per session for Saturday academy 
 

Supplies for after/before school programs and Saturday Academy.  

Scheduling considerations: 

  Regular meeting times on Monday or Tuesday afternoons during which ENL, AIS, Cluster Teachers and other 

support personnel will meet with classroom teachers to plan collaboratively and inform instructional 
decisions.  

  Clustering of ELLs by level in certain classes to maximize teacher's co-planning time and students' exposure to 

instructional supports by ENL teachers.  

 
Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 
Title III, 

X 

Tax Levy 

X 

Title I SWP 

 

Title I TA 

 

Immigrant 

Title II, 
Part A 

X 

Title III, 
Part A 

 

 

C4E 

 

21st Century 

Grant 

 
Part 5 – Progress Monitoring  

 

SIG 

 

PTA Funded 

 

In Kind 

X 

Other 

Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement 
planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 
 

By January 2019, the percentage of ELLs and SWDs meeting English language proficiency and grade-level 
expectations will have improved by 2% as measured by independent reading level growth (TCRWP), classroom 
exams and school-wide periodic assessments. Online instructional resources, including Mathletics, MyON and 
Pathblazer, will also produce data to be used to measure progress toward the mid-point benchmark.  

 
Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January 
Regents, etc.) 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          26 

 

 

Teacher teams and administration will track and examine progress towards established goals through analysis of: 

School-wide screener 
Student work samples 

 
 
  Common Core New York State Fall & Spring Benchmark Assessments 
  Gains in TCRWP independent reading levels via Assessment Pro 
 
  Examination of Curriculum Unit Plans in Math and ELA 
  Teacher/parent surveys regarding the success of instructional strategies to support struggling learners. 
  Data from various online instructional programs (Pathblazer, Raz Kids, MyOn, Mathletics, etc.) 
  Measure of Teacher Practice (MOTP) Data in domains 3 (Classroom Instruction). 

Journeys and Go Math Chapter Exams and Performance Tasks 

 
Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action 
plan, if applicable. 

 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          27 

 

Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans 

 
Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and 
school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. 

Part 1 – Needs Assessment   

Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and 
formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not 
limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. 
Number responses accordingly. 
 
1.  What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element?  Indicate the data trends, source and year. 
2.  What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? 

Indicate the data trends, source and year. 

3.  What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? 
 

The educational community of PS 186 is committed to ensuring that all students strive for and achieve excellence in 
academics, arts and citizenship. We promote strong communication between the home and school by planning an 
instructional program that challenges and engages students’ thinking and creativity. Language, ethnic and cultural 
diversity are respected as enhancements to student learning. Staff members and support personnel are committed 
to planning for the academic and social-emotional growth of the whole child. An established instructional focus 
derived from the Framework for Great Schools, including productive struggle with a growth mindset mentality, and 
development of strong academic language through student-to-student discussion, is evident in all content areas 
and within all disciplines as part of our instructional core program. Common protocols across grades have been 
identified to support students in mastery. In addition, we strongly believe in and focus on establishing a strong 
culture for learning and a positive and mutually respectful classroom environment so that all learners believe they 
can be successful. We will continue to promote this through implementing Sanford Harmony within our 
classrooms.  

 

The PS 186 school culture has historically welcomed families to be active participants in their child’s education. 
Throughout the school year, parents are invited to participate in many school-wide celebrations that support our 
school initiatives. There are many new families who speak little to no English in our community. To encourage 
participation from these families we plan to include workshops in native languages that are facilitated by classroom 
teachers and accompanied by a translator. Translation will be provided for any workshops or families meetings that 
take place during the Tuesday parental engagement time, monthly evening meetings, Family Fun Fridays, and Bi-
monthly Playworks Playdates. ExpandED staff have also served as translators for parent-teacher conferences and 
other school events. 

 

Our school will continue to utilize “Class” Dojo, a point reward system during lunch time to encourage students in 
being good citizens and respect their environment. This permits students to be key members of their school 
community and further promotes their social emotional growth. Additionally, during Recess students participate in 
the Playworks, which promotes teamwork and conflict resolution. Daily games are facilitated by school aides,NIA 
staff and Student Junior Coaches. Additionally, "Team Building Tuesdays", scheduled weekly, will be embedded 
into the schedule, to support Social and Emotional Growth of all students.  

 

Students apply to serve in various capacities in many roles, among which include Language Ambassadors, Tech 
Team, Safety Squad and Playworks Junior Coaches. This elaborated system has helped our school develop a 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          28 

 

common culture that supports our Non-Negotiable Rules, School Instructional Focus and Mission Statement, all 
focusing on mutual respect and positive behavior from all members of our school community. Student teams meet 
two to three times a week to complete their responsibilities. 

 

Joint professional development between school, faculty and community educators in the ExpandED program 
supports positive outcomes for students in the area of academic and social emotional growth with the goal 
“College and Career Readiness.” Students will be invited to attend various after school programs to support them in 
their academic and social emotional growth such as Saturday Academy, Ready Readers and Phonics and Literacy 
Program. The Afterschool I -Ready program will take place November through May on Wednesdays and Thursdays 
in addition to the Saturday Program, which runs every Saturday from November through May.  

 

Furthermore, Respect For All Week, a school wide initiative is implemented in our school mid-February to promote 
social emotional growth and inclusion of all. Each day students are asked to wear a particular color that represents 
a positive characteristic or trait. In addition, students and parents are asked to be “Bucket Fillers” this week. Being 
a “Bucket Filler” means that you are kind and respectful. Students are asked to be “Bucket Fillers” all year, not just 
on this particular week. 

 

Staff and ExpandED have received training in RULER, a social-emotional learning project. There is evidence that 
RULER approach, which stands fo Recognize-Understand-Label-Express-Regulate, improves students' academic 
performance, leadership skills and attention. Resources and information from this conference was previously 
shared with staff for a whole-school implementation of the initiative. The principal also attended monthly 
professional developments to further implement this initiative. Teachers will continue to implement strategies 
within their classrooms to promote social emotional growth in our students.  

 

Our school has created name tags for all students and staff members indicating their first and last names, school 
lunch code, and spoke language, which they wear daily. The name tags create a supportive environment and school 
culture. Students and staff members are able to address people by their name which builds rapport and respect 
amongst the school. The name tag also indicates the language or languages that particular person speaks so that 
the person could be addressed in a language that they understand encouraging and supporting strong family and 
community ties. 

 

Findings from the 2016 Quality Review for Quality Indicator 3.4 (High Expectations) include: 

"School leaders consistently communicate expectations for high levels of shared accountability for learning across 
the school. All staff members communicate and partner with families to support academic expectations and 
learning goals for all students. A variety of effective communication systems and support structures contribute to 
strong partnerships between staff and families and result in mutual accountability for improving achievement by all 
students." 

 

Priority Areas of Need: 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          29 

 

The Learning Environment Survey indicates that: 

Some teachers felt that “adults could do more to teach students how to advocate for themselves.” (16%) 

Teachers feel that order, discipline and safety can be improved upon. 

18% of parents “somewhat agreed” that “My child's teachers incorporate students' cultural/backgrounds into the 
curriculum to make learning more meaningful. 

Due to the continuous growth of non-English speaking families moving into the surrounding neighborhood, there is 
a need for increasing translation services (using the Over-the-Phone Interpreter Service) and providing more 
language-based support. Continuing to provide a seamless day opportunity for students through the ExpandED 
program will allow students to participate in academic and enrichment activities. The parent coordinator is needed 
to provide support during the school day and after school program time 

 

 
Part 2 – Annual Goal 

Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this 
element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the 
identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, 
and Time-bound. 
 

By June 2019, there will be a 5% increase in the percentage of parents who feel that the school creates a culture 
that encourages students to support one another and provides for their social and emotional growth. Students and 
parents will engage in various school initiatives such as Respect for All Week, bullying workshops, growth mindset 
mentalities and collaborative conversations. Students are supported in building relationships through various social 
and emotional initiatives and student teams, such as the Language Ambassador Team and Playworks. Our families 
are supported through various school based opportunities such as Saturday Academy, English as a New Language 
(ENL) classes and parenting workshops. These initiatives will be measured by informal parent surveys provided 
throughout the year, as well as parents’ responses on the Learning Environment Survey. 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          30 

 
Part 3a – Action Plan 

Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and 
strategies your school will implement to achieve the 
identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools 
element, including: 

Target Group(s) 
Who will be 
targeted? 

Timeline 
What is the 
start and 
end date? 

Key Personnel 
Who is responsible 
for implementing 
and overseeing the 
activity/strategy? 

Students 

Sept-June 

Teachers; 

Paraprofessionals 

ExpandED staff; 
Guidance counselor 

  Evidence-based instructional programs, 

 

professional development, and/or systems and 
structures needed to impact change. 
Strategies to address the needs of students with 
disabilities, English language learners, and other 
high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-
credited, SIFE, STH). 

Increase the frequency of high quality student activities that 
promote an understanding of tolerance, acceptance, 
empathy, and kindness: 

 

The school-wide “class” DOJO is implemented during the 
school day to promote positive student behavior. Class DOJO 
is used in the cafetiera and by most classroom teachers to 
promote a positive school environment and develop 
students' responsibility and accountability to their school 
community. 

Our students participate in various teams to promote social 
and emotional growth within the school. The teams include 
Playworks Monitors and Language Ambassadors. 

 

Additionally, the RULER approach to social-emotional 
learning will further supplement the school's DOJO system. 
Resources and information from the RULER conference will 
be shared with teachers, school support team members and 
ExpandED staff through joint professional learning 
opportunities, in order to equip stakeholders with the tools 
necessary to promote student responsibility and ensure a 
positive and safe learning environment for all students at 
every point of the school day. In addition, Sanford Harmony 
Program will be implemented across all grades. Effectiveness 
of these strategies will be assessed through parent and 
student surveys administered midway through the school 
year. 

 

Also, all staff and students will wear name tags to encourage 
and support strong family and community ties. The name 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          31 

Teachers; 

Sept-June   Administrators 

Paraprofessionals; 
Parents 

Parents/ Families  Sept-June 

Administrators; 
Guidance 
Counselor; SBST 
team; 

Classroom Teachers 

 

tags also include stickers indicating the different languages 
the student speaks. 

Increase the rate and effectiveness of communication among 
staff, teachers and other stakeholders around students' 
social-emotional growth. This will be achieved through usual 
forums such as inquiry team meetings, parent teacher 
conferences, grade team meetings, and during the time 
devoted to parent engagement on Tuesday afternoons. 
Additionally, through the adoption of Pupilpath (Skedula), an 
online data management and student monitoring tool, 
teachers will be able to communicate students' social-
emotional progress to other teachers, administrators, 
guidance counselors and parents more feasibly, directly and 
effectively. Pupilpath will allow teachers to communicate 
anecdotal information quickly to parents and other school-
based personnel through automatic emails and push 
notifications to personal electronic devices. 

To promote parent engagement and buy-in for 
aforementioned initiatives, more frequent parent workshops 
around various academic and social-emotional topics will be 
conducted by teachers, full-time guidance counselor, 
administration and ExpandED staff. Notices sent home and 
messages via REMIND (which can also be translated), 
regarding parent workshops will be translated and 
translation services will be provided for these events. To 
promote inclusion of students' cultures, English Language 
Learners will be invited to a home language class, in at least 
one of the major home languages, as part of the Saturday 
Academy and/or ExpandED programming. The SLT team will 
serve as a forum for parents to express their needs, for 
parents to make suggestions and take part in the decision 
making process. 

 

The Guidance Counselor and De Escalation team will provide 
at least three workshops for parents throughout the school 
year around school-based initiatives that target social-
emotional learning, such as RULER, Playworks, Respect for 
All, and/or Sanford Harmony. Other topics will include 
cyberbullying, internet safety, and positive reinforcement 
strategies. These will allow parents to become acquainted 
with the strategies staff are using so that they may follow 
through at home. 

 

The full time school assistant principals, psychologist, 
guidance counselor, many teachers and paraprofessionals. 
also attended rigorous four day training for TCIS. They later 
highlighted significant strategies as a team which they then 
turn keyed to other staff members. 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          32 

Parents, Students  Sept – June   Administration ; 

Guidance Counselor 

The designation of a full-time, 5 day-per-week guidance 
counselor and school psychologist will allow for consistency 
and efficiency of communication between various 
stakeholders, including administration, teachers and staff. 
The guidance counselor will be crucial in the monitoring of 
student progress within the social-emotional framework. The 
guidance counselor will lead both parent and teacher 
workshops around school-wide strategies and approaches 
towards students' social-emotional learning and 
development. 

 

 
 

 
3b – Parent and Family Engagement 

How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to 
support  the  whole  child?  Include  the  timeline  and  identify  key  personnel  and  stakeholders  responsible  for 
implementation and oversight. 
Families will be invited to various workshops in order to encourage strong family and community ties, as PS 186 
believes these relationships are extremely important to the success of all of the members of our school community. 
Workshops include Curriculum Night, Monthly Family Fun Fridays, Community Nights to support the Disney Theatre 
Production, Playworks Playdates, Promotion in Doubt Parent Night, Autism Workshops, International Food 
Festivals, ENL Workshops : Introducing Families to ENL Levels and Getting Ready for the NYSESLAT, Kindergarten 
Orientation and Getting Ready for The Next Grade. Additionally, our 5th grade families will attend workshops with 
the parent coordinator in order to prepare for the middle school process. Workshops include: Getting Ready for 
Junior High School and The Middle School Application Process. Parents will be invited to attend a Saturday 
Academy where they are able to learn English and how to help their children be successful in school. Students will 
be invited to attend various after school programs to support them in their learning such as Saturday Academy, 
Phonics and Literacy After School Program and System 44. Families are constantly engaged and supported with the 
use of the Remind App. Teachers are able to send class announcements or individual messages to ensure their child 
is supported at home.  

 

 
Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 
Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including 
human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 
Title 1 funds will be used towards purchase of: 

  Pupilpath/Skedula online systems 
  Paper supplies, copies of resources, and other student materials aligned to the RULER approach.  
 
 
 
 
  Playworks Training and Supplies  

Supplies/Copies for Parent Meetings 
School Messenger 
School Website Management (ECHALK) 
"Giraffe Store" supplies for student rewards as part of PBIS 

Tax Levy Fair Student Funding will be utilized towards: 

  Addition of 5 day Guidance Counselor 
  Per Session/Per Diem for teachers, guidance counselor and administration to attend training around PBIS and 

RULER initiative  

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          33 

 

Title III funds will be utilized towards: 

  Translation services for Saturday program and parent meetings. 

Other Funding - Through partnership with CBO and ExpandED organization: 

  RULER conference in summer 2016 and other accompanying resources for the program 
  Personnel salaries for adult technology and English language classes during Saturday program  

Scheduling considerations: 

 

School Administration, Parent Coordinator, Guidance Counselors, ExpandED Directors, and Student Council 
will allocate time during the school day to meet and implement PBIS system. 

  Monthly planning meetings with CBO Staff including Expanded Directors and primary school staff including 

the educational liaison.  

  Changing of the Parent Coordinators official hours so she can support parental involvement and provide 

engagement during ExpandED hours (9:45- 5:20 pm).  

  Working with the Title 1 Committee to contract with school messenger service and EChalk 

 
Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 

X 

Tax Levy 

X 

Title I SWP 

 

C4E 

 

21st Century 

Grant 

 
Part 5 – Progress Monitoring  

 

 

Title I TA 

SIG 

 

 

Title II, 
Part A 

X 

Title III, 
Part A 

PTA Funded 

 

In Kind 

 

X 

Title III, 

Immigrant 

Other 

Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement 
planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 
By January 2019, there will be an increase in the percentage of parents who feel that the school creates a culture 
that encourages students to support one another and provides for their social and emotional growth. This will be 
measured by informal parent surveys and a mid-year analysis of MOTP scores for domain 2 (Classroom 
Environment).  

Teacher teams and administration will track and examine progress towards established goals through analysis of: 

  Parent Surveys  
  Review attendance for all events 
  Monthly meetings with Playworks Recess Team and School Aides to discuss OOR’s and observational data  
  Monthly meetings with NIA Team to discuss findings and next steps 

 
Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 
 

 

Teacher teams and administration will track and examine progress towards established goals through analysis of: 

· Parent and student surveys via survey monkey. 

· Anecdotal evidence from guidance counselor, teachers, administration and ExpandED staff  

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          34 

 

 

· Number of referrals for guidance counseling by teachers and other support staff 

· OORS Data regarding incidents of student misbehavior both in and out of the classroom.  

· Learning Environment Survey results 

Average teacher ratings for MOTP in Domain  

 
Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action 
plan, if applicable. 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          35 

 

Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans 

Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success 
and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional 
development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. 

 

Part 1 – Needs Assessment   

Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and 
formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not 
limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. 
Number responses accordingly. 
 
1.  What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element?  Indicate the data trends, source and year. 
2.  What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? 

Indicate the data trends, source and year. 

 

PS 186 school leaders provide feedback to teachers aligned to professional goals that support teacher growth and 
development, resulting in a strategically planned professional learning system that meet the needs of teachers, 
students and staff. Teachers receive clear expectations and support through the lens of the Danielson Framework 
for Teaching as a means of furthering and strengthening their instructional practice. Teachers are encouraged to 
use a self assessment rubric to evaluate and plan for their lessons as it relates to the Danielson Framework.  

First and second year teachers are provided with a mentor, to help guide them and watch over them while they 
plan. Mentors and Mentees part take in monthly meetings to discuss glows and grows for both the Mentor and 
Mentee. Mentors meet with their mentee for a minimum of 2 hours a month to discuss observational feedback and 
provide support in implementing next steps in future lessons.  

Furthermore, evaluative feedback provided to teachers is clear, actionable, and specific, and aligns to their 
professional goals. Inter-visits take place among colleagues which are voluntary and scheduled by administrators, 
depending on need, to highlight best practices and provide feedback that improves instruction. Teachers that 
exhibit exemplary practices or have expertise in a particular area are encouraged to plan and facilitate workshops 
for colleagues. A Professional Development Learning team, which encompasses representatives from all grades and 
departments, plan and facilitate workshops to staff based on results of surveys and observational data.  

 

Various workshops are facilitated by staff members to provide staff with support in the following areas: Project 
Based Learning (Social Studies Passport), Math Talk and Attacking Word Problems, Use of Protocols to Support 
Students in practicing the Hallmarks of Literacy. Additionally we will continue to support teachers in the following 
areas, which were turn-keyed in the 2017-2018 SY: Behavior Management Strategies, Using ENL Progressions to 
Differentiate Instruction, Social and Emotional Initiatives, such as Sanford Harmony, Guided Reading Approach, The 
To Go Strategies: Scaffolding Options for Teachers of ENL Students, Using Data to Revise GO MATH Pacing 
Calendars, Meaningful Extensions, Using Google Drive in the Classroom, Smart Learning Suite, Move to Improve, 
Speech: Student Study: Treatment and Classroom Strategies, Mighty Milers Introduction and Analyzing Benchmark 
Data using SchoolNet. 

 

The Vertical Team collaborated during bi-weekly meetings to pilot the Hallmarks of Literacy from the 
book,Teaching Advanced Literacy Skills: A Guide for Leaders in Linguistically Diverse Schools by Emily Phillips 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          36 

 

Galloway, Nonie K. Lesaux, and Sky H. Marietta. The team encompasses representatives from all grades and 
departments who turn key information to their grade and department teams.  

The team work through the implementation of various key ideas related to the Hallmarks of Literacy, which have 
now become school wide initiatives; identifying benchmark assessments, creating a screener, and norming running 
records for the purpose of creating spreadsheets to gather data and plan for instruction. 

Additionally, all grade teams used inquiry based protocols to identify trends and patterns across grades. Based on 
data gathered the team worked with their grade teams to plan for curriculum shifts and small group instruction.  

As a team participants decided upon various school wide protocols to use across grades in order to support 
students in mastering specific routines and to ensure cohesiveness across all grades and departments. The 
following protocols will be evident across all grades and classrooms: Stronger and Clearer, Four Corners, IRADE, 
Graffitti and Gallery Walk.  

During and End of the Year Planning Retreat, all staff participated in Curriculum planning based on the Vertical 
Teams work during the 2017-2018 SY. All curriculum maps will have a strong emphasis on Thematic Units 
embedding Science and Social Studies as it relates to the Hallmarks of Literacy : Work With Engaging Texts that 
Feature Big Ideas and Content, Talk/Discuss, to build language and knowledge, Write to Build Language and 
Knowledge, Study a Small Set of High Utility Vocabulary Words to build breadth and depth of Knowledge and 
School Wide Protocols.  

School Wide Teams drive the instructional cohesiveness of our school community, as they are tool forturn keying 
important information to staff in small group settings. The following teams meet regularly to discuss areas of 
success and areas in need of improvement: School Leadership Team ,Grade Leaders, Vertical Team, Professional 
Development Team, Passport Social Studies Team, Mentor & Mentee Team, Safety Team & BRT.  

2016 Quality Review Major Findings: (Quality Indicator 4.2 Teacher Teams and Leadership Development) 

"Teams of teachers systematically analyze their instructional practices and develop strategies for improving staff 
and student achievement. Distributive leadership structures facilitate teacher collaboration with school leaders to 
make critical decisions about teaching and learning. Through extensive teamwork, teachers regularly reflect on 
their pedagogy and play an integral role in key decisions that improve teacher capacity and student outcomes 
across the school." 

Other Relevant Data 

· Teachers’ responses indicate that only 22% feel that teachers “are willing to take risks to make the school better” 
and “are eager to try new ideas”. 

· 55% of teachers either disagreed or strongly disagreed that professional development opportunities this year 
“included opportunities to work productively with teachers from other schools.” 

· Interviews with teachers indicate a need to continue focusing on collaboration with AIS, ENL and other student 
support staff. 

Priority Areas of Needs: 

· Individualized and self directed professional learning plans 

· Expanded database for professional literature 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          37 

 

· Increased number of professional learning opportunities outside of the school, CTLE approved 

  Create PD session that focus on individual needs of teachers 

· New teacher roles (per session opportunities): 

 

Inquiry Leader to facilitate connection between research, teaching practice, and student outcomes 

· Continued funding and meeting time for Professional Learning team 

· Sharing of best practices during “inter visitations” 

· Increased amount of professional planning time designated for specific items during extended time on Mondays 
and Tuesdays 

 

 
Part 2 – Annual Goal 

Indicate  your  school’s  2018-19  goal  for  improving  student  outcomes  and  school  performance  that  addresses  this 
element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified 
priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-
bound. 
 

By June 2019, there will be a 5% increase in the number of professional learning opportunities based on student data 
analysis and teacher growth as noted in observational feedback. Professional learning will be planned and facilitated 
by our Professional Development Learning team which encompasses representatives from all grades and 
departments. In addition to this on site professional development, various staff members will attend outside 
workshops and turn-key to select teacher teams, with guidance from Professional Development Mentors. 
Professional Development sessions will be geared towards strengthening instructional practices that result in gains in 
student achievement. In collaboration with parents, teachers will hold workshops and meetings to provide resources 
in order to further support student progress.  

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          38 

 
Part 3a – Action Plan 

Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies 
your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for 
this Framework for Great Schools element, including: 

  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional 

 

development, and/or systems and structures needed to 
impact change. 
Strategies to address the needs of students with 
disabilities, English language learners, and other high-
need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, 
SIFE, STH). 

Increase collaborative planning time for teacher teams that 
results in enrichment, extensions to learning, and rigorous tasks 
implemented within the instructional program for all learners, 
including SWD and ELLs. Planning time will be scheduled at 
regular times for particular focuses - for example, to plan for ENL 
supports within lessons or to modify curriculum unit plans based 
on student data analysis. Teacher teams will be held accountable 
for implementing products from these meetings (i.e. unit plans, 
curriculum maps, etc.) These work products will be "living 
documents" and shared and modified digitally via Google Drive. 
The net result will be that learning materials will be 
differentiated to allow all learners access to high-level tasks and 
content. Vertical teams will be scheduled to meet to ensure 
cohesiveness amongst grades. The ENL team will meet weekly to 
develop differentiated materials using the Bilingual Common 
Core Language Progressions for each grade level and to further 
ensure cohesiveness. Additionally, ENL teachers will meet with 
their grades to ascertain scaffolds support English language 
learners and the planned curriculum. 

New teacher leadership roles will be implemented that allow for 
more strategic planning of key teacher team meetings. The role 
of Inquiry Leader/Grade Leader will assist inquiry teams in 
connecting educational research, effective instructional 
strategies, and data analysis that would result in improved 
student outcomes. 

 

Other leadership roles include mentors which serve in supporting 
new teachers. In the upcoming school year mentors will continue 
to informally mentor those new year teachers as they enter their 
second year of teaching. 

 

Mentors and mentees will meet weekly for a minimum of two 
hours per week for planning, classroom visits, IEP writing, 
debriefs, etc.. 

Target 
Group(s) 
Who will be 
targeted? 

Timeline 
What is the 
start and 
end date? 

Key Personnel 
Who is responsible 
for implementing 
and overseeing the 
activity/strategy? 

Teachers 

Sept - June  Administration; 

Professional 
Learning Team 

ENL Teachers 

Cluster 
Teachers 

AIS Teachers 

Teachers 

Sept-June 

Administration 

 

Vertical 
Team 

Mentor 
Team 

Mentee 
Team 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          39 

 

 

The principal will meet with the Mentor and Mentee teams 
monthly separately. At meetings, members will highlight glows 
and grows. This will further indicate the professional 
development needed at our school to support our new teachers. 

The PlayWorks Recess Team Coordinator will facilitate 
professional development sessions for Recess Team, staff and 
NIA staff, organize and oversee Playworks Recess Schedule and 
implementation of games during all recess periods. Additionally, 
"Team Building Tuesdays" will be embedded into the schedule, 
to support Social and Emotional Growth of all students.  

 

Teacher teams, including the Professional Learning team, will 
more frequently utilize professional publications rooted in recent 
educational research that relates to school goals. Teacher teams 
will make use of the NYCDOE EBook Database to access 
professional literature. Professional Learning team members will 
serve as mentors to teachers selected to attend off-site 
professional learning opportunities when turn-keying. The 
professional learning team mentor will be involved throughout 
the planning process; creating the agenda, PowerPoint, sign in 
sheets, grouping, exit slip, protocols/activities, and materials 
needed. 

Teachers 

Sept-June 

Administration 

Professional 
Learning Team 

 

Teachers 

Sept-June 

Administration 

Professional 
Learning Team 

Teachers will be selected to attend more off-site, CTLE approved, 
professional learning opportunities offered by the city and the 
district (specifically 

ELL and SWD). These opportunities will be made more readily 
available to teachers through the use of a bulletin board with 
posted opportunities updated bi-weekly. Opportunities will also 
be made available via email. Funds will be allocated to pay for 
substitutes in order to relieve teachers to attend the workshops. 
Teachers that go off-site will be expected to turnkey what they 
have learned to colleagues during Monday or Tuesday 
afternoons with the support of their professional learning team 
mentor. 

 
 

 
3b – Parent and Family Engagement 

How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies 
to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and 
identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. 
 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          40 

 

An additional parent teacher conference will be scheduled in January 2018, as a midpoint to discuss student 
progress and if needed a lack of student progress (Promotion In Doubt students). This meeting time promotes the 
importance of collaboration between a teacher and parent to further support their children and increase their 
growth and success. 

Families will be invited to attend PTA meetings and parent workshops related to currIculum common core 
standards and state exams. Family Fun Fridays’, Food Festivals and Playworks Playdates will be scheduled to ensure 
families are involved in activities that celebrate students. During open school week parents will have the 
opportunity to engage in learning. 

  

 
Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 

Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including 
human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 
Title 1 funds will be used towards purchase of: 

  Professional Literature for teacher teams 

Tax Levy Fair Student Funding will be utilized towards: 

  Per Session for new Teacher Leadership roles and current teacher teams 
  Per Diem for teachers and other staff to attend off-site professional learning opportunities and plan turnkey 

of information to colleagues.  

Scheduling considerations: 

 

School administration will collaborate with professional learning team to plan out workshop offerings and 
schedule regular meeting times for specific focuses of teacher teams during the Monday and Tuesday 
afternoon extended workday.  

 
Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 

X 

Tax Levy 

X 

Title I SWP 

 

C4E 

 

21st Century 

Grant 

 
Part 5 – Progress Monitoring  

 

 

Title I TA 

SIG 

 

 

Title II, 
Part A 

PTA Funded 

 

 

Title III, 
Part A 

In Kind 

 

X 

Title III, 

Immigrant 

Other 

Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement 
planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 
Teacher teams and administration will track and examine progress towards established goals through analysis of: 

  Teacher surveys via Survey Monkey 
Learning Environment Survey result 
 
  Average teacher ratings for MOTP (Measures of Teacher Practice 

(Domain 1, 3, and 4)  

  Danielson Data: Initial and Summative Meetings: Review Grows, Glows and Goals, Review Next Steps and 

Feedback from observations  

  Discussions with Mentor and Mentee Teams 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          41 

 

 

  Exit Slip from Professional Development Team PD sessions and Grade Team meetings 

  
Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 
Teacher teams and administration will track and examine progress towards established goals through analysis of: 

  Teacher Surveys - Survey Monkey  
  Exit Slips  
  MOTP Dat 

 
Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action 
plan, if applicable. 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          42 

 

Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans 

 

Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and 
nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional 
support that drives student achievement. 
 
Part 1 – Needs Assessment   

Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and 
formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not 
limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. 
Number responses accordingly. 
 
1.  What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element?  Indicate the data trends, source and year. 
2.  What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? 

Indicate the data trends, source and year. 

 

The development of handbooks and other guiding documents, such as the Staff Handbook, Special Education 
Reference Binder, School Mission Statement, Instructional Focus, CEP Goals, and PBIS School Matrix, clarify school 
expectations and reinforce values of the school community. Specifically, the School’s Mission and Instructional 
Focus, displayed consistently and visibly throughout the school, reminds the school community that P.S 186 strives 
for excellence in academics, arts, and citizenship. School leaders encourage strong communication between the 
home and school, engage and challenge students to think creatively, and urge teachers to celebrate diversity as a 
means towards enhancement of student learning; all areas of focus in the school's mission and vision.  

 

To strengthen the culture around these principles, the school focuses yearlong on professional development 
aligned to the Danielson Framework for Teaching as well as implementation of college-ready initiatives. 
Furthermore, professional development encompasses a variety of topics from student engagement and discussion, 
engaging students in a productive struggle, reflecting on lesson plans, to the reviewing of model teacher clips from 
Engage New York to allow for self-reflection on practice. A Professional Learning Team made up of various teachers 
from all grades and departments, plan and facilitate deliver professional learning workshops, have helped to create 
an environment around high expectations related to college and career and to foster a collaborative school 
community of mutual accountability. 

As part of an ongoing partnership with ExpandED to ensure a seamless school day for our participating students, 
school-based leadership, ExpandED director and assistant director meet on a regular basis to plan engaging 
instructional and extracurricular activities that address the needs of our students and school community. Monthly 
meetings are attended by ExpandED educational liaison, the ExpandED directors, CBO leadership, principal and a 
representative from the ExpandED schools organization to assess the program's strengths and identify next steps. 

Shared leadership structures allow teachers to have input in the school's curricular and organizational decisions.  

During the 2018-2019 school year, teachers will have the opportunity to be a part of School Leadership Team, 
Professional Learning Team, Playworks Recess Team, Vertical Team, Grade Leader Team, Mentor/Mentee Team. 
We will also have a well-established mentoring program with about 8-10 seasoned teachers serving as school-
based mentors to new teachers. Additionally, teachers and parents serving on the School Leadership Team have 
the opportunity to drive goal-setting and decision making initiatives. Parent input in school decision making is also 
evidenced through the Parent Teacher Association (PTA) which meets regularly to discuss and plan for logistics of 
school events, safety procedures and entrance/dismissal procedures. 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          43 

 

Administration will create a digital survey via Survey Monkey that will guide professional developments for the 
year based on their areas of need. This survey will be given once in the beginning of the school year and then at the 
middle of the school year to see if progress has been made towards their goals. Focused initial planning and 
summative conferences will inform administration of the strengths and areas of need, based on Danielson Data and 
TCRWP data, for the staff which will further drive professional development training.  

Team building will be provided at various professional development days such as Election Day, Clerical Day and 
staff conferences. Teachers will learn the value of teamwork and communication which should be articulated 
throughout the school year. 

 

Newly hired teachers will meet with the administration team and other key members of the PS 186 staff prior to 
the beginning of the school year. Team building activities and highlighting of each person’s area of strength is done 
at this time as well. Teachers have the opportunity to become familiar with the school by participating in a New 
Teacher Orientation and various workshops to support them in the first weeks of school for example, the School 
Handbook, TCRWP administration, and the New Teacher Calendar.  

2016-2017 Learning Environment Survey Data Regarding Leadership 

· 54% of teachers reported that they have a moderate to great deal of influence over school policy in the area of 
selecting instructional materials used in classrooms. (Q12c) 

· 62% of teachers reported that they have a moderate to great deal of influence over school policy in the area of 
developing instructional materials. (Q12d) 

· 64% of teachers reported that they have a moderate to great deal of influence over school policy in the area of 
setting standards for student behavior. (Q12e) 

· 76% of teachers agreed or strongly agreed that the principal/school leader at their school participates in 
instructional planning with teams of teachers. (Q11h) 

 

Priority Areas of Need 

· More frequent informal surveys for parents, students, and staff to gauge effectiveness of programs and initiatives 
and to decipher favor ability of proposed purchases, changes. 

· Continuing to promote more inclusive decision making regarding budgetary, curricular and planning decisions 
with School Leadership Team (SLT). 

· Identify and develop teacher leaders for key school initiatives, such as PBIS, Peer mediation, and Budget 
Committee  

 

 
Part 2 – Annual Goal 

Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this 
element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the 
identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, 
and Time-bound. 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          44 

 

By June 2019, the expansion of an inclusive decision making structure, that focuses on the development of teacher 
leaders, will result in an average 5% increase in the number of teachers who respond favorably to questions 
regarding Effective School Leadership on the Learning Environment Survey. As a school community we have formed 
Professional Development (PD) teams, such as the vertical teams, school leadership teams, and TCIS training to help 
teachers grow based on needs and wants of the student population. Parents partake in effective school leadership 
through REMIND app, school phone messenger, the school website and PTA/SLT meetings.  

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          45 

 
Part 3a – Action Plan 

Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies 
your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for 
this Framework for Great Schools element, including: 

  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional 

 

development, and/or systems and structures needed to 
impact change. 
Strategies to address the needs of students with 
disabilities, English language learners, and other high-
need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, 
SIFE, STH). 

Target 
Group(s) 
Who will be 
targeted? 

Timeline 
What is the 
start and 
end date? 

Key Personnel 
Who is responsible 
for implementing 
and overseeing the 
activity/strategy? 

To give voice to all stakeholders, two benchmark surveys will be 
created for teachers and students via Survey Monkey, ExpandED 
staff and parents regarding the effectiveness of the school's 
instructional and social-emotional initiatives. Results from the 
survey will be used to gauge favorability of proposed purchases 
and effectiveness of initiatives. Results will also be shared with 
staff and parents at designated staff meetings, SLT meetings and 
PTA meetings. 

Parents,; 
Teachers; 
ExpandED 
staff 

Sept - June  Administration 

To promote more inclusive decision making, new teacher 
leadership roles and teams will be created in the areas of 
curriculum development, student inquiry, student social-
emotional development and budget/purchasing. Teachers can 
apply for these positions through per session postings. 
Development of teacher's leadership skills will be supported by 
school administration. Teachers who apply for these positions 
will be encouraged to sign up for professional learning 
opportunities aligned to their responsibilities. 

Continue to promote more inclusive decision making regarding 
budgetary, curricular and planning decisions through teacher 
and parent involvement in the School Leadership Team (SLT). 
The SLT will consider creation of a virtual monthly newsletter 
and post minutes in the school lobby and/or school website to 
highlight school initiatives and communicate decision making 
outcomes with multiple stakeholders. 

Overall parental involvement and engagement opportunities will 
continue and be increased through Family Fun Friday project 
based activities, across all grade levels, bimonthly. Teachers will 
plan for a Fun Friday project based activity that is 
interdisciplinary and engaging. 

 
 

 
3b – Parent and Family Engagement 

Teachers  

September - 
June 

Administration 

Teachers; 

Sept - June  Administration 

Parents; 

School 
Leadership 

Teachers, 
Parents 

Sept-June 

Administration, 
Teachers 

How  will  your  school  engage  parents/families  and  support  their  understanding  of  Effective  School  Leadership  and 
strategies  to  promote  parent  leadership  and  engagement  in  order  to  support  their  children  at  home?  Include  the 
timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. 
Families will be invited to attend PTA meetings and parent workshops related to currIculum common core 
standards and state exams. Family Fun Fridays’, Food Festivals and Playworks Play dates will be scheduled to 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          46 

 

ensure families are involved in activities that celebrate students. Parents are encouraged to join our PTA, SLT team 
and volunteer for all family events and school trips. Parents are also encouraged to attend meetings which inform 
them of ways to support their children at home which includes the monitoring of their child's summer reading 
expectations and workshops to support healthy habits at home such as the Three Keys to Success provided by our 
School Psychologist. Parents are kept informed of important events through the use of the school’s phone 
messenger, the school website and the Remind App. Incoming kindergarten families will also be kept informed with 
the use of a separate Remind.  

 

 
Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 
Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including 
human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 
 

Title 1 funds and Tax Levy Fair Student Funding will be used towards: 

  Per session for teacher leadership roles  
Funding for SLT members and activities 
 
  Per diem for teacher leaders to attend off-site professional learning opportunities.  

 

Scheduling considerations: 

 

School administration will collaborate with professional learning team to plan out workshop offerings and 
schedule regular meeting times for specific focuses of teacher teams during the Monday and Tuesday 
afternoon extended workday. 

 
Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 

X 

Tax Levy 

X 

Title I SWP 

 

C4E 

 

21st Century 

Grant 

 

 

 
Part 5 – Progress Monitoring  

Title I TA 

 

Title II, 
Part A 

SIG 

X 

PTA Funded 

 

 

Title III, 
Part A 

In Kind 

 

 

Title III, 

Immigrant 

Other 

Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement 
planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 
 

By January 2019, there will be a 3% increase in the number of teachers who respond favorably to questions 
regarding Effective School Leadership on benchmark informal surveys as a result of the expansion of an inclusive 
decision making structure, that focuses on the development of teacher leaders.  

 
Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 
Teacher teams and administration will track and examine progress towards established goals through analysis of: 

· Teacher surveys 

· Learning Environment Survey results 

· Quality Review data 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          47 

 

 

· Average teacher ratings for MOTP (Measures of Teacher Practice) in domains 1 (Planning and Preparation) and 4 
(Professionalism). 

 

Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action 
plan, if applicable. 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          48 

 

Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans 

 
Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a 
welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. 
 
Part 1 – Needs Assessment   

Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and 
formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not 
limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. 
Number responses accordingly. 
 
1.  What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element?  Indicate the data trends, source and year. 
2.  What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? 

Indicate the data trends, source and year. 

 

At PS 186, we consider parents our crucial partners in ensuring students' academic success. Our hope is that 
increasing parental engagement and enrichment activities will result in stronger parental partnerships that improve 
student achievement. PS 186 works hard to focus on promoting parental engagement activities and building parent 
capacity so that parents are clear on the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) which is 
evidenced by a home-school partnership aimed at helping to prepare children for the future. Parents are kept 
informed with the school-phone messenger, school website and the Remind app. The parent coordinator has been 
instrumental in partnering with families to promote them in being invested in the school’s program. This focus has 
been embodied in our school’s enrichment programs which are aimed at supporting students’ progress toward 
college and career readiness.  

 

Families are not only involved in the Parent Teacher Association parents volunteer daily to assist with lunch time 
events, walking students to class, coordinating picture day, sponsoring bake sales, spearheading holiday boutiques 
and breakfasts, tree lighting ceremonies, school wide carnival and Field Day. Activities such as inviting parents in to 
share their careers and promote student thinking around their future planning are common in the school 
community. Additionally, to emphasize the focus of “Parents as Partners,” teachers commit to planning a 
bimonthly and Final Farewell Family Fun classroom celebrations per year, which do not include school wide family 
events, such as Take Dad to School Day, Take You Mom to School Day, Take Your Child to School Day, VIP Readers, 
College Day, Career Day, Playworks Playdate, Food Festivals, Zumba for a Cause Events, New Year Celebration, 
Thankful for Our Families, Curriculum Night, Family Community Nights, and lastly, Kindergarten and Fifth Grade 
Graduation.  

 

All these activities are designed to strengthen the bond within the wider school community promoting the feeling 
of being welcomed and belonging. All of these practices help to foster an environment where the school 
strategically partners with families to reach the expectations of the Common Core and those set by the school 
community. Tuesday parental engagement time is used for teachers to conduct parental outreach face to face or by 
telephone to communicate student progress and performance. Teachers regularly use translation services via 
phone and or letters to ensure effective communication and to foster inclusion of all families. This is additional to 
the 4 required parent teacher conferences that are held contractually. Teachers have also held workshops for 
parents throughout the school year. Some topics include: Understanding TCRWP, How to Help Students Perform 
Well on the NYS Exams, Understanding the NYS Science Exam, What is Close Reading?, Unit by Unit GO Math!, 
Mathletics, myON, Think Central, REMIND APP and PupilPath (Skedula).  

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          49 

 

P.S. 186 is aware of the different types of families and what kind of support they need to overcome specific barriers 
for engagement, keeping in mind the needs of working families, welcoming younger siblings to meetings to allow 
for stay-at-home parents to participate, and the use of the translation services. In planning specific events we will 
work on providing various times in which our families are invited to celebrate the work of their children not only in 
school but in the evening, through events such as an Art Show, Summer Skills Parent Workshop, Community Nights 
and District 20 Showcase. PTA meetings are scheduled monthly, rotating times between morning and evening.  

Translators from our staff, community partnerships and NIA Expanded staff are available at all PTA meetings, 
parent teacher conferences and family events to help with making families feel comfortable in our school 
community. Communication between teachers and families are done using the DOE Over the Phone Interpretation 
Service when needed both for dally communications and parent meetings.  

 

From the 2016 Quality Review Report: 

"During the meeting with families, all stated that they meet with teachers regularly and participate in workshops 
that inform them about expectations for their children and ways to support learning at home. Families spoke about 
Saturday English classes for families of ENL students, a recent “College Awareness Day”, and workshops on reading 
levels, Common Core Learning Standards, English Language Arts (ELA) and math exams, and links to online 
resources, all of which empower them to help their children. They added that events such as “Family Fun Fridays”, 
ENL meetings and curriculum nights provide an overview of expectations for classwork and homework. Families 
also noted that staff members constantly communicate with them via the school’s website, text messages, phone 
calls, and emails. Through progress reports, student-led conferences and sharing of data from Engrade (an online 
portal), all staff members partner with families, whose work with their children contributes to student readiness 
for the next grade. Families contribute funds for student planners and yearbooks and help coordinate day and 
afterschool events." 

 

Other Data 

“Parent involvement in school” index lagged behind city (84% vs 87%). 

Priority Areas of Need: 

· Introduction of Pupil Path 

· Title III Parent engagement – English Language classes / Saturday Academy 

· Title I – Technology classes/workshops for parents (as part of Title I parent engagement requirement) 

· Monthly Parent flyer/newsletter that informs parents of what is happening in the school community, resources, 
upcoming workshops and information sessions, pictures of their participation in previous school events, etc. 

 

 

 
Part 2 – Annual Goal 

Indicate  your  school’s  2018-19  goal  for  improving  student  outcomes  and  school  performance  that  addresses  this 
element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          50 

 

identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and 
Time-bound.  
By June 2019, we will continue improve parent involvement and increase engagement by 5% in our school 
community, which will be evidenced by an increase in attendance at parental activities, parent survey responses and 
feedback sheets. This will include positive results from the Learning Environment Survey and result in an increase in 
student achievement for ELLs. 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          51 

 
Part 3a – Action Plan 

Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies 
your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for 
this Framework for Great Schools element, including: 

  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional 

 

development, and/or systems and structures needed to 
impact change. 
Strategies to address the needs of students with 
disabilities, English language learners, and other high-
need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, 
SIFE, STH). 

Target 
Group(s) 
Who will be 
targeted? 

Timeline 
What is the 
start and 
end date? 

Key Personnel 
Who is responsible 
for implementing 
and overseeing the 
activity/strategy? 

Introduction of Pupil Path: 

Parents 

Sept-June 

Teachers; 

Through the adoption of Pupilpath, an online data management 
and student monitoring tool, teachers will be able to 
communicate to students' academic progress or lack of to other 
teachers, administrators, guidance counselors and parents more 
feasibly, directly and effectively. 

The REMIND app is used by all staff members to communicate 
expectations and share information with all families on a daily 
basis. The school website is updated regularly with important 
information and monthly goals are posted. 

Parents will be invited to participate in adult English language 
classes and technology classes as part of the Saturday Academy. 
Parent participation in these classes has helped with attendance 
numbers for students in the Saturday program for the 2017-2018 
school year. This program will be expanded for the 2018-2019 
school year to target a greater number of parents. Through our 
partnership with ExpandED, we will identify highly qualified staff 
that can teach these classes, along with school-based teachers. 
Title III funding will be used for staffing and supplies for the 
Saturday program. 

In addition to the NYC Survey, a parent interest survey will be 
shared, via Survey Monkey, to determine topics for future 
workshops. A a Family Survey will be used to determine the 
effectiveness of the ExpandED program and our parental 
engagement efforts (2 times per year). 

 

A monthly translated parent flyer/newsletter that informs 
parents of what is happening in the school community, 
resources, upcoming workshops and information sessions, 
pictures of their participation in previous school events, will be 
shared with parents on the school website and backpacked 
home. 

 
 

 

Administration  

Parents 

Sept-June 

Teachers; 

ExpandED staff; 
Administration  

Parents 

Sept-June 

Administration; 

NIA ExpandEd 
Directors 

Parents 

Sept-June 

Administration;  

PTA; 

Teachers 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          52 

 
3b – Parent and Family Engagement 

If  any,  list  the  Community  Based  Organizations  or  other  partnerships  that  support  parent/family  and  community 
engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. 
Our ongoing partnership with ExpandED ensures a seamless school day for our participating students. School-based 
leadership, ExpandED director and assistant director meet on a regular basis to plan engaging instructional and 
extracurricular activities that address the needs of our students and school community. Monthly meetings are 
attended by ExpandED educational liaison, the ExpandED directors, CBO leadership, principal and a representative 
from the ExpandED schools organization to assess the program's strengths and identify next steps. NIA supports 
family and community engagement through various events such as Community Nights, Disney Productions, 
Brooklyn Arts Festival, Cook Shop, among other events. Parent Teacher Conferences, Family Fun Days, Mom Take 
Your Child to School Day, Promotion in Doubt Conferences, Playworks Playdates, Dad Take Your Child to School 
Day, Dance Festival, Field Day, Spring Concerts, Student of the Month Ceremonies, Farewell Families, Saturday 
Parent ENL Academy, VIP Reader Day, College Day, Career Day, Fire Safety, Con Edison Initiative, Zumba for a Cause 
and the Halloween Parade are some of the many events we host that further promoted strong family and 
community ties.  

 

 
Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 

Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including 
human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 
 

Title 1 funds will be used towards purchase of: 

  Pupilpath/Skedula online systems 
 
 
 
  Copies for Parent Survey, Parent Newsletter 

Supplies/Copies for Parent Meetings 
School Messenger 
School Website Management (ECHALK) 

Tax Levy Fair Student Funding will be utilized towards: 

  Per Session/Per Diem for teachers, guidance counselor and administration  

Title III funds will be utilized towards: 

  Translation services for Saturday program and parent meetings. 
  Teacher Per Session for Saturday program  

Other Funding - Through partnership with CBO and ExpandED organization: 

  Personnel salaries for adult technology and English language classes during Saturday program  

Scheduling considerations: 

  Changing of the Parent Coordinators official hours so she can support parental involvement and provide 

engagement during ExpandED hours (9:45- 5:20 p m).  

  Working with the Title 1 Committee to contract with school messenger service and EChalk 

 
Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 

X 

Tax Levy 

X 

Title I SWP 

 

Title I TA 

 

Title II, 
Part A 

 

Title III, 
Part A 

X 

Title III, 

Immigrant 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          53 

 

 

C4E 

 

21st Century 

Grant 

 
Part 5 – Progress Monitoring  

 

SIG 

 

PTA Funded 

 

In Kind 

X 

Other 

Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement 
planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 
By January of 2019 there will be an increase in parent engagement by 5% in our school community that positively 
impacts student learning, especially for ELLs. This will be measured using attendance records, parent survey 
responses, feedback sheets and responses from the an informal parent survey  

 
Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 
Teacher teams and administration will track and examine progress towards established goals through analysis of: 

· Learning Environment Survey results 

· Attendance Records from Parent Meeting 

 
Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action 
plan, if applicable. 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          54 

 

Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS)  

(Required for All Schools) 

  

Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services 
(AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records 
need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area 
listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. 
 

Type of Academic 
Intervention Service 
(AIS) 

English Language 
Arts (ELA) 

Criteria for 
determining AIS 
services (For 
additional guidance, 
refer to NYSED’s 
memo.) 
 

Type of program or 
strategy (e.g. 
repeated readings, 
interactive writings, 
etc.) 

-Guided Reading 

Not meeting TCRWP 
Benchmarks, 

-Fundations for 
phonemic awareness  

Low Performance on 
Writing Tasks, 

intervention  

When the service is 
provided (e.g. during 
the school day, 
before or after 
school, etc.) 

-Before, During and 
After School  

-Saturday Program 
October through 
May  

  

Method for delivery 
of service (e.g. small 
group, one-to-one, 
tutoring, etc.) 

-Small group push in 
model during normal 
school day by AIS 
teacher 

-Small group pull out 
during ExpandED 
hours and Saturday 
Academy 

  

-Pathblazer Online -
Reading -
Interventions (myON, 
Raz Kids A-Z) 

 

 

 

Mathematics 

Below level ELA 
grade on School 
Report Card, 

New York State 
Performance Scale 
Scores 

  
Below grade level 
performance on 
Math Unit Exams, 
New York State 
Performance Scale 
Scores, Performance 
on performance task 

 

-Intervention 
Material for Go 
Math! 

-Small group push in 
model during school 
day  

-Mathletics and 
Pathblazer Online 
Programs 

-Small group pull out 
during ExpandED 
hours and Saturday 
Academy.  

-Flocabulary for 
vocabulary 

  

 

 

-Before, During and 
After School  

-Saturday Program 
October through 
May  

 

 

 

Science 

-Students performing 
below grade level 

 

 
Non fiction leveled 
readers to provide 
repeated readings 

-Strategy lesson 
during school day 

 

-During school day 

  

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          55 

and academic 
language support 

 
Nonfiction leveled 
readers to provide 
repeated readings 
and academic 
language support 

 
One to one or group 
counseling 

 

-Strategy lesson 
during school day 

 

-During school day 

 

-Pull out program or 
push in (group or 
individual when 
determined 
necessary) 

-Schedule created by 
guidance counselor 
and social worker 

  

 

-Assemblies  

  

 

 

Social Studies 

-Students performing 
below grade level 

At-risk services (e.g. 
provided by the 
Guidance Counselor, 
School Psychologist, 
Social Worker, etc.) 

  

 

Crisis intervention for 
students exhibiting 
social emotional 
behaviors that 
negatively impact 
school performance -
Observations based 
on PBIS system, 
Sanford Harmony 
and RULER approach 
to promote positive 
behavior. 

-Teachers submit an 
emergency PPT form 
to the School 
Assessment team to 
be reviewed in order 
for the student to 
begin receiving at risk 
services. 

  

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          56 

 

Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH)  

 

Directions: 
-  All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. 
-  All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. 
 
Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) 
As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the 
federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and 
report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support 
your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: 
http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf   

Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 

 

1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your 
school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE 
systems and may change over the course of the year.) 

The total 
number of 
students 
in 
Temporary 
Housing is 
23.  

 

2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. 

Title I set-aside funds will be used primarily for educational services to ensure homeless children and youth progress 
academically, including emergency supplies such as uniforms, school supplies, books, or even glasses, academic 
programs & educational support services, transportation, extended library hours, counseling services and parental 
involvement.  

  

Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 

1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school 
(please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). 

n/a 

 

2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          57 

Our part time (3 day per week) social worker supports our families and students. The social worker meets with 
families and provides them with resources to support their well-being and healthy habits such as referring them to 
outside counseling and agencies. 

 

All students will receive breakfast on-the go. Students will have opportunities to meet with the school guidance 
counselor and will be provided with school supplies.  

  

3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary 
housing.  If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation 
Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question.  If your school did not receive an allocation 
and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. 

n/a 

 

 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          58 

 

Directions: 

Section 8: Title I Program Information  

 

  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1. 
  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2. 
  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3. 
  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4. 
 

If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response 
can be found. 

  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. 

 
Part 1: Title I Status 

Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. 

X 

Schoolwide Program (SWP) 

 

Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools  

 

Non-Title I 

 
Part 2: All Title I Schools 

2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) 

Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support 
including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. 
 

• High quality professional development is provided to our staff in an ongoing manner by our A.P.s, consultation team 
and contracted organizations. PD is differentiated by interest (according to a beginning and mid-year survey) and by 
level of teacher effectiveness based on formal and informal observations. Surveys are distributed at least 2 times per 
year and include a section that invites teachers to indicate their willingness to become part of a consultancy team or 
grade leader. 

 

First and second year teachers are provided with a mentor, to help guide them and watch over them while they 
plan. Mentors and Mentees part take in monthly meetings to discuss glows and grows for both the Mentor and 
Mentee. Mentors meet with their mentee for a minimum of 2 hours a month to discuss observational feedback and 
provide support in implementing next steps in future lessons.  

 

• We will advertise for vacancy on the DOE website and part of open market for high quality teachers. Rigorous 
interview process will take place to ensure high quality candidates including ATR teachers. Demonstration lessons, 
personal references will be required. Administrators will attend recruitment fairs to attract high quality candidates 
for vacancies. 

  

 
2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development 

Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, 
paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS).  
 

High quality professional developments for teachers, principals, and paraprofessionals, and staff through the use of in 
house providers who demonstrate highly effective practices. In addition external vendors, Network and Department 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          59 

 

of Education PD offerings. Vendors will be contracted to offer PD to staff during Staff development days, such as 
Smart TEQ and online support will be available for all staff members.  

 

High quality professional development is provided to our staff in an ongoing manner by our Assistant Principals and 
teachers, consultancy teams and contracted organizations. PD is differentiated by interest and by level of teacher 
effectiveness based on formal and informal observations. Surveys are distributed at least 2 times per year and include 
a section that invites teachers to indicate their willingness to become part of a school wide teams.  

 

Evaluative feedback provided to teachers is clear, actionable, and specific, and aligns to their professional goals. 
Inter-visits take place among colleagues which are voluntary and scheduled by administrators, depending on need, 
to highlight best practices and provide feedback that improves instruction. Teachers that exhibit exemplary 
practices or have expertise in a particular area are encouraged to plan and facilitate workshops for colleagues. A 
Professional Development Learning team, which encompasses representatives from all grades and departments, 
plan and facilitate workshops to staff based on results of surveys and observational data.  

 

Various workshops are facilitated by staff members to provide staff with support in the following areas: Project 
Based Learning (Social Studies Passport), Math Talk and Attacking Word Problems, Use of Protocols to Support 
Students in practicing the Hallmarks of Literacy. Additionally we will continue to support teachers in the following 
areas, which were turn-keyed in the 2017-2018 SY: Behavior Management Strategies, Using ENL Progressions to 
Differentiate Instruction, Social and Emotional Initiatives, such as Sanford Harmony, Guided Reading Approach, The 
To Go Strategies: Scaffolding Options for Teachers of ENL Students, Using Data to Revise GO MATH Pacing 
Calendars, Meaningful Extensions, Using Google Drive in the Classroom, Smart Learning Suite, Move to Improve, 
Speech: Student Study: Treatment and Classroom Strategies, Mighty Milers Introduction and Analyzing Benchmark 
Data using SchoolNet. 

 

 

 
Part 3: TA Schools Only 

3a. Use of Program Resources 

Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. 
N/A 

 

 
3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program 

Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., 
providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from 
the regular classroom during regular school day). 
N/A 

 

 
 
 
 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          60 

 
 
Part 4: SWP Schools Only 

4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only)  

Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary 
school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early 
intervention services, etc.). 
Family workers and Social Workers will help to provide parent and staff workshops to help transition children from 
programs. A parent orientation is held for all incoming Kindergarten families where curriculum expectations are 
defined and a summer reading packet, along with the books is provided. Parents are given the opportunity to meet 
their child’s kindergarten teacher in order to ease the transition into elementary school.  

 

 
4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments 

Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate 
multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to 
improve instruction.    
Teachers use student data from classroom and curriculum aligned common assessments to inform instructional 
planning and decisions so that instruction is targeted and all students are aware of their next learning steps.  

Teachers use common assessments and administer benchmarks aligned to the ELA curriculum, the Journeys literacy 
program, and Go Math curriculum, to establish a clear picture of mastery across grades and subjects. Item analyses 
enable teachers to drill down on specific standards for which students need support.  

 

 

As next steps, the Vertical and Professional Learning Teams will create a School Wide Assessment Plan to 
streamline benchmark assessments. Grade teams will plan collaboratively to create Unit Plans for Journeys which 
include both Science and Social Studies connections, highlighting common formal and informal assessments 
throughout each unit.  

 

Professional Learning Teams and Grade Teams focus on analyzing data and teacher practice to make decisions on 
when and how to provide professional development that is based on teacher needs to improve instruction. Teacher 
teams analyze student work using protocols and have determined a need to revise existing curriculum unit plans to 
be more reflective of the shifts necessary to meet the CCLS. This year, teacher teams collaboratively worked on 
revising unit plans and pacing calendars in math, created writing plans to align with Journeys Writing Program and 
Reading Unit Plans to be reflective of increasing opportunities to use complex text to examine and teach academic 
language and vocabulary is the focus of instructional planning time 

  

 
4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools 

Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and 
Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible 
for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide 
plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the 
consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and 
purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, 
and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          61 

 

each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the 
intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. 
Program Name 

Fund Source 
(i.e. Federal, 
State or Local) 

Funding Amount 
Indicate the amount 
contributed to 
Schoolwide pool. 
(Refer to Galaxy for 
school allocation 
amounts) 

$602,034.00 

 
$80,395.00 

 
$42,318.00 

 
0 

 
$5,471,511.00 

x 

 
x 

 
x 

 

 

x 

Place an (X) in Column A below to verify 
that the school has met the intent and 
purposes of each program whose funds are 
consolidated.  Indicate in Column B, section 
references where a related program activity 
has been described in this plan. 

Column A 

Verify with an (X) 

Column B 

Section Reference(s) 
Sections 5A - 5E 

 
Sections 5A - 5E 

 
Sections 5A - 5E 

 
Sections 5A - 5E 

 
Sections 5A - 5E 

Title I Part A (Basic) 

Title II, Part A 

Title III, Part A 

Title III, Immigrant 

Tax Levy (FSF) 

Federal 

Federal 

Federal 

Federal 

Local 

 

 

 

 
1Explanation/Background: 
Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and 
programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and 
advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools 
may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, 
State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This 
gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students.   
 
Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a 
single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual 
identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool 
to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds 
used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from 
which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to 
combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used 
conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the 
dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds.  
 
Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages: 

  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program 

separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different 
sources when accounting for their use. 

  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the 

statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., 
semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent 
and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended 
beneficiaries are met. 

 
2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as 
follows: 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          62 

 

  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to 
improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes 
provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH). 

  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement 

plans that aims to  improve instruction and address the identified needs  

  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in 

grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not 
available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional 
program. 

  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, 
develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and 
achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another 
purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-
quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in 
effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the 
participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language 
instruction programs. 

  Title III Immigrant:  Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of 

English language acquisition and content area achievement. 

 
Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated: 

  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and 
programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent 
representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities 
funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with 
student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. 
IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education 
designed to meet their individual needs. 

 

  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by 

the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 

 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          63 

 

Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)  

 (Required for All Title I Schools) 

 

Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and 
representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will 
participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I 
program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson 
that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the 
parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school 
will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic 
achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family 
Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. 
 
The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current 
S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent 
Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent 
involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen 
family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy.  
 
Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample 
Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) 
as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. 
 
 

Parent and Family Engagement Policy 

Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. 
The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of 
parents and community in the school. P.S. 186, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every 
Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen 
the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is 
designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the 
education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent 
Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. 

 

 

Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students 

PS 186 Dr. Irving A Gladstone will support parents and families of Title I students by: 

 

● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., 
literacy, math, and use of technology; 

● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision 
making in support of the education of their children; 

● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor 
their child’s progress; 

● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          64 

 

● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in 
languages that parents can understand; 

● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve 
outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other 
members of the school community 

  

Parental Involvement and School Quality 

The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all 
parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The 
school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement 
policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school 
surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and 
enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school.  

 

In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the 
school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership 
Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for 
additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: 

● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I 
program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title 
I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; 

● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated 
directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; 

● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as 
described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; 

● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent 
Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support 
and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills;  

● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. 
The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the 
parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and 
inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents 
each month and file a report with the central office.; 

● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, 
grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and 
technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home;  

● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State 
accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review 
Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          65 

 

● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of 
children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 
the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable 
sections under the ESSA; 

● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning 
or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and 
allow parents to provide suggestions; 

● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed;  

● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and 
workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help. 

  

The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: 

Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement 

 

● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; 

● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; 

● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher 
Association) and Title I Parent Committee; 

● supporting or hosting Family Fun Friday events; 

● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; 

● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; 

● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their 
children’s progress; 

● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school 
activities and student progress; 

● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, 
and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand 

 

 

 

 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          66 

 

 

 

School-Parent Compact (SPC)  

School-Parent Compact (SPC) 

 
PS 186 Dr. Irving A. Gladstone , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds 
Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student 
achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and 
programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will 
share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be 
developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. 

 

 

 

I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum 

Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating 
children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: 

 

● using academic learning time efficiently; 

● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; 

● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; 

● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; 

● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the 
Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); 

 

 

I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships 

Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: 

● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be 
discussed as well as how this Compact is related; 

● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students 
participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to 
be involved; 

● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds 
are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; 

● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation 
services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education;  

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          67 

 

● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of 
participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; 

● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent 
Involvement Policy and this Compact; 

● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results 
for each child and other pertinent individual school information;  

● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents 
each year; 

 

 

Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: 

I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff 

 

● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited 
English speaking parents; use of the Over the Phone Interpreting Service 

● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff 
member; 

● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to 
observe classroom activities; 

● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences 

 

 

 

 

I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents 

Provide general support to parents by: 

 

● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment 
for parents and guardians; 

● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their 
child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of 
parents can attend); 

● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all 
members of the school community; 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          68 

 

● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents;  

● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in 
this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; 

● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and 
consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; 

  

 

 

II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities 

● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate 
procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; 

● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and 
his/her age; 

● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; 

● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes);  

● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; 

● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports 
and/or quality family time; 

● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; 

● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; 

● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education;  

● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by 
prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; 

● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; 

● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy 
and this Compact; 

● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn 
more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; 

● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on 
advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams;  

● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          69 

 

 

 

 

III. Student Responsibilities 

Student Responsibilities: 

● attend school regularly and arrive on time; 

● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; 

● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; 

● show respect for myself, other people and property; 

● resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully using strategies learned in Sanford Harmony program and referring to 
the values outlined in the Playworks Core Values  

● always try my best to learn. 

  

 
 
 
 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          70 

 

Division of English Language Learners and Student Support 
Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 
52 Chambers Street, Room 209  
New York, New York 10007 
Phone:  212-374-6072 
http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY 
Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components: 

 

 

  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high 

academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas.  

o  The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need 
o  These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154.  
o  Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. 
o  Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.   

  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on 

the teachers’ performance in classrooms.”  

o  Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term 

workshops and conferences.  

  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet 

community needs.   

o  These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process.  

 
NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional 
development, and 20% to OTPS.   
  
For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and 
Performance Specialist.  Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30.   
 

Part A: School Information 
Name of School:            
This school is (check 
one): 
 

DBN:            

conceptually consolidated (skip part E below)                
NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below)     

 

Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information  
The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): 

Before school                After school             

Saturday academy        

Total # of ELLs to be served:            
Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply):  

1       
7       

2       
8       

K       
6       

4         
10       
Total # of teachers in this program:            
# of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers:            
# of content area teachers:            

3       
9       

5 
11       

12 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          71 

 

Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information  
Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the 

rationale 

 
  subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  
  schedule and duration 
 
language of instruction 
  # and types of certified teachers 
 

types of materials  

Begin description here:            
 1. Our Title III ELL After-School Intervention Program- System 44  will consist of 50 English 
Language Learners (ELLs) who require additional language, literacy, phonemic and academic 
development. The after-school program will run from October 2018 through June 2019 for 3 
hours per week on Wednesday, Thursday, and Friday afternoons.  System 44 is a rotation model 
which consists of three components: Guided Reading, Independent Reading, and Software.  One 
certified ENL teacher will work with Grade 3 Entering and Emerging students and select ELLs 
with disabilities in a small group to reinforce English language skills as well as develop the 
literacy skills required to succeed on the standardized NYSESLAT and NYS ELA exams. 
2. We will also offer a Title III Saturday ELL Academy Program geared to our newcomer 
English Language Learners students who have received ELL services for less than three years 
with priority given to newcomer ELLs in grades K-5. The Title III Saturday Academy Program 
will take place on approximately 14 Saturday sessions from 8:30 am to 11:30 am 
beginning December 2018.   Students will arrive at 8:20 am to our Cafeteria under the 
supervision of  a supervisor in charge which is a cost to the Title III program to minimize 
lateness and loss of instructional time since there is no other program running concurrently.  10 
certified ENL teachers will provide small group instruction in each class using a thematic 
approach in all four communication strands (listening, speaking, reading and writing) so that 
students have the opportunity to practice their skills in all four language modalities as well as 
acquire new content area vocabulary and concepts.  The goal of the Title III Saturday ELL 
Academy Program is to provide extensive language development opportunities, scaffold 
academic support in an optimal environment, and exposure to computer-based programs so that 
our Newcomer ELLs will be able to demonstrate growth in their English Language proficiency 
as measured by the NYSESLAT as well as develop their confidence in navigating a new 
language and a new academic setting.  Allocated funding will be used to purchase appropriate 
grade level instructional materials, literacy learning materials English student user licenses and 
listening center materials as well as provide professional development for the teaching staff that 
focuses on differentiation of instruction for ELLs and using effective ELL strategies with ELLs 
in all school settings  building.  10% of the allocation will be utilized to contract quality 
professional development and professional texts to support a study group so that teacher 
strategies will provide students with high quality ELL instruction for both Title III teachers and 
the entire staff so that methodologies will be transferred school wide to support ELL 
instruction.   A school aide will assist at no cost to the Title III Supplemental Programs.  All 
materials will be used solely for the Title III program. 
Raz kids will be utilized as a computer based reading intervention program that is in addition to 
the above materials at no cost to the Title III program.  RAZ-kids is offered free of cost to all 
ELL students through the NYC Department of English Language Learners. Kids access their 
leveled text through an interactive learning portal designed to keep them motivated and engaged. 
Every eBook is available in online and mobile formats, and allows students to listen to, read at 
their own pace, and record themselves reading. Students then take a corresponding eQuiz 
complete with an extended answer response to test comprehension and determine future 
instruction needs. Once a child has read ten or more of the leveled eBooks and passed each of the 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          72 

 

 

Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information  
corresponding eQuizzes, they advance on to the next reading level where they have access to 
lengthier and more difficult text. 
The teachers will also provide targeted support in Math word problem solving for grade K-5 
students and develop understanding of academic language.   Allocated funding will be used to 
purchase additional materials that are not used during the school day which 
includes NYSESLAT test preparation materials, bilingual resources and other teaching materials. 
We will be  purchasing and using bilingual dictionaries, literature and picture cards within the 
program.   In addition, grade level mathematics word problem solving material will be purchased 
and provide targeted instruction to these students to help enhance vocabulary development in the 
area of mathematics and problem solving by strand at no cost to this program.   A total of three 
per-session hours per ENL teacher will be allocated for ENL curriculum development of units to 
be shared with CB teachers curriculum with embedded ENL methodologies. 
The targeted population is our Entering and Emerging students in grades K-5.  We are working 
to advance the ELL students proficiency levels.  After careful review of the NYSITELL data it 
was identified that in Grades K-5, we  currently  have 130 ELL students  that are at the 
Entering/Emerging level .  The Saturday ELL Academy Program will be utilized to improve 
student achievement as evident through the NYSESLAT administration. 
          GRADE                  Entering                     Emerging 
             K                              28                                   12 
             1                                12                                    8 
             2                              10                                    12 
             3                               4                                    11 
             4                              4                                     8 
             5                               12                                    9 
The program will service students in approximately 10 classes.  During the Saturday 
Academy Program we will utilize small group self-contained ELL classes.  The Saturday 
Academy program will begin on Saturday, December 8, 2018 and run through Saturday, March 
30, 2019.  The curriculum will focus on increasing student background knowledge and the use of 
academic language to improve reading comprehension, content writing and mathematics through 
the use of ELL techniques and strategies to promote language development.  In addition teachers 
will focus on language literacy and math content areas through the use of visuals, TPR and 
repetition to increase student performance on NYSESLAT. This program will run for 14 
sessions, 3.5 hours per session on Saturdays.  
All records including student attendance and program notifications in parents preferred 
languages will be maintained in the main office. 

Part C: Professional Development  
Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as 
other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs.   

rationale 
teachers to receive training  

 
 
  schedule and duration 
 
  name of provider 

topics to be covered 

Begin description here:            
  Title III teachers and our classroom teachers, ENL teachers, AIS/related service providers, and 
paraprofessionals attend in-house staff development conferences and grade conferences, other 
professional development opportunities in and outside of our school building offered by 
contracted vendors , as well as professional development opportunities offered by our District, 
Brooklyn South Field Support Center, and the NYC DELL's to ensure that they will be able to 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          73 

 

 

Part C: Professional Development  
assist our ELLs as they transition from one proficiency level to another. Our ENL teachers are 
tentatively planning to attend some of the professional development opportunities offered by 
NYSED and CUNY- the NYC DOE Office of ELLs, and in -house Professional 
Development.  These include but are not limited to  "Collaboration and Co-Teaching: How to 
Have a Successful Push-in ENL Model," “Advancing the Academic Literacy of ELLs - Grades 
K-5,” “ELL/SIFE Students in Our Classrooms: Best Practices for Their Success”  and "RTI for 
ELL's- with a focus on Distinguishing Language Acquisition from Learning Disabilities".  These 
will be offered throughout the year and will be turn keyed to staff during Monday Professional 
Learning Opportunities.  
A portion of Title III Supplemental funds will be used to contract an external vendor to provide 
ELL Methodology Support Training to all K-5 staff so that effective strategies will be provided 
to student through direct instruction  both during the school day and after school/Saturday 
program by staff members.  We have contracted "Education Consortium, LLC" as the external 
vendor. The Institute will be given as one 6 hr session for all teachers.  The topic is : Building 
Social and Academic Language with Multilingual Learners. The ELL Institute will enhance 
participants’ repertoire of pedagogy (methodology and best practices) and instructional 
leadership for ELLs, by targeting a more comprehensive understanding of how to systematically 
support English Language Development (ELD) through the content areas to bolster second 
language learning (English) and to help impact/improve student performance on New York State 
assessments.  The Institute will be followed up by in-class coaching by the same vendor. The 
Institute will begin monthly during November of 2018 and conclude in March 2019.     
Professional Texts will be purchased to support the professional development provided by an 
external vendor as part of a study group.  Some texts are already available in our building which 
would be at no cost to the program. However, a small portion may need to be purchased as part 
of the 10% OTPS allocation.    All records including agendas and attendance sheets will be 
maintained by the ELL Corodinator. 

Part D: Parental Engagement Activities   
Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact 
higher achievement for ELLs.  NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as 
parent orientation during ELL identification process.   

rationale 

 
  schedule and duration 
 
  name of provider 
  how parents will be notified of these activities 

topics to be covered 

Begin description here:            
  Our parent coordinator is a wonderful resource for all of our parents and caregivers; in 
particular, she researches and distributes information about adult ESL classes and other parent 
resources in the community and serve as the language designee for our school. Our parent 
coordinator is tentatively conducting a Title III Conversational ESL Class for parents along with 
Technology Program (that are at no cost to the Title III program) training to help parents 
navigate programs we use as part of our PS 186 Curriculum supports such as : ECHalk, Think 
Central, and RAZ Kids on Saturdays from October through April. In collaboration with the 
parent coordinator, the ENL department also provides ESL materials appropriate for adults to 
inquiring parents through monthly parent workshops held during the Tuesday afternoon Parental 
Engagment sessions approximately once per month .  Our parent coordinator works with 
members of the school community including paraprofessionals and staff members to coordinate 
interpreters and translators when needed for parent teacher conferences, PTA meetings, parent 
workshops and other school events. We also contract with external agency The Big Word to 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          74 

 

 

Part D: Parental Engagement Activities   
provide translation in approximately 10 languages to parents during parent conference 
opportunities.  Our P.S. 186 website www.ps 186.com is updated on a daily basis and is instantly 
translatable in several languages.  Our parent coordinator  organizes with staff teams a variety of 
family activities such as movie nights, Literacy Pajama Night, Wellness and sports nights, LEAP 
Adult Cooking Classes, and Scholastic Book Fairs,  to encourage parents to participate in school-
wide events. Our parent coordinator plans events such as monthly field trips for parents of ENL 
children to local NYC cultural institutions and arranges for guided tours to help parents 
understand the community we live in and in turn bring their children to visit these popular 
destinations within our city that can provide language and experience.  A Title III Multicultural 
Festival organized by our parent coordinator, is conducted in the fall with Pre K families and in 
the spring with grade 5 families in order to build connections and celebrate our differences 
within our school community. It is an opportunity for families to come together and engage in 
fun activities as a community. During the Multicultural Festival, our families participate in arts 
and crafts activities, dance to cultural music and share a meal together.  The majority of parent 
communication letters will be translated by the DOE Translation Unit.  We will comply with 
Chancellor's Regulation A-663, applicable documents and plans are all posted and distributed as 
required to identified parents.  On-going workshops on select topics such as testing, online 
resources overview, ENL strategies and ideas for helping language acquisition will be provided 
by administrators, parent coordinator, teachers, and After-school CBO directors.  Day and 
evening sessions will be offered and schedules will be included during our  PTA 
meetings.  Parents will be notified via translated letters about Family involvement activities.  Our 
Parent Coordinator will work collaboratively with administrators to plan workshops on a 
monthly basis that invite ENL parents to learn about: conversational English and Writing, fall 
projects, winter projects, helping children prepare for tests, including NYSESLAT, Health, 
Hygiene and Nutrition, and adult classes through a contracted vendor at no cost to the Title III 
program. We will make every effort to contract translators or utilize school staff to assist with 
meetings so that families can receive information in multiple languages.  All records will be 
maintained by the Parent Coordinator including agendas, attendance sheets and invitations in 
parents' preferred languages.  

Part E: Budget  
FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY.  Ensure that your 
Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. 
Allocation Amount: $           
0 
Budget Category 

Budgeted Amount 

Professional salaries 
(schools must account for 
fringe benefits) 

           
           

  Per session 
  Per diem 

Purchased services 

  High quality staff 

and curriculum 
development 
contracts. 

Supplies and materials 

           
           

           
           

Explanation of expenditures in this 
category as it relates to the 
program narrative for this title. 
           
           

           
           

           
           

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          75 

 

 
 
 
 

Part E: Budget  
FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY.  Ensure that your 
Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. 
Allocation Amount: $           
0 
Budget Category 

Budgeted Amount 

Explanation of expenditures in this 
category as it relates to the 
program narrative for this title. 

  Must be 

supplemental. 

  Additional 

curricula, 
instructional 
materials. 

  Must be clearly 

listed. 

Educational Software 
(Object Code 199) 
Travel 

Other 

TOTAL 

           
           
           
           
           
           
           
           

 

           
           
           
           
           
           
           
           

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          76 

 

DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT 

GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY 

SUBMISSION FORM 

2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR 

 

DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information 

necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English 

language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a 

part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the 

services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should 

be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily 

available on file in the school.  When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces.  For 

additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. 

Part I: School ELL Profile 

 

 

 
 

A. School Information 

District  20 
School Name   Dr. Irving A. Gladstone 

Borough  Brooklyn 

School Number   186 

 
B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant 

principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. 
 

Principal   Bayan Cadotte 
Coach  N/A 
ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher  
 Betty Soto 
Teacher/Subject Area Darcy LoGuidice/Gen Ed 
Teacher/Subject Area N/A 
Related-Service Provider Alexia Termini/SETSS 
Superintendent Karina Costantino 

 

Assistant Principal  Mary Grace Altilio 
Coach N/A 
School Counselor  
N/A 
Parent  Danielle LaManna/PTA 
Parent Coordinator Elaine Delaney 
Field Support Center Staff Member Lucia Perez-Medina  
Other (Name and Title) N/A 

C. Teacher Qualifications  
Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section.  Press TAB after each number entered to calculate 
sums and percentages.  
     
Number of certified 
ENL teachers currently teaching in the 
ENL program 

Number of teachers who hold both content 
area/common branch and TESOL certification 

1 

5 

1 

Number of certified 
bilingual teachers not currently 
teaching in a bilingual program  
Number of certified foreign 
language/world language teachers 
providing home language arts 
(HLA) to students in bilingual 
programs [applicable to grades 7–
12] 
Number of teachers currently 
teaching a self-contained ENL class 
who hold both a common branch 
license and TESOL certification 
[applicable to grades K–6] 

0 

0 

Number of teachers who hold both a 
bilingual extension and TESOL 
certification 

Number of special education teachers 
with bilingual extensions 

0 

0 

Number of certified 
bilingual teachers currently 
teaching in a bilingual program 

Number of certified ENL teachers 
not currently  teaching in the ENL 
program  

 

0 

0 

D. Student Demographics  
Total number of students in 
school (excluding pre-K) 

1027 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          77 

Total number of ELLs 

334 

ELLs as share of total student population 
(%) 

32.52% 

 
 
 
 
Part II: ELL Demographics 
 
 
 
 
 
A. ELL Programs 

This school serves the following grades (includes 
ELLs and non-ELLs) 
Check all that apply 

 
 
This school offers (check all that apply): 

K

    1

    2

     3

     4

     5

 

6

   7

     8

    9

     10

     11

    12

 

Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) 

Yes

             No

Dual language program (DL) 

Freestanding ENL 

Yes

             No

Yes

             No

 

 

 

If yes, indicate language(s):            

If yes, indicate language(s):            

 

 
Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a 
separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. 
 

Bilingual Program Breakdown 

School 
Year 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Lang. 

Opened 
(e.g., 2013-14) 

1 

2 

K 

0 
 
 
0 
 
 
0 

Program 
TBE 
TBE 
TBE 
DL 
DL 
DL 
Total 
 
 
 
Part III: Assessment Analysis 
 
 

0 
 
 
0 
 
 
0 

0 
 
 
0 
 
 
0 

4 

0 
 
 
0 
 
 
0 

3 

0 
 
 
0 
 
 
0 

5 

0 
 
 
0 
 
 
0 

6 

7 

8 

9 

10 

11 

12 

         

         

         

         

         

         

         

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

       

       

       

       

       

       

       

 
 
0 

 
 
0 

 
 
0 

 
 
0 

 
 
0 

 
 
0 

 
 
0 

Tot # 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 

After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 

1.  What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, 

teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? 
Our school uses TCRWP to assess children 4 times per year.  Classroom teachers use writing on demand pieces to assess 
understanding of both genre specific writing and mechanics/grammar.  The data is used concurrently with genre specific 
checklists and the Journeys Literacy program unit exams and assist us with providing students targeted instruction in reading 
and writing.  The data provided by TCRWP is able to track students reading level progress.  We are able to track and share 
reports during Inquiry meetings about ELLs at all levels and monitor their progress through reading levels from grades K-
5.   TCRWP also provides comparative data between ELLs and non -ELL students in all grades.  TCRWP helps teachers acquire 
information about student's phonemic awareness and phonics skills including letter and sound recognition.  This data is 
valuable because utilized effectively it allows teachers the opportunity to observe strengths and areas of difficulty while 
setting grade level benchmarks for four assessment windows.   Our September 2016 - TCRWP benchmark indicated that 51% 
of our ELL students in grades 1 and 2 are level 1s.  This implies that their reading level is below the benchmark.  Based on this 
information we administered the Emerging Literacy Survey from Houghton Mifflin Harcourt Journeys which gives us insights to 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          78 

 

specific phonemic awareness and sight word areas of need.  Teachers and parent reports are printed that provide tips & 
information on how to improve reading and early literacy skills.  Data is shared with teachers of ELL students and instruction is 
planned accordingly. 
 

2.  What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 

As part of our school's instructional program teachers collaboratively look at student work and data such as TCRWP, running 
records and anecdotal notes to select resources, material, revise curriculum and plan for small group and/or individualized 
instruction.   The state of NY has not provided data RNMR report at this time.  Our teachers also utilize assessment resources 
in the curriculum of Journeys and Go Math. Teachers utilize the Think Central website portal to print translated assessments to 
better support our ELL students. We use native language supports throughout instruction as well as during unit and or chapter 
formative assessments. Our school also utilizes the EDAT tool provided by the New York City Department of Education which 
combines data from a variety of sources. This drives our instruction because it indicates our at risk students.  
 

3.  What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL 

Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? 
P.S. 186 uses Journeys weekly assessments and monthly Benchmark Exams, Common Core  Writing Units, TCRWP and Cold 
Read assessments.  In grades 3-5, we use a two and four point writing rubric that is used for the New York State ELA.  
Journeys weekly assessments assess the reading skills, strategies and vocabulary words taught during that week. Benchmark 
exams assess the reading skills and strategies taught throughout that particular reading unit which includes a variety of skills, 
strategies and vocabulary terms. This exam is used as our baseline assessment which highlights areas of strength and need 
which drives classroom instruction. The Common Core Writing Unit is worked on throughout the Journeys unit. The writing 
unit follows the writing process with daily writing prompts and mini lessons. Rubrics, checklists and conferences are utilized to 
drive writing instruction and future mini lessons. Cold read assessments are utilized in the upper grades which are reading 
passages not related to the material taught that week. The assessments include literal and inferential questions. There is also 
an extended response question which is graded on the ELA 2 point writing rubric. 
Progress is measured consistently. We analyze our data throughout the school year to identify students progress and areas of 
need to drive our instruction daily. 
 
 

4.  What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered?  

Language development at all levels should be fostered through purposeful, deliberate conversation between teacher and 
students, and among students. Reading and writing must be both taught as specific curricula, and integrated into each content 
area.  A strong CORE program is instrumental for ELL students.  In addition, differentiated instruction must be evidenced in 
planning and lesson delivery.   Analyzing both formative and summative data is an important component of determining the 
effectiveness of the ELL program.  Goal setting and benchmarking data such as our goals and determining whether we have 
made AYP is important to the value of the program. The data yielded can easily be used to focus on the progress toward 
achievement of proficiency for specific subgroups of ELLs, and the design of effective instructional programs and/or 
interventions for those students. The factors that can be analyzed include home language, grade level, years of ELL service, 
ELA/Math performance and progress, NYSESLAT proficiency and progress, attendance, age, credit accumulation, holdover 
status, SIFE status, and disability classification.     
Academic Intervention Services (AIS) is also an intervention in place that supports our ELLs. The AIS team reviews the school 
data to select students many of which are our ELL population.  Our AIS teachers push into the classrooms to differentiate 
instruction specifically through guided reading.  
System 44 is a new pilot program in place this year at our school. The program is piloted in our third grade classrooms. Our 
third grade students took an online phonics and comprehension screening assessment which indicated our low performing ELL 
students. Thus, our System 44 teachers which include an AIS and ENL teacher who integrate (push in) and standalone (pull out) 
phonics based instruction. The data gathered drives their instruction including the third grade teachers' instruction. An 
additional screener will be implemented to indicate growth and progress in 6-8 weeks. The need for a screener in the area of 
phonemic awareness was implemented due to summative data collected in the previous school years. 
 
 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          79 

 

5.  How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-
5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.]  
  
Strengthening classroom instruction (i.e., the instructional core), is a key step to supporting ELLs at-risk for or experiencing 
difficulties, as well as a critical step in fully implementing the RTI model.  Intensive instruction is provided to support ELLs who 
are not showing sufficient progress on the skills and/or competencies measured based on data.  Tier 1 is the instructional core 
that is intended to incorporate high quality evidence-based instruction for all students. This includes instruction that has been 
shown to be effective for ELLs, and differentiation to meet students’ diverse needs. Instruction for ELLs in English Language 
Development is provided at the Tier 1 instructional level. Students move into Tier 2 and Tier 3 if they demonstrate a need for 
more targeted and intensive academic support. This extra support can occur in the classroom, but also in separate settings 
with instruction focused on specific learning targets. Tier 2 and Tier 3 instruction is also tailored to meet ELLs’ language needs 
and is be incorporated into research-based intervention strategies.  Students targeted for Tier 2 and Tier 3 intervention are 
tracked for specific homogenous groups during Saturday and NIA after school programs.  ENL teachers with specific training in 
programs such as Fundations and intervention from Teacher Made Materials provide small group intervention during the 
school day and as part of a Saturday and After School Title III activity.   
 
The RTI model goes hand in hand with our Pupil Personnel Team (PPT). When referral forms are filled our by classroom, AIS or 
ENL teachers the team reviews them weekly along with the student work provided to determine the necessary tiers. Indicated 
on the referral forms are tier I interventions that were used in the classroom including notes and progress if any while they 
were in place. If the team then feels the student is in need of additional support; AIS teachers may begin servicing those 
students and or related service providers (speech language therapists, occupational therapists and or physical therapists) may 
assess those students using a screener once consent is provided.  Thus, if it is determined that there is a need not relating to 
their English Language Learner status, at risk related services begin. Progress monitoring is then used via a case management 
form ensuring the student is making adequate progress. If substantial progress is not made, and the team believes it is not 
based upon language, a special education case may be open to determine a disability. 
 
 

6.  What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? 

([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS].  
The NYSESLAT, New York State ELA, Mathematics and Science assessments are used to evaluate and inform our ELL programs. 
TCRWP results from June, which track the progress from September to June also inform our ELL instruction.  
 
After careful analysis of classroom data, teachers recognized the need for phonemic instruction integrated into our reading 
curriculum. At this time, we are piloting a new program that included a screener for our third grade students. The System 44 
screener indicated a need in the area of phonemic awareness in our 3rd Grade ELL students. This has created a need in 
phonics based instruction therefore two specially designed teachers push in and pull out ELL students to increase their phonics 
and comprehension skills.  
 
After analyzing the NYSESLAT scores from 2017 we have consistently noted for a vast majority of our ELL students growth & 
steady movement.  31 of our students regressed in proficiency level.  These students and students that remained stagnant in 
proficiency levels will be invited to our Super Saturday Academy for intense review of language strategies and 
NYSESLAT review.   
 
Our Kindergarten students continued to make the most growth this year.  On the NYSITELL from Fall 2016 which applies to our 
Kindergarteners and newcomers we noticed these students scored mostly Entering/Emering level.   Most of our 
Entering/Emerging leveled students are newly arrived immigrants.  We saw significant growth with most of our newcomers 
moving from a Entering/Emerging level to Transitioning and Expanding level this year.  This June 2017 we are noticing that our 
incoming Kindergarten students are scoring higher levels on the NYSITELL because of their Pre-K English experience.   
 
 
 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          80 

 

 

7.  What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? 

   P.S. 186 reviews data at faculty and grade level meetings in September.  The NYSESLAT, NYSITELL, ELA, MATH and TCRWP 
assessment data is reviewed by classroom teachers and ELL teachers for their new students to differentiate instruction and 
plan accordingly.  We continue to review TCRWP data throughout the school year to monitor progress and address key 
concerns in language and literacy development.  We use this data from TCRWP and ELA to plan for grade specific Inquiry 
students throughout the school year. 

 
 
 
Part IV: ELL Programming 
 

Programming and Scheduling Information 

1.  How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented 
as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students 
regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in 
one class]).  

a.  Freestanding ENL program. 

According to the amended CR Part 154 the organizational models used are integrated and stand-alone.  In the 
integrated model there are heterogeneous (mixed proficiency levels).  The stand alone model is homogeneous 
(organized by grade and proficiency level).  Students identified as Entering (Beginner) will receive a total 360 minutes 
per week the breakdown of which is 180 minutes stand alone ENL and 180 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA.  Students 
identified as Emerging (Low Intermediate) will receive a total 360 minutes per week the breakdown of which is 90 
minutes standalone ENL, 180 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA, and 90 minutes minimum of stand alone or integrated 
ENL (with ELA or other content area).   Students identified as Transitioning  (Intermediate) will receive a total of 180 
minutes per week the breakdown of which is 90 minutes integrated ENL/ELA  and 90 minutes standalone or 
integrated ENL (with ELA or any other content area).  Students identified as Expanding (Advanced) will receive a total 
of 180 minutes of ENL all of which will be integrated ENL/ELA or other content area.  Students identified as 
Commanding (Proficient) are entitled to a total of 90 minutes integrated ENL/ELA or other content area.       
For the 2017-2018 school year and in accordance with CR Park 154.2, PS 186 will continue to implement an Integrated 
and Standalone - Freestanding ENL program from grades K to 5.  Students will be grouped by grade in heterogeneous 
groups according to their language proficiency levels (based on prior NYSESLAT scores) and reading levels (based on 
TCRWP scores).  The Freestanding ENL program at PS 186 will be delivered by 5 licensed ENL Teachers.  All our ENL 
Teachers will cooperatively plan with Mainstream Teachers in order to differentiate the literacy lessons, making them 
accessible and comprehensible for all ELLs.  The students receiving ENL services will be taught Common Core aligned 
core content and intense language instruction as directed by the New Language Arts Progressions (NLAP).  This will be 
accomplished using ENL methodologies from both the ENL and Mainstream Teachers.  Students in these classes will 
consist of ELLs (all language levels) and former ELLs or ELLs at the Commanding language acquisition level (who are 
entitled to two years of transitional support services). 
 
In addition to these calibrations, students at the Entering and Emerging language acquisition levels will receive ENL 
services 360 minutes per week by a certified ENL teacher. The breakdown of these services is as follows:   
1. 180 minutes of Standalone ENL services with a licensed ENL Teacher. 
2.  180 minutes of Integrated ENL/ELA services with a licensed ENL Teacher in small group or co-teaching with the 
Mainstream Teacher according to the ELL group size and needs within the class.  The ENL Teacher will implement ENL 
strategies and scaffolds; and the Mainstream Teacher will provide core content instruction. 
Also, students identified in the Transitioning and Expanding language acquisition levels will receive Integrated ENL 
services 180 minutes per week with a licensed ENL Teacher in small group or following the co-teaching model paired 
with the Mainstream teacher.  Students identified as being at the 
Commanding level of language acquisition receive Integrated ENL services 90 minutes per week for two years after 
they have met exiting criteria. 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          81 

 

 

 
SAMPLE THIRD GRADE INTEGRATED ENL SERVICES STUDENT SCHEDULE: 
Period 1 – Journeys Reading Block (scaffolded Integrated ENL Services) 
Period 2 – Journeys Writing Block (scaffolded Integrated ENL Services) 
Period 3 – Teacher Prep (Science) 
Period 4 – GoMath 
Period 5 – Lunch 
Period 6 – Science 
Period 7 – Social Studies 
 
Students’ instructional schedule supports the Freestanding ENL program.  Students remain in their mainstream 
classrooms throughout instruction of all major subject areas (reading, writing, math, social studies and 
science).   Related Services and ENL Services adhere to this protocol to ensure maximum use of instructional time. 

b.  TBE program.  If applicable.   

For the 2017-2018 school year we will be opening a TBE Spanish and TBE Chinese program in Kindergarten following 
the guidelines for instruction in CR PART 154.2. 
 

c.  DL program.  If applicable.    

N/A    

2.  How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each 

program model? 

a.  How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 

below)? 

          
In accordance with CR Part 154.2, PS 186 implements an Integrated and Standalone- Freestanding ENL program in grades K 
through 5. To ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to students’ levels: students in the 
Entering and Emerging language acquisition levels receive ENL services 360 minutes per week (eight periods per week; and in 
accordance with the NLAP, their home language is used to make instruction explicit).  This service includes 180 minutes of 
Standalone ENL services and 180 minutes of Integrated ENL/ELA services.   Within the same classroom, students identified in 
the Transitioning and Expanding language acquisition levels receive Integrated ENL/ELA services 180 minutes per week.  Also 
within the same classroom, students identified in the Commanding language acquisition level receive Integrated ENL/ELA 
services 90 minutes per week.   
 
Students’ instructional schedule supports the Freestanding ENL program.  Students remain in their mainstream classrooms 
throughout instruction of all major subject areas (reading, writing, math, social studies and science).   Related Services and ENL 
services adhere to this protocol to ensure maximum use of instructional time.      
We do not have any Bilingual/Dual Language or Transitional Bilingual programs at this time but anticipate opening a Spanish 
and Chinese Bilingual program (TBE) for the 2017-2018 school year in Kindergarten. 
 

3.  Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and 

methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core 
Learning Standards.  
  
Core content instruction is taught by the classroom teacher(s) and ENL teacher(s) in English.  ENL Teachers participate in grade 
level and vertical program planning and implementation of the literacy curriculum.  This past year (2016-2017), teachers 
worked together to create differentiated entry points for parts of the Journeys literacy curriculum.  Teachers also refer to the 
Bilingual Common Core New Language Arts Progressions (BCCNLAP), NYSESLAT Performance Level Descriptions and Target of 
Measurement, and the NYS Common Core Standards Instructional Shifts  for guidance on making instructional decisions that 
meet the linguistic and academic demands of all ELLs.  ENL Teachers analyze linguistic demands of learning tasks to create and 
design resources that include but not limited to, vocabulary with visuals, word banks, phonics, sentence frames, and grammar 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          82 

 

activities that support in comprehension.    
 
Students have many opportunities to demonstrate content comprehension and language development within a subject area 
(ELA/Math/Science/Social Studies)  that meets the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards.  They are encouraged to 
use oral and non-oral skills to communicate their thoughts and ideas, as indicated in the BCCNLAP in the Entering and 
Emerging language acquisition levels.  In the upper grades (3-5), students are provided with bilingual dictionaries that support 
literacy comprehension in their home language and bilingual math glossaries during math instruction.  Newcomer students at 
the Entering and Emerging language acquisition levels are assigned home language buddies whenever possible to help them 
navigate the school system and become acclimated to their new school.  PS 186 also implements the Language Ambassador 
initiative.  A Language Ambassador is a bilingual upper grade student that is at the high Expanding, Commanding language 
acquisition level or a can also be a non-ELL, bilingual student who assists an Entering/Emerging student by translating various 
skills and tasks for a given period of time.   ELLs are supported with instruction through the use of resources (computers, 
schoolwide licensed computer programs, bilingual books, dictionaries, bilingual dictionaries, the aid of a SmartBoard and 
testing materials), hands-on learning, and explicit modeling.   These methods help to aid with learning while keeping the 
students on par with their native and native-like peers. 
 
ENL and Mainstream Teachers foster native language support for core content in the ENL program by utilizing technology, 
including computers,  SMART Boards, projectors, listening centers, bilingual books and dictionaries.   Lessons are aligned to 
meet New York State Common Core Learning Standards for grade level and content areas. 
 
Our school has implemented the  Journeys Program with ELL supplemental materials developed by Houghton Mifflin for our 
Freestanding ENL program in order to make content comprehensible, enrich language development, and prepare students to 
meet Common Core Learning Standards.  The components of the above program include thematic units that focus on literacy 
through content areas (ELA, math, science, and social studies).  Each unit is zeroed in on a central theme, which ties together 
instruction and activities for each content area, with an emphasis on vocabulary. The series has built-in reading strategies, 
sight and story words, word analysis, phonics, spelling, graphic organizers, grammar, writing modes and assignments, writing 
models, linguistics, small group differentiated instruction, as well as native language (Spanish) culture clues and background 
assistance for Spanish-speaking students.  This series is designed for the English Language Learner to help develop English 
language skills and succeed in all academic studies and content areas. This series aligns with the Common Core Learning 
Standards. 
All teachers at PS 186 are required to use Best Practices and teach language through content.  Teachers recognize the need to 
provide the linguistic means for students to fully and clearly utilize their background knowledge.  Teachers have a clear 
understanding, as a result of intensive professional development activities, of the backgrounds of the multilingual learner.  For 
this reason, they use ENL strategies in their classroom. When deemed appropriate a bilingual paraprofessional may be 
assigned to aid a student(s) with home language support.  Teachers utilize the NYS Bilingual Common Core Progressions to 
plan their lessons according to their students Proficiency levels.  This allows for the classroom and ENL teachers to scaffold 
their instruction daily. 
All ELL students also receive daily ELA instruction in their classrooms through reading and writing workshops.  In adapting their 
lessons for ELL students, teachers activate prior knowledge and increase receptive language by modifying presentation of 
materials with abridged versions of anchor texts, and extensive visual support .  In addition, teachers adapt literature activities 
through the use of small group and individualized instruction--previewing text, utilizing book talks, mapping concepts using 
webs, and interactions with a SmartBoard which is in every classroom in the school, as well as modifying daily and weekly 
writing pieces to improve productive language skills. 
ENL teachers communicate with Mainstream Teachers through articulation, informal meetings, and weekly common planning 
periods to target individual students’ needs and help drive effective instruction.  Weekly planning time is established and 
proves essential for our teachers to plan effectively for the needs of their students.   In addition, ENL teachers utilize some 
sheltered instruction methods to support content area instruction, including the use of multiple intelligences [e.g., songs, Total 
Physical Response (TPR), realia, new and home language classroom labels, and hands-on projects], linguistically heterogeneous 
groups, home language groups, alternate assessments, and activation of prior knowledge and experience. 
 

4.  How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          83 

 

  
 ELLs that are literate in their native language have the opportunity to receive state tests and assessments in their native 
language along with an English version.  The state tests are available in Chinese, Spanish, Arabic, Russian and Haitian Creole.  If 
the native language test is not available for a given assessment, our school hires a certified native language interpreter to 
translate state exams from English to the student’s native language.  These students are given the native language test at the 
recommendation of the Mainstream and ENL Teachers, who solicit input from parents/students regarding a preference for the 
test being given in a native language--or bilingual setting. These tests are evaluated and graded by district level bilingual 
interpreters.   
 
Throughout the school year, these students have the opportunities to converse with teachers, paraprofessionals and other 
students in their home language during instruction.  They are also given the option of choosing books that can be read in their 
native language (when available) as well as having access to bilingual dictionaries and glossaries to assist in new language 
comprehension. Students also have the use of technology (computers, listening centers--CDs) to assist in translations and 
language acquisition.   
 
Teachers can access Go Math in Spanish for Spanish-speaking students; further support is provided by offering home language 
to English translations by administering classroom assessments in their home language when available.   Furthermore, 
teachers also provide those students who are literate in Chinese, Spanish, Russian, or Arabic, with older versions of state tests 
in their home language for further practice and support.    
 

5.  How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? 

SIFE   

a. 
b.  Newcomer  
c.  Developing   
d. 
e. 

Long Term 
Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status  

SIFE  Presently, there are no  ELL Students with Interrupted Formal Education (SIFE).  In the event of the admittance of a SIFE 
ELL, the student would be placed in an ENL program according to placement procedures.  In addition, extra support would be 
given using ENL newcomer strategies to address formal academic instructional gap and begin to build English language 
acquisition skills.  Our initial goal is for these students to obtain basic communication and social skills embedded in academic 
content.  Because SIFEs often lack grade level proficiency in content areas, we would work closely with the child’s classroom 
teacher to give strong language support specifically in content areas in order to close the gaps in their academic 
achievement.  The Home Language Information Survey should also indicate his/her SIFE status.   
         
Newcomers to our Freestanding ENL Program have complete access to grade appropriate Common Core Learning Standards 
with the guidance of the BCCNLAP.  Recently arrived ELLs are placed in ENL classrooms with other ELLs of a variety of language 
levels.  They receive Standalone and Integrated ENL services for 360 minutes per week.  Both, Mainstream and ENL Teachers 
provide intensive one-to-one and small group instruction on a daily basis.  Teachers ensure that students receive a balance of 
foundational and conceptual instruction.  Students are exposed to rigorous grade level work while being supported in the 
areas of phonics (Fundations Phonics Program), social and academic spoken English (group and partner activities), vocabulary 
(frayer model) and writing (sentence, paragraph and essay frames).   While students are presented with rigorous academic and 
language instruction, newcomers are assigned a home language buddy to help them become acquainted with school routines 
and student expectations. 
 
The newcomers in our Freestanding ENL Program have the opportunity to use technology in order to aid their language 
acquisition through interactive SmartBoard activities, laptops and tablets with access to specific licensed software, as well as 
websites for word games, independent reading activities, native language literacy, and home activities.   
For the 2017-2018 school year, we have contracted licences with several online software companies that will target the needs 
of newcomer students in our school.  For example, one of the them is Learning A-Z (includes: Vocabulary A-Z, Writing A-Z, 
Science A-Z, Reading A-Z and Raz-kids) online support for our ELL students.  This program provides language and reading 
leveled reading, vocabulary, writing, science, resources to easily differentiate reading, vocabulary, writing and content 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          84 

 

instruction. This program includes beginner level books for Entering/Emerging students, which aid them in word recognition. 
Read Alouds are provided to familiarize students with the sounds and rhythm of the English language as well as to expose all 
students to higher-level reading that they may not be able to access independently.  Another online program is 
BrainPopESL.  This program is a comprehensive English language learning program that uses highly engaging animated movies 
to model conversational English while seamlessly introducing grammar concepts and vocabulary words. The movies are 
leveled, with each new movie and associated features building upon earlier ones, thereby reinforcing vocabulary, grammar, 
pronunciation, reading comprehension, and writing skills. The building block structure enables students to master the 
language in a step-by-step process, giving them the confidence they need to read, write, and speak English.   
For additional support with Journey’s Literacy Curriculum, students are given access to anchor text by providing them with 
abridged versions of the text and related activities.  Teachers consider the newcomers language level and scaffold Journey’s 
questions to be able to keep the integrity of the program in tact and promote higher order thinking.  Newcomers are exposed 
to grade level target vocabulary with the usage of TPR and visuals.  Also, if the student is literate in their home language, we 
provide assessments in that language as available for all content areas except ELA.  In addition, we strive to familiarize the 
newcomers with ELA type learning strategies until the child reaches proficiency for his/her grade level.  c. ELLS AT THE 
DEVELOPING LEVEL:   This instruction is provided through the reading and writing components of Journeys curriculum and 
scaffolded with the use of the NYS Bilingual Common Core Progressions.  Another resource utilized to support the academic 
and language development of ELLs at the developing levels is the P.S. 186 ENL literacy room.  The ENL Literacy room is replete 
with leveled readers that support language acquisition.  In addition, Academic Intervention Service (AIS) teachers help to 
challenge these students and guide them towards the next level of success. Students are moved within groups on an ongoing 
basis. These students are helped through visual literacy guidance to assist with comprehension, cognitive and metacognitive 
skills regardless of language acquisition levels.  Students prior knowledge (including home language) and personal experiences 
are welcomed to help assist students with comprehension and connections from personal to academic experiences.  Students 
are encouraged to deliver oral presentation, to communication in a social and academic setting .  We are hopeful that using 
these communicative participation models, students will be able to become more confident and fluent in English, both in a 
written and spoken modalities. We are confident that these strategies will extend their competence levels as well as assist 
them to their next steps academically. The ELLs receive additional reading support through the use of technology (i.e. 
SmartBoards and computers), including listening activities, read-alongs, use of search engines to discover stories of different 
genres, and Internet research. d.  LONG-TERM ELLS:  For Long-Term ELLs who have been in NYC schools for six years or more, 
we use formal and informal assessments ranging from NYSESLAT and NYS assessment performance, to ENL and Classroom 
Teachers observations in order to identify the students’ areas of strengths and weakness.  Accordingly, we strive to enhance 
their reading abilities by focusing on key topics for comprehension, organization of writing, looking for written context clues, 
and more expressive and complex spoken English.  We encourage and support students to speak out loud and participate 
freely using sentence starters.  We use many manipulatives to help address hands-on learning. In addition, long-term ELL 
students use the computer in the classroom in order to create published works – a method that in the past students are eager 
to participate in and one that makes writing and editing faster, easier, and more professional. ANY ELLs with SPECIAL NEEDS: 
The ENL teachers, along with every service provider in the school, have received electronic access of the IEP for every student 
they service who has been identified as having special needs (via Chapter 408 form).  Each service provider is required to 
familiarize herself with each student’s specific needs and modifications so instruction can be modified accordingly.  In addition, 
the ENL teachers maintain consistent communication with the teachers of ELLs with special needs in order to ensure that each 
student’s needs are being addressed through instruction.  In grades Kindergarten and 2nd Grade, Classroom and ENL Teachers 
use Journeys leveled vocabulary readers and Fundations which are grade level curriculums. These series have grade level 
appropriate stories, activities, leveled reading books, as well as audio files to help facilitate English language development. The 
books and stories in the series' contain a wide range and variety of content level information. Some of the areas the books 
touch upon are Social Studies and Science. The series also contains numerous thematic units which contain whole group 
reading and instruction, word study, small group instruction, writing components, newcomer level stories,  audio CD's, themed 
projects, pair and group work, writing assignments for independent and group activities, as well as the use of computer work 
and assignments. The school participates in having a new reading skill each week. These skills are taught and reviewed 
throughout the school year both in the classroom by the classroom teachers, the ENL teachers and the AIS teachers. ELL 
students are also given a Science cluster period to work on many hands-on activities in that content area. This Science cluster 
teacher has a room that encompasses a fully working science lab. The lab affords students the opportunity to work in a hands-
on environment.  

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          85 

 

e. Students who have just scored Commanding on the NYSESLAT within the last two years are given numerous levels of 
support.  Students are given ENL (time and a half) extra for state and classroom testing.  These modifications are entitled to 
former ELL students and are continually implemented for the two years after students have been determined proficient on 
NYSESLAT. Former ELL students are entitled to two periods per week (90 minutes) of ENL instruction with an ENL licensed 
teacher in an ENL classroom.     All ELL students also receive daily ELA instruction in their classrooms through reading and 
writing workshops which include ELL components.  In adapting their lessons for the ELL students in their classes, teachers 
activate prior knowledge, modify presentation of materials, and extend language; in addition, teachers adapt literature 
activities through the use of small group , previewing text, mapping concepts using webs, and modifying daily and weekly 
writing pieces. Teachers use ENL activities in their daily lesson plans to ensure ELL students are included and ENL strategies are 
incorporated into their lessons.  
 

6.  What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic 

content areas and accelerate English language development?  
Books and lessons are leveled for grade and age appropriateness and aligned with common core standards.  The Journeys 
leveled readers  and complete series contains front loading instruction, vocabulary, thematic organization, systematic skills 
development, phonics, word analysis, picture walks, writing pieces, built-in differentiated instruction, picture dictionaries, 
reading strategies, sight word vocabulary, spelling tips, graphic organizers, grammar, writing models and assignments, and 
using culturally and linguistically responsive teaching to enhance learning for all students including ELLs with disabilities. 
 
 There is even a linguistic contrastive analysis.  For newcomers the program provides emphasis on vocabulary and 
speaking.  These students also have access to technology through computers and listening centers. For ELL's that are in ESL 4-6 
years the emphasis is on intensive reading and writing.  These students will also have the use of technology to aid in language 
and reading fluency.  Students may use search engines to do research or investigate genres of reading.  Manipulatives to aid in 
hands-on learning, as well as the use of visual and listening aides are used to help re-enforce skills. Content area instruction is 
done in class by the classroom teacher. The instruction is supported with the use of Promethean boards, bilingual dictionaries 
and glossaries, as well as native language reading books. Teachers are asked to refer to ENL strategies given to them at the 
beginning of the year to help assist their ELL students. Materials for reading and math may also be found in the student's 
native language to aid in understanding and comprehension.  When possible ESL teachers push-into classrooms to co-teach 
with classroom teachers while implementing ENL methodologies and instruction. Some additional instructional components 
are: during ENL instruction, there is a heavy concentration on literacy skills using the above programs, as well as providing the 
students with a print rich environment.  These programs place an emphasis on all four modalities.  ENL teachers implement 
the use of computers and internet in their classrooms.  
ELLs/SWD are supported in the ENL program through a range of learning materials designed to address multiple learning 
modalities.  In all classrooms, especially ELLs with disabilities are supported through the use of visual aids, songs, SMART Board 
usage, laptops, tablets, word vocabulary cards, charts, picture cards, big book stories, stories on audio CDs, hands-on class 
work, manipulative charts, Total Physical Response (TPR) activities, guided reading activities, computer research and 
assignments, as well as the use of interactive promethean boards in all classrooms and appropriate library reading leveled 
books geared towards the ELL student.  Our ENL teachers also integrate technology for each subgroup of ELLs as outlined 
above. 
ENL teachers utilize students' IEPs to develop lessons and address their long term and short term goals. Within the IEP, 
teachers specifically state current levels, areas of strengths, weaknesses,and management needs for each individual student. 
For students with disabilities whose IEP's mandate bilingual instruction, these students are assigned a bilingual 
paraprofessional who can translate all forms of instruction to their native language. These students also receive the mandated 
amount of ENL instructional periods.  For ELL students with disabilities whose IEP mandates ENL instruction, students are 
serviced with other students in the same grade for the mandated number of minutes according to their proficiency 
level.   Alternate placement paraprofessionals are utilized to translate instruction when students are stronger in their native 
language. Paraprofessionals working one to one with students, provides them with individualized instruction they need to 
meet long term and short term goals and better access the general education curriculum. 
 
P.S. 186  employees a full time IEP teacher, Alexia Farrauto who works with the School Assessment Team to ensure all IEP goals 
and related service mandates are being met for SWD.  All service providers including ENL teachers, speech language therapist, 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          86 

 

occupational therapists,  physical therapists, guidance counselors, hearing education, and adaptive physical education 
providers meet in the office of school assessment to coordinate schedules to ensure all students receive mandated services 
without overlapping as required by law. All classroom teachers have electronic access to their student’s IEP as indicated on the 
Chapter 408 forms stored in room 314. Electronic copies are also accessible via SESIS as attachments with the start of the new 
year as well as the creation of each IEP (i.e. annual, re-evaluation, tri-annual). Cluster teachers, AIS teachers, related services 
providers and ENL teachers sign this document ensuring they know and understand the student’s IEP. 
materials on Think Central (computer site). The basis of the lower grade reading program is to enhance phonemic awareness, 
spelling, comprehension, The use of the PS 186 3rd floor literacy room will ensure a wider variety of literature for the ELL 
student in which to be exposed.  P.S. 186  believes achievement of the ELL child is our main objective.  Any way we can support 
and assist our ELL population students we will strive to do it.  
ELLs are given support services throughout the school day. ENL teachers collaborate with classroom teachers to ensure better 
access to the Journeys curriculum. This reading program has specific ENL components to facilitate language and reading 
acquisition. Staff, parents and students have access to and listening skills.  Depending on their level, ELL students are provided 
with a push-in/pull-out method.  There, the ENL teachers supplement instruction with visuals, guided reading, technology, etc. 
to better meet the language needs of each of the students. 
 

7.  How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and 

attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? 
The ENL teachers, along with every service provider in the school, have electronic access of the IEP for every student they 
service who has been identified as having special needs. Classroom teachers (the principal’s designee) distribute chapter 408s 
in order for providers to sign which means they know and understand the IEP of that specific student.  Each service provider is 
required to familiarize himself/herself with each student’s specific needs and modifications so instruction can be modified 
accordingly.  In addition, the ENL teachers maintain consistent communication with the classroom, cluster and related service 
providers with students of special needs in order to ensure that each student’s needs are being addressed through 
instruction.   
ELL-SWDs are pulled for ENL services and integrated with other ELL grade level students from general education and special 
education classes. Students IEP's are kept on file so that teachers have access to building upon the goals of the student's 
individualized education plan. ENL teachers want to attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment for all 
our ELL student population, especially the ELL-SWDs. Throughout the school day scheduling is done that may incorporate self 
contained classes with regular mainstreamed classes based on their level of need of ENL instruction.  Preparation periods are 
mainstreamed for all students. General education teachers, special education teachers and all students are involved in all 
aspects of educational and instructional planning. All general and special education teachers meet to plan vertically and 
horizontally. All regular and special education teachers meet each week for grade level team meetings as well as inquiry time 
to review student work and plan for future instructional goals.      
 

8.  Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups 

targeted).  List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which 
they are offered. 
Our school uses TCRWP and leveled libraries as per Fountas and Pinnell to assess children 4 times per year.  Classroom 
teachers use writing on demand pieces to assess understanding of both genre specific writing and mechanics/grammar.  The 
data used concurrently with genre specific checklist and the Journeys Literacy program unit exams assists with providing 
students targeted instruction in reading and writing.  The data provided by TCRWP is able to track students reading level 
progress.  We are also able to track ELL students at all levels as they progress through reading levels from grades K-
5.  Recently, our school has chosen to utilize TCRWP tracking tool through all grades including K to 5 Assessment Pro.  TCRWP 
provides comparative data between ELLs and non-ELL students in all grades.  TCRWP helps teachers acquire information about 
children's phonemic awareness and phonics skills including letter and sound recognition.  This data is valuable because utilized 
effectively it allows teachers the opportunity to observe strengths and areas of difficulty while setting grade level benchmarks 
for four assessment windows.   Our June 2017 - TCRWP benchmark indicated that 58% of our ELL students in grades K-5 are 
level 1s.  This implies that their reading level is below the benchmark.  Based on this information we administered the 
Emerging Literacy Survey from Houghton Mifflin Harcourt Journeys which gives us insights to specific phonemic awareness and 
sight word areas of need.  Teachers and parent reports are printed that provide tips & information on how to improve reading 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          87 

 

and early literacy skills.  As part of our school's instructional program teachers collaboratively look at student work and data 
such as TCRWP, running records and anecdotal notes to select resources, material, revise curriculum and plan for small group 
and/or individualized instruction.   The state of NY has not provided data RNMR report at this time.  Tier 1 is the instructional 
core that is intended to incorporate high quality evidence-based instruction for all students. This includes instruction that has 
been shown to be effective for ELLs, and differentiation to meet students’ diverse needs. Instruction for ELLs in English 
language development is provided at the Tier 1 instructional level. Students move into Tier 2 and Tier 3 if they demonstrate a 
need for more targeted and intensive academic support. This extra support can occur in the classroom, but also in separate 
settings with instruction focused on specific learning targets. Tier 2 and Tier 3 instruction should also be tailored to meet ELLs’ 
language needs and should be incorporated into research-based intervention strategies.  Students targeted for Tier 2 and  Tier 
3 intervention are tracked for specific homogenous groups during Extended Day and after school programs.  ENL teachers with 
specific training in programs such as Fundations, Wilson, and interventions from Teacher Made Materials will provide small 
group intervention during Extended Day and After School activities.  Houghton Mifflin Harcourt Journeys provides intervention 
through the use of leveled ELL readers and Vocabulary readers that align with the CORE program's themes and genres and help 
to support and scaffold instruction.  Parent letters that are sent home are uploaded to the school's website and parents have 
the ability to view the website in their native language.  
 

9.  Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year?    

   We have purchased Houghton Mifflin Science Fusion Program K-5, a new science curriculum along with consideration being 
given to the purchase of the 2015 Journeys anthology addition.   We will continue using Go Math!  2016  along with 
supplemental materials.  Beginning 2017-2018 we will being using Passport to Social Studies for all of our students.  We will 
modify and scaffold as needed for our ELL students. We will also continue to use online programs such as Brain Pop ELL, 
Reading A to Z and at this time are looking into introducing Imagine Learning for our ELL students in 2017-2018.   
 

10.  If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? 

.   
We were slated to open a TBE Chinese Kindergarten for the 2016-2017 school year.  As per parent choice we did not have 
enough students for a full class.  The parents were offered to transfer to a TBE but declined.  We will be opening a TBE Spanish 
Kindergarten and TBE Chinese Kindergarten for the school year 2017-2018. 
 

11.  How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs?  Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in 

your building. 
ELLs are afforded equal opportunities. They are invited to participate in all programs including extracurricular activities such as 
dance,  chorus, student council and after school programs including Disney Theatrical Productions.   Teachers of SWD - ELLS 
provide instruction using Core and Supplemental curriculum programs. Teacher of ELL -SWD use both Journeys and GO 
Math  along with the differentiated options offered in Think Central.  The material offered as resources provided by Think 
Central online can supplement, modify and differentiate learning.  Additional scaffolding is required for students who are ELL 
w/SWD is necessary and must be reflected in both lesson planning and delivery.  Small group differentiated instruction is 
provided using modified materials and scaffolded for ELLS-SWD.  We use materials such as Empire NY NYSESLAT prep material 
to insure that all students are receiving adequate instruction.   For students lacking phonemic skills Fundations is provided 
during 50 minute blocks daily.  This past year ELL students in PS 186 were given access to the MINDPLAY online tutorial 
program that focuses on developing literacy skills in several areas: fluency, vocabulary, stamina, and comprehension.  ESL 
students also received access to IXL  Math tutorial and Ten Marks which are both online intervention program.  ELLs with 
Special Needs were offered the opportunity to attend supplemental programs offered after school and during Saturday school 
hours.  In addition, to using On Our Way to English supplemental material, online materials, and Continental Press NYSESLAT 
prep to support students in developing listening, speaking, reading and writing fluency.   
 

12.  What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language 

materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. 
   
Teachers of SWD - ELLS provide instruction using Core and Supplemental curriculum programs. Teacher of ELL -SWD use both 
Journeys and GO Math  along with the differentiated options offered in Think Central.  The material offered as resources 
provided by Think Central online can supplement, modify and differentiate learning.  Additional scaffolding is required for 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          88 

 

students who are ELL w/SWD is necessary and must be reflected in both lesson planning and delivery.  Small group 
differentiated instruction is provided using modified materials and scaffolded for ELLS-SWD.  We use materials such as Empire 
NY NYSESLAT prep material to insure that all students are receiving adequate instruction.  This past year ELL students in PS 186 
were given access to the MINDPLAY online tutorial program that focuses on developing literacy skills in several areas: fluency, 
vocabulary, stamina, and comprehension.  ELLs with Special Needs were offered the opportunity to attend supplemental 
programs offered after school and during Saturday school hours.  In addition, we use Continental Press NYSESLAT prep to 
support students in developing listening, speaking, reading and writing fluency.     
 

13.  How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? 

   
We do not have a TBE or Dual Language program.  We plan to provide Native Language support for the students with the use 
of native language books and a buddy system.  We have Language Ambassadors who are assigned to classes of English 
Language Learners during their lunchtime to help students in their native language and translate to the students as needed. 
Use of Native Language in our building will be provided with native language books placed in both the classrooms and a special 
section of the school library that will house these books.  We will also try to use the buddy system with our children whenever 
possible during reading.  We do not offer Native Language Arts since we do not have Bi-Lingual classes at this time.  We can 
offer native language support for students and parents by providing workshops and access to families and students to all 
school textbooks and workbooks for Science, Literacy and Math through Think Central Spanish translation.    
 

14.  Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels.  

  
ELL's are grouped heterogeneously by age and grade level. Instruction for ELL students is aligned with New York  State 
Common Core State Standards. Whether in the main classroom or an ENL students self contained special education classroom, 
during ENL instruction or during any supportive service program, the teachers at P.S. 186 align instruction with proper age and 
grade level standards.Support services are given throughout the day to all eligible students.  At the beginning of the school 
year all Speech teachers, OT and PT teachers, SETSS teachers, ENL teachers as well as upper grade math and reading teachers 
meet and have a large sized schedule of each student in the school which is entitled to services.  The schedules are filled in by 
time slot to ensure all pull-outs and push in services are met without the existence of an overlap.  If for any reason a teacher 
needs to change their schedule or program, the teacher would have to check the child's schedule before a change is 
made.  This will ensure every child entitled to a required service will get the support and resources they need in the least 
restrictive environment. 
 
Teachers of SWD - ELLS provide instruction using Core and Supplemental curriculum programs. Teacher of ELL -SWD use both 
Journeys and GO Math  along with the differentiated options offered in Think Central.  The material offered as resources 
provided by Think Central online can supplement, modify and differentiate learning.  Additional scaffolding is required for 
students who are ELL w/SWD is necessary and must be reflected in both lesson planning and delivery.  Small group 
differentiated instruction is provided using modified materials and scaffolded for ELLS-SWD.  We use materials such as On Our 
Way to English and Empire NY NYSESLAT prep material to insure that all students are receiving adequate instruction.  This past 
year ELL students in PS 186 were given access to the MINDPLAY online tutorial program that focuses on developing literacy 
skills in several areas: fluency, vocabulary, stamina, and comprehension.  ENL students also received access to IXL  Math 
tutorial and Ten Marks which are both online intervention program.  ELLs with Special Needs were offered the opportunity to 
attend supplemental programs offered after school and during Saturday school hours.  In addition, to using online materials, 
and Continental Press NYSESLAT prep to support students in developing listening, speaking, reading and writing fluency. 
 

15.  If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the 

ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met?   
 We are not a co-location school. 
 

16.  Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for 

new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, 
parent coordinator).  
At this time PS 186, students are offered an opportunity to enroll in an afterschool enrichment and academic program called 
ExpandED which serviced approximately 550 children.  Vivian Barreto is our NIA ExpandED Director for afterschool and Elaine 
Delaney is our Parent Coordinator who is also involved in the afterschool program.  We also offer a Saturday program for 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          89 

 

 

newly enrolled ELL students during the school year.  P.S. 186 has offered  an afterschool intervention program for students in 
the past as per available funding.  At the completion of a grade each student, which includes the ELL student population, is 
given a summer homework packet to ensure students are educationally challenged.  We also provided vacation packets that 
are differentiated by ENL levels up to 4 times per year.   Students must complete this packet for the following school year.  This 
ensures a continuation of literacy and math skills throughout the holiday and summer months.  All newly enrolled students are 
offered the same programs as all the students at P.S. 186.  
 

17.  What language electives are offered to ELLs?  

We do not offer any language electives.     
 

18.  For schools with dual language programs: 

a.  What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day 

(percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. 
In which language(s) is each core content area taught? 

b. 
c.  How is each language separated for instruction? 
d. 

Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same 
time (simultaneous)? 

Not applicable.     
 

Professional Development and Support for School Staff 

1.  Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic 

staff.)  What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs 
as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? 
Our school professional team meets monthly to ensure that our school professional learning plan is rich, varied and addresses 
the professional development needs of our staff for all students including ELLs.  The professional development is offered to all 
common branch teachers, ENL teachers, administrators, paraprofessionals, secretaries, school psychologist, school counselor 
and the Parent Coordinator throughout different times of the school year.   The staff at P.S. 186 receives on-going staff 
development from our ENL teachers and at workshops presented in the building by our District ELL liaisons, through Brooklyn 
South and contracted vendors such as Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, and Education Consortium consultants.   These professional 
development sessions provide strategies and methods so that the ELL student can be included and participate in classroom 
lessons.   This last school year our district has provided a series of ongoing professional development workshops that address 
strategies for English Language Learners as well as information and application of the Common Core Standards and Bilingual 
Common Core New Language Arts Progressions in all content areas.  These workshops invite both ENL teachers and classroom 
teachers to attend.  The PD offerings from the Office of ELLs which are communicated to all staff including new staff who is 
strongly encouraged to register and attend.  We make every accommodation necessary to promote professional learning for 
all teachers especially new teachers who are acquiring mandated training hours.  ENL Teachers engage in all professional 
development sessions and meet with their grade level teachers on an ongoing basis. Topics this year may include but are not 
limited to: 
 
 

2.  Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all 
teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include 
how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance).  Refer to ELL Policy and Reference 
Guide, Professional Development section. 
Professional staff developers from Ed Consortium  have been invited to provide training sessions for staff to assist ELLs as they 
transition from Entering to Commanding.  Intensive Follow-up coaching was provided to plan scaffolds and differentiated 
instruction for our ELL students as well as planning for professional development for the upcoming school year for 
teachers.  Professional development, provided through the district office ELL educational consultants, is also provided to 
teachers to review how to scaffold curriculum for ELL students on all Proficiency levels .Weekly department meetings are  held 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          90 

 

 

with the ENL teachers & Assistant Principal.    As per the state mandates all teachers must receive 15% of their PD hours in ELL 
professional development training.  Professional development is done by P.S. 186's  five ENL teachers.  Documentation of this 
training is kept in-house in the main office.  Professional development consists of instruction in the latest methodology of ENL 
student support. Topics will include the use of ENL strategies within the mainstream classroom to best aid in the achievement 
and success of the ELL student. Our ENL teachers will be receiving 50% of their total hours of Professional Development 
through PD offerings at the District office of ELLS and through turn-key training in our school.  
 
 

Parental Involvement 

1.  How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language 
development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? 
Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent 
orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences?  
In order to provide support to our parents, workshops are held throughout the year to keep parents abreast of school-wide 
activities and ongoing tests and assessments.  Parents are also given all letters home from school in their native language. 
Interpreters are available to assist during all open school afternoon and evening conferences to help facilitate communication 
between the teacher, school and home.  The parent coordinator also presents workshops for ELL parents with many hands-on 
activities keeping the home-school connection strong.  Monthly parent goals are sent home for all subject areas.  In addition, 
our school website which offers translation provides translated information of program goals including the monthly goals. 
 
ENL Teachers utilize Tuesday Parental Engagement Time to provide parents with progress data for the annual individual 
meetings.  They discuss the goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results 
and language development needs in all content areas by reviewing and tracking data results from the NYSESLAT, and 
curriculum assessments such as Journey's, Go Math, Cold Read Assessments, Benchmark Assessments, Common Core Writing 
Units, etc. Classroom Teachers meet with the parents via phone or in person with the presence of that student's ENL teacher 
to assist in reviewing the ELL students data and goals of the ENL program. ENL Teachers are present at IEP meetings for ELL 
students with disabilities.  All Teachers use the Translation Services to communicate with their students' 
parents/guardians.  PTA meetings are done throughout the year and with the assistance of parent-interpreters, ELL parents 
can partake in all school-wide functions.  Translation signs are displayed throughout the lobby and in the main office to inform 
parents of the translation services available.  Translators are utilized to contract over 20 interpreters for Parent Teacher 
Conferences Fall and Spring.    
 
The above mentioned individual meetings occur face to face at our school during Tuesday Parent Engagement Time and or 
during the teacher's prep period with a school staff member who serves as a translator. These meetings may also occur via 
phone utilizing the Phone Translation Unit. Our school also uses a Remind App which serves as text messages to the parents. 
These are sent various times throughout the school day and even after school hours. These messages are able to be translated. 
A phone messenger is also utilized which contacts parents in their native language to remind them of special events, meetings 
and conferences.  

2.  Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. 

Annual Parent meetings including all workshops, meetings, telephone calls, letters, and conferences are recorded in our ELL 
Binder.  Classroom and ENL Teachers keep a running record of all parent meetings they have throughout the school 
year.  Parent tear-off slips are held by the teachers in a folder in their files.  We have introduced into our school with the help 
of our parent coordinator and ELL Literacy Program for parents of our students.  This class is held during Saturday school to 
help the parents improve their English literacy and to also help them with everyday life skills.  We have implemented an adult 
lending library that contains children’s books with text presented in both the home language and English.  Parent Surveys are 
distributed in multiple languages up to 2 times per year to  help to inform the types of activities and workshops the parents are 
interested in receiving.  Our parent coordinator, Assistant Principal, and ENL Staff work collaboratively to bring high-quality 
workshops that appeal to all parents including ELLs. Wherever possible translators are made available during workshops.  We 
have contracted approximately 20 translators for September, November and March Parent Conferences so that parents needs 
are addressed.  We also provide assistance and translation during March Conferences for parents as they complete the 
Learning Environment Surveys.  We provide pd on Common Core learning standards, NYS test design and JHS with the help of 
translators (Spanish, Russian, and Chinese).   Our parent coordinator, Elaine Delaney is the family access coordinator who 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          91 

 

 

creates passwords and accounts for all families to the new data system.  Our parent coordinator, professional learning team 
members including our assistant principals  provide high quality workshops to address interest and needs of families in our 
school community.  
 

Additional Information 

Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for 
ELLs.  You may attach/submit charts.   This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted.   
Paste response here:    
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          92 

Part V: ELL Identification Attestation 

Principal Certification 

2. 

3. 

4. 

5. 
6. 

7. 

8. 

9. 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 

In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL 
Policy and Reference Guide, I, Bayan (Ebeid) Cadotte, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are 
adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 
 
1. 

The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for 
students entering with IEPs). 
Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined 
a. 

If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status 
relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level.  

The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue.   
a.  The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services 
are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality 
translation service.   

Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined.   
a. 

If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility 
to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. 

Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible.   
Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language.  
a.  Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. 
If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish 
LAB.  
Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources 
available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-
education-sife.  
If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting.  
a.  Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent 

video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask 
questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided 
throughout the meeting. 

10.  ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected.  

a. 

b. 

If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program 
in accordance with DOE transfer policies. 
If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent 
choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice.   

11.  Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process).  
12.  If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose 

ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 
 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          93 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 

Part VI: LAP Assurances 

School Name:   P.S. 186 Dr. Irving A. Gladsto                                                                              School DBN: 20K186 
Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate.  Names listed in Part A, should align with this 
section.  

Name (PRINT) 

Bayan Cadotte 

Title 

Principal 

Mary Grace Altilio 

Assistant Principal 

Elaine Delaney 

Parent Coordinator 

Betty Soto 

ENL/Bilingual Teacher 

Danielle LaManna 

Parent 

Darcy LoGuidice/Gen Ed 

Teacher/Subject Area 

-- 

-- 

-- 

Teacher/Subject Area 

Coach 

Coach 

Pina Pietanza 

School Counselor 

Karina Costantino 

Lucia Medina-Perez 

Superintendent 
 
Field Support Center Staff 
Member 
        -- 

 Alexia Farrauto 

Other SETSS 

--- 

--- 

Other --- 

Other         --   

 

Signature 

Date (mm/dd/yy) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

06/28/17 

06/28/17 

06/28/17 

06/28/17 

06/28/17 

06/28/17 

      --     

          -- 

          -- 

      06/28/17     

06/28/17 

06/28/17 

-- 

06/28/17 

      --     

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          94 

 

 
 

2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS 

Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools 

 

DBN: 

20K186 
 

School 
Name: 

Dr. Irving A. Gladstone 
 

Superintendent: 

Karina Costanti 
 

 
The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. 
If there is more than one LAC, list all. 
 

First Name  

Last Name  

Title  

Has the LAC attended a 

2018-19 training 

The LAC was involved in 
the development of this 

conducted by the Field 

plan? Yes/No  

Language Access 

Coordinator? Yes/No  

Mary Grace 

Altilio 

Elaine 

Alexia 

Betty 

   

Delaney 

Farrauto 

Soto 

Assistant Principal 

Parent Coordinator 

Special Ed Teacher 

ENL Teacher 

No 

No 

No 

No 

Yes 

Yes 

Yes 

Yes 

 
* The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs 
on translation,  
interpretation, compliance and budget.  
 

School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful 
opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's 
Regulation A-663).  
 
By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and 
interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). 
 
Part A:  Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 
 
1.  Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written 

and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from: 

  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS) 
  Automate The System (ATS) reports 
  Student Emergency Contact cards 
  Surveys conducted by your school. 

 

At registration, all parents and guardians must fill out the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS) with an ENL 
teacher. During the registration process parents will meet with one of the pedagogues which may include, Mary 
Grace Altilio, AP, one of our five ENL teachers or our SETTS teacher. They conduct an interview with the parent(s) 
and child. When necessary, native language support is utilized to aid the interview process--either through an in-
house interpreter or through the over-the-phone interpretation services provided by the NYC Department of 
Education. Notes from the interview are recorded on a form and attached to the student's HLIS and placed in the 
students' cummulative file; a copy is also kept in the main office. ENL teachers are mindful of checking the portion 
(Part III) of the HLIS to help give a clearer indication of language ability/instruction. At this time eligibility results 
are entered on the students HLIS along with the OTELE codes and the HLIS is signed off by the pedagogue. Based 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          95 

 

on this initial screening process and the parent choice of English or native language communication this 
information will be input into ATS. Depending upon parent choice of language, all communication from the school 
will be in the language choice of the parent. Teachers at the beginning of the school year are given a survey for 
parents to fill out (in numerous available languages) asking parents to fill out the choice of language they wish to 
receive communication from the school in. These letters are kept on file in the main office and are input into ATS 
so that all communication to the parents will be in the parents language choice. The secretary keeps a record of 
the oral and written communication survey. All newly registered students are given the survey at registration to 
ensure they are included in the language communication choice and are input into ATS at registration. The blue 
emergency cards in the office also state the language and communication preference of the parent. All teachers 
and staff members have access to these cards and can then provide parents with the language assistance they 
need either through in house staff interpreters or the DOE interpretation services. The home language 
indentification survey also contains the language communication choice of parents. All letters will be given in the 
parents language of choice on the same day as English language communication letters. There is no delay of 
communication for any parent whether it is in English or another language. For open school day and evenings 
there are interpeters retained and available for communication with teachers. This will help oral interpretation 
needs will be met for our ENL parents. P.S. 186 also utilizes the department of education interpretation services 
unit for oral communication with parents. This will ensure all parents are provided with native language assistance 
to communicate with teachers. Any phone calls teachers need to make to a childs parent are done by use of the 
blue main office emergency card which contains the parents language/communication choice. Once the card is 
pulled the teacher will check the communication choice and either use the assistance of a staff member or the 
Interpretation Services Unit supplied by the DOE. 

The school shares the Foreign Language Survey with all staff members during staff meetings as well as during 
parent teacher conferences. This data helps to provide language needs for meetings, PTA comunication, parent-
teacher conferences and workshops. This information is also kept in the photo copy room so that the aide's can 
make appropriate copies for the parents in the languages requested. All the languages are listed by class and 
grade and are updated bi-monthly.  

The native language of choice for parents is also kept within the students cumulative folder for reference by the 
teacher, other staff members as well as if the child were to transfer to another school, the information would be 
readily available. The child's HLIS is also kept on file in the students cumulative record card. Attached to the HLIS 
form is the parent correspondence form, the parent selection form and the interview notes from registration.  

When possible and necessary, oral native language support is utilized either through an in-house interpreter or 
through the over-the-phone interpretation services provided by the NYC Department of Education. Written 
translation needs are addressed as part of our schools family outreach in which letters are sent home to parents 
in English as well as parent's native language (at the same time) to keep them abreast of school-wide activities, 
meetings, workshops as well as open school day, evening and week. Interpreters (requested by the school from 
the translation and interpretation unit) are available to assist during all open school afternoons and evenings to 
help facilitate communication between the teacher, school and home. Report cards are sent home to parents in 
their native language to ensure a strong school-parent connection. The information is presented to parents in 
their native language to ensure they understand and are able to play an active role in their childs education. 

The parent coordinator also presents workshops for ENL parents with many hands-on activities keeping the home-
school connection strong. She makes every effort to have all information available to parents in their native 
language. The parent corrdinator also helps to provide native language literature available to ENL parents during 
AIS/ESL parent workshops. 

PTA meetings are held throughout the year with the assistance of parent-interpeters. ENL parents can partake in 
all school-wide functions. Translation signs are displayed throughout the lobby and in the main office to inform 
parents of the translation services available. 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          96 

 

We can further determine the needs from parents and families that attend mandatory orientations and open 
houses. 

Staff members are also available to translate (when applicable) to keep ELL parents abreast of services available 
to them and their children. Our staff has many bilingual teachers and paraprofessionals that can help with 
translation services. Some of the languages staff members speak are; Russian, Urdu, Arabic, Spanish, and Italian  

 

 
 
2.  List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, 

which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language 
Report (RCPL) ATS report. 
 

Language  

Written Preferred  

Percent Written  

Oral Preferred  

Percent Oral  

Albanian 

Arabic 

Bengali 

Burmese 

Chinese Any 

Cantonese 

Hungarian 

Hausa 

Italian 

Moldavian 

Mandarin 

English 

Polish 

Portuguese 

Russian 

Slovak 

Spanish 

(American) Sign 
Language 

Turkmen 

Tadzhik (AKA Tajik) 

Urdu 

Ukrainian 

Uzbek 

Vietnamese 

   

 

12 

31 

1 

1 

366 

0 

1 

1 

1 

4 

0 

518 

2 

1 

140 

1 

265 

0 

2 

2 

19 

5 

29 

3 

0.85 

2.21 

0.07 

0.07 

26.05 

0 

0.07 

0.07 

0.07 

0.28 

0 

36.87 

0.14 

0.07 

9.96 

0.07 

18.86 

0 

0.14 

0.14 

1.35 

0.36 

2.06 

0.21 

12 

30 

1 

1 

350 

8 

1 

1 

1 

0 

16 

515 

2 

1 

142 

2 

262 

1 

2 

2 

19 

4 

29 

3 

0.85 

2.14 

0.07 

0.07 

24.91 

0.57 

0.07 

0.07 

0.07 

0 

1014 

36.65 

0.14 

0.07 

10.11 

0.14 

18.65 

0.07 

0.14 

0.14 

1.35 

0.28 

2.06 

0.21 

3.  From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at 

least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, 
French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          97 

 

 

N/A 

 

 
 
Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 
 
1.  List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be 

distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents.  
 

Document Name  

Month/Frequency Distributed to 

Families  

Principal's Monthly Newsletter 

Monthly 

Workshop letters 

Approximately Oct, Dec, Feb, May 

Family Fun Day letters 

Monthly 

NYS Test Meetings 

March 

NYSESLAT Meeting 

March 

Parent Teacher Conferences 

Nov/Mar 

How do you plan to translate? 
Include procedures to ensure 
timely provision of translated 

documents to parents.  

We use bilingual staff, DOE T & I 
Unit for translation into covered 
languages, school website which 
translates into parents preferred 
language and translation vendor 
for non-covered languages as 
needed 

We use bilingual staff, DOE T & I 
Unit for translation into covered 
languages, school website, School 
Messenger, & REMIND Messenger 
service which translates into 
parents preferred language, and 
translation vendor for non-
covered languages as needed 

We use bilingual staff, DOE T & I 
Unit for translation into covered 
languages, school website, School 
Messenger, & REMIND Messenger 
service which translates into 
parents preferred language, and 
translation vendor for non-
covered languages as needed 

We use bilingual staff, DOE T & I 
Unit for translation into covered 
languages, and translation vendor 
for non-covered languages as 
needed 

We use bilingual staff, DOE T & I 
Unit for translation into covered 
languages, and translation vendor 
for non-covered languages as 
needed 

We use DOE intranet templates for 
covered languages, we use school-
based personnel and/or 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          98 

 

Parent Curriculum Nights 

Sept/Jan 

ELL Entitlement/non 
entitlement/Continuation letters  

Sept 

Winter/Spring Concert Letters 

Dec/May 

Disney Performance 

Feb 

translation vendor for non-
covered languages 

We use DOE intranet templates for 
covered languages, we use school-
based personnel and/or 
translation vendor for non-
covered languages  

We use DOE intranet templates 

We use bilingual staff, DOE T & I 
Unit for translation into covered 
languages, school website, School 
Messenger, & REMIND Messenger 
service which translates into 
parents preferred language, and 
translation vendor for non-
covered languages as needed 

We use bilingual staff, DOE T & I 
Unit for translation into covered 
languages, school website, School 
Messenger, & REMIND Messenger 
service which translates into 
parents preferred language, and 
translation vendor for non-
covered languages as needed 

   

 

2.  List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as 

parent-teacher  
conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings.  
   

Meeting Name  

Month/Frequency of Meetings  

How does your school plan to provide 

Parent Teacher Conferences 

Nov/Mar 

Curriculum Night 

Sept 

Promotion in Doubt Meetings 

Jan 

Family Wellness Night 

Mar 

Initial ELLs Parent Orientation 

Sept 

interpretation service(s)?  

We use over the phone interpretation 
service, bilingual school personnel, 
NIA and Fort Hamiliton HS translation 
services 

We use over the phone interpretation 
service, bilingual school personnel and 
NIA after-school personnel 

We use over the phone interpretation 
service, bilingual school personnel and 
NIA after-school personnel 

We use over the phone interpretation 
service, bilingual school personnel and 
NIA after-school personnel 

We use bilingual school staff and NIA 
after-school personnel 

  
2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          99 

 
 

 

3.  Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of 

a school emergency.  
 

Our School Messenger system calls parents in the language of their choice according to ATS. REMIND text and email 
messenger system is used to provide parents emergency information and is set up by parents in their language of 
choice. 

 
 

 
 
Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure

 

 
Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and 
what resources are available to meet compliance.  
 

The Langugae Access Team will turnkey to staff all information regarding updates to language interpretation plans. 
The Language Access Team will ensure staff members are aware of Chancellors Regulation A-663 and the resources 
available to our school through staff meetings, faculty conferences, memos, Translation flyer disseminated to staff in 
September of every new school year, and through Language Access Cards. 

 

 
 
Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services 
 
Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive 
information. Include any: 

  Translated signage 
  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents 
  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) 

 

The school will provide the parent with a native language survey within the first few days of enrollment into our 
school. Parents' native language needs will be input into the computer on ATS to facilitate future translated letters 
and documents to parents. This native language information will be shared and available to all staff members so that 
parent communication (either oral or written) will be kept consistent. The blue emergency cards in the main office 
with have the communication preference listed on them. The students record cards will have an HLIS form along with 
an interview form, and a parent selection survey stapled together for easy access. Photocopy staff members will have 
a chart in their room that will list the class, grade level and amount of native languages letters needed (along with the 
native language needed). Interpreters on staff (in-house) and parent volunteers will be used as the primary oral 
communicators when applicable and available. The secondary use of oral communicators will be through the use of 
the Department of Education over-the-phone or in-person interpreters when necessary and applicable. These native 
language translators will be provided with all oral communication from the school to the parent whenever available. 
At no time will a child (minor) be used to translate to a parent or adult. The staff is well aware that this is not proper 
protocol. P.S. 186 will request from the NYC Department of Education translation and interpretation unit necessary 
translators for parent teacher conferences, as well as other school activities. 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          100 

 

All meetings and workshops done by staff members and the PTA will have interpreters available (in-house or parent 
volunteers) to assist ELL parents with translations. All letters for workshops and meetings are being sent out in 
available native languages.  

 

 
 
Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services 
Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the 
language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services?   
 

PS 186 sends home parent learning surveys each year. Parents answer questions based on their feelings and 
experiences. At the bottom of the survey parents list questions and concerns. These surveys are sent home to the 
parents to fill out and return sealed. Parents can also leave feedback, comments and concerns on the P.S 186 website, 
which gets reviewed and updated weekly by staff members, administration and the technology teacher. The parent 
coordinator meets with parents on a monthly basis to discuss updated procedures that are going on in the school as 
well as new information regarding upcoming events. She also holds a focus group yearly to address the parental needs 
of the many cultures and languages in our school. The PTA frequently holds meetings throughout the school year to 
discuss any concerns or questions parents have. A phone relay system school messenger is utilized for reminders and 
notifications. Parents also can schedule conferences with their childs classroom teacher, service provider(s) and 
administration to voice any opinions they have regarding their child and school work. P.S 186 staff members have 
websites that are created for each class individually, where parents are not only welcome to see what information is 
posted but also leave any questions/concerns/comments. Parents are always welcome to send letters to the teachers 
about any concerns or questions they may have. Feedback from the parent surveys are analyzed to see where we 
need improvement and expand upon areas we are strong in. This feedback is shared with all staff members during 
professional development days. In addition to analyzing the results, staff members are encouraged to follow up with 
any classroom/teacher issues on an individual basis. Parent ExpandED after school surveys are utilized to provide 
parents with programs and services that meet their needs.  

 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          101 

