 
 

 

 
 

 
  
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

2018-19 

COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN 

(CEP) 

 
 
 
 

 

DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 

18K276 

School Name: 

P.S. 276 LOUIS MARSHALL 

Principal: 

YASMINE FIDELIA 

 
 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                          
 

 

 

 

 1 

 

Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline  

 
 
Section 1: School Information Page 
 
 
Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page  
 
 
Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) 
 
 
Section 4: CEP Overview  
 
 
Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  

  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction 
  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment 
  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers 
  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership 
  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties  

 
 
Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS)  
 
 
Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) 
 
 
Section 8: Title I Program Information  
 
 
Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 
 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          2 

Section 1: School Information Page 

 

School Information 

 

The Louis Marshall School 

18/K/276 

 

 

 
School Name: 

BEDS Code: 

Grades Served: 

School Address:  

Phone Number: 

 

 
331800010276 

 
Pre-K-5 th grade 

 
1070-East 83 rd Street 
 
718 758-7100 

School Number (DBN): 

 

718 241-5560 

Fax: 

 

YasmineFidelia 

yfideli@schools.nyc.gov 

School Contact Person:  

 

Yasmine Fidelia 

Email Address: 

 

Principal: 

UFT Chapter Leader: 

Parents’ Association President: 

SLT Chairperson: 

Title I Parent Representative (or 
Parent Advisory Council 
Chairperson): 

Student Representative(s): 

 

CBO Representative: 
 

 
Sabrina Bharratt-Sookai 

 
Veronica Campbell 

 
Laura Jo Kelly 

 

Maria Olatunji 

 
N/A 

 
N/A 

 
N/A 

 

 

District Information 

 

Geographical District: 

18 

 

Superintendent’s Office Address: 

Beverly Wilkins 

Superintendent: 
1106 East 95th Street, Brooklyn New York 11236 

 

 
bwilkin@schools.nyc.gov 

Superintendent’s Email Address: 

 

718-566-6059  

Phone Number: 

 

718-649-7074 

Fax: 

 

 
 

Field Support Center (FSC)  

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          3 

 

Brooklyn South Field 
Support Center 1 

FSC: 

 

Executive Director’s Office Address: 

MauriciereDeGovia 

 

Executive Director: 
415 89 th Street, Brooklyn, New York 11209 
 
MDeGovi@schools.nyc.gov 

Executive Director’s Email Address: 
718-759-4862 

 

Phone Number: 

 

718-759-3930 

Fax: 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          4 

 

Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page  

 

All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this 
Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to 
support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention 
Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal 
number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with 
Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. 
 
Directions: 

 

1.  List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 
2.  Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization 
(CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an 
asterisk*. 

3.  SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member 

does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, 
which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT 
member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval.   

4.  The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file 

in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. 

 

Name 

Yasmine Fidelia 

 
Sabrina Bharratt-Sookai 

 
Veronica Campbell 

 
Lisa Mallo 

 
Maria Olatunji 

 

N/A 

 

N/A 

 

N/A 

 
Daphne Exavier 

 
Latoya Fable 

 
NatalyaBirmakher 

 

Position and Constituent Group 

Represented 

Signature 
(Blue Ink) 

*Principal or Designee 

*UFT Chapter Leader or Designee 

*PA/PTA President or Designated Co-
President 

DC 37 Representative (staff), if 
applicable 

Title I Parent Representative or 
Parent Advisory Council Chairperson  

Student Representative  
(optional for elementary and middle 
schools; a minimum of two members 
required for high schools) 

Student Representative  
(optional for elementary and middle 
schools; a minimum of two members 
required for high schools) 

CBO Representative, if applicable 

 
Teacher 

 
Paraprofessional 

 
Teacher 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          5 

 

Name 

Position and Constituent Group 

Represented 

Signature 
(Blue Ink) 

Ann Marie Joseph 

 
Donette Samuels 

 
 

Darline Quebe 

 
Farah Jean Philippe 

 
Acacia Thompson 

 

 

 

 

 

Parent 

 
Parent 

 
Member/ 
 
Parent 

 
Parent 

 
Member/Parent 

 
Member/Parent  

 
Member/ 

 
Member/ 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          6 

 

Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan  

 

The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to 
support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing 
school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, 
monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. 
This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the 
school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, 
Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. 

Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools 

The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect 
the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms 
where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity 
and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and 
classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more 
attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and 
Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our 
families and students. 

Strong Schools, Strong Communities  

The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, 
educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school 
prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult.  

The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers 
and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of 
schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, 
school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that 
all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New 
Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students.  

The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development 

The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and 
external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase 
learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently 
ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan 
(CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school 
community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and 
address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for 
students. 
 

Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish 
high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the 
Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community 
members concrete ways to improve. 
 
In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in 
consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to 
participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a 
comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          7 

 
the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all 
the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements 
work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing 
that it likely addresses other elements as well. 
 

The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools  

Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards 
are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical 
thinking skills. 
Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, 
and challenged by their teachers and peers. 
Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. 
They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous 
improvement. 
Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, 
developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. 
Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by 
welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. 
Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school 
and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value 
each other. 

 

The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools 

In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in 
improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative 
and qualitative data. 

NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) 

The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by 
coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality 
Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 
Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below:  

I.       Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) 
II.    School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4)  
III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and 

Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) 

  
School Quality Guide  

The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to 
set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to 
accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also 
available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s 
practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. 
For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. 
The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of 
similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set 
based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. 

 

Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          8 

 
Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, 
professional development, and parent and family engagement. 
 
To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in 
improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will 
serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the 
administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish: 
 
 
 
It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School 
Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the 
joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% 
parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% 
budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent 
and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on 
establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. 

a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; 
a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) 

 
Next Steps for CEP Development 

School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  

  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the 

requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655. 

  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability 

status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year. 

  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed 

by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are 
SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you 
monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school 
community know when you’ve reached your goal. 

  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action 
plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement. 

  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I 

schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). 

  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall 

cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action 
plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. 

Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful 
implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to 
accomplishing desired results. 

Section 4: CEP Overview 

 

1.  What is your school’s mission statement? 

Our mission at P.S. 276 is to provide a safe, welcoming environment whereby, administrators, teachers, and parents 
collaborate to support all students to achieve at their best and become productive, responsible citizens.  

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          9 

 

2.  Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, 

including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented.  

Our school strives to be the hub of the community by providing academic services during the day to students and 
workshops to parents. Extended services are offered to parents and students through various programs and extra-
curricula activities after school hours and Saturdays. We do so, because we believe that in building relationships with 
the whole family we will bring about progress for the child to succeed both academically and socially. We have 
participated in the Learning Partners Plus Program since the 2015-2016 school year. We applied so as to pair with 
schools with similar student demographics to solve our challenges as a team gaining insight from each others' 
strengths, leading to improved student outcomes. That has been one of the best decisions we have made as a school. 
Through the Learning Partners Plus program, we have had the opportunity to have inter-visitations with other schools 
within our cohort and share best practices. It has also afforded us the ability to strengthen structures within our 
school such as planning, classroom environment and management. We also used the inquiry process through 
instructional rounds more consistently to look at data and debriefed on how teachers were using assessments during 
instructions to provide students with immediate feedback to further their learning as well as to measure if teachers 
were planning using the curriculum with fidelity to teach showing knowledge of content and pedagogy. We reviewed 
our School Quality Guide and Quality Review feedback and decided on three learning focus areas. We also used the 
Inquiry process to develop and monitor approaches to improving student outcomes, strengthening instruction in 
English Language Arts (ELA) and Math and promoting family and community engagement. 

 

Home/ school partnership is extremely important to the success of our students, therefore each year we try to 
increase our parent engagement through further collaborating with our parents and guardians. We work with the 
Parent Teachers Association to have Family Movie Nights at least once a month. On Tuesdays, our parents are invited 
to come in and read to our students in the lower grades in their native language. We ensure that our classroom and 
school libraries are stocked with books in Spanish, Haitian Creole and Arabic so as to welcome parents to share a 
read-aloud or just read to their child. Our goal with the students that are bilingual is to help the students maintain 
their native language while leaning English as a new language. Our English as a Second Language Teacher/ 
Coordinator (ESL), also has numerous workshops whereby she invites parents to share their culture and practices with 
staff and other parents and students. We have participated in sharing cultural celebrations, foods dance, jewellery, 
and art. Our Parent Coordinator (PC) has also hosted workshops on Nutrition with presenters from Cornell University, 
Anti-Bullying Workshops with local pastors and Councilman, Parenting classes and Homework Help with United 
Federation of Teachers (UFT). Parents attend our Teachers versus Parent Basketball game on Parent Teacher 
Conference (PTC) Day in May and teachers take pride to invite families to participate in celebrating student 
presentations at the end of a Unit study in classrooms. During the holidays of Thanksgiving, and Holiday Parent 
Teachers Association (PTA) meetings, with the support of the School Leadership Team (SLT) we have had raffles for 
Thanksgiving, and Easter Dinners for our parents by our administrators, and Holiday baskets at other times.  

In building strong family community ties, we are certain that: 

* All students have unique abilities and talents which we build on through teaching a variety of strategies. 

* Data driven instruction provides valuable information for administrators, teachers, parents and students  

in regards to specific skills that must be taught and re-taught to the students.  

* All children learn best in a safe, welcoming, caring environment. This environment values diversity,  

collaboration and risk taking. 

* Children will become productive, responsible citizens by participating in various programs and  

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          10 

 

extra-curricula activities as we prepare them for the ever-changing global community. 

Our Positive Behavior Intervention Services (PBIS) approaches remains the strongest initiative we have that supports 
our school environment. It enables us to help our students to learn to respect themselves and by that demand the 
respect of others. It is developed our the matrix to "be respectful, be responsible, be prepared, be safe" This initiative 
has brought our school occurrences and incidents down over 40%. Our students and staff9including custodians) all 
wear our PBIS t-shirts every Friday in order to promote our vested effort in excelling in an environment of respect and 
as viable citizens within our school community working toward goals of academic and social progress. Our children 
also wear their Bilingual/Bi-literacy t-shirts every Tuesday to promote 

 

3.  Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. 

Our English as a New Language students are showing the greatest need . At P.S. 276 about 85% of our students are 
from bilingual/trilingual homes. Even if a student passed the LAB-R coming in in Kindergarten and did not receive ESL 
instruction or just got off the plane from one of the nearby airports from some far away or not so far away land, if 
they are living in an environment that speaks a language other than English, we are finding that they are in need of 
additional academic support. Many of the students that are coming from Haiti are coming academically deficient. 
There are lapses in their education whereby a fourth grader may not know his alphabet or how to add. The parent 
may share that the child had been in school and may even produce a report card. The report card though does not 
align with incoming assessment of the student by the ENL teacher. This issue is also similar in students coming in from 
the Asian countries. We provide these students with academic intervention in the morning and Response to 
Intervention (RtI). as well as after-school programs to meet their needs. I have also hired two paraprofessionals an 
Arabic and a Haitian Creole speaking paraprofessional to push-in the classrooms to support the students during 
instruction  

Another student population that is of concern are those coming from countries like Guyana or Jamaica. Countries 
whereby English is the first language but these children are coming in illiterate. Though their parents are also claiming 
that the children attended school, the children have academic deficits that are two - three years below grade level. 
This places us in positions to place the students in their grades and provide them with academic intervention, 
however the students' instructional levels are so low, it will take them years to meet the core standards for their 
grades and they still have to take the New York State exams within the year.  

 

4. 

Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over 
the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. 

School Strengths and Accomplishments 

P.S. 276 focuses on teacher collaboration by establishing a vertical professional learning committee. This committee 
meets biweekly to prepare professional learning cycles for all teachers using a monthly calendar template that we 
created and is shared with all staff. The committee concentrates on various topics which are derived from a needs 
assessment survey that are conducted three times a year. These include looking at student work using a protocol; 
item skill analysis, looking at Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) to identify strengths and weaknesses across the 
curriculum; revising ELA and math curriculum by adding additional resources and differentiating the instruction to 
meet the needs of all students. 

At P.S. 276 we offer English as a Second Language (English as a New Language) where the teacher designs and 
implements lessons aligned to Common Core and Bilingual progressions. These lessons incorporate research based 
methodologies in order to enhance language acquisition to our Haitian Creole, Arabic, and Spanish population. Using 
these progressions and methodologies, the teacher uses a combination of integrated and pull-out models to meet the 
needs of students at various levels of language proficiency. Every week our English Language Learners (ELL) Team 
meets to receive professional development focused around current strategies, methodologies, materials and 
regulations. This information is collected and turn-keyed from the Department of English Language Learners and 
Student Services and Support. Additionally during these meetings, Regional Bilingual Education Resource Network 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          11 

 

(RBERN) visits P.S. 276 to provide an additional period of support and professional learning to the ELL Team and to the 
school community through workshops or push-in activities.  

For the 2017-2018 school year we opened a Dual Language Kindergarten program in Haitian Creole. We adopted a 
side by side model. In one class, the teacher teaches and speaks in Haitian Creole while in the other class the teacher 
teaches and speaks in English. Both teachers have attended Professional learning with AP Ward and a coach to help 
them register and share with parents the main points of a Dual Language program and second language acquisition. 
We had several parent workshops at the school with the support of R-Bern's Myriam Augustin and Nicole Rosefort as 
well as speaker LiLy Cerat to welcome parents to our new program. A bulletin board resides in our school hallway 
across from our Main Office to educate parents about the Dual Language Program filled with pictures from our 
workshops, sharing with them our vision for the program and our increased parent involvement. Our Pre-K students 
learned the song "Chouconne: Ti Swezo Nan Bwa Ki Ta Pe Koute" and sang it for parents and students during several 
of our Kindergarten Open Houses and Auditorium presentations , exemplifying how easy children can acquire a 
second language when they are taught at early ages. Libraries in Haitian Creole have been brought as resources and 
materials have been translated to supplement curriculum and Curriculum Maps have been updated to include the 
Dual Language curriculum in Kindergarten. Haitian Creole reading and Math curriculum have been bought from Haiti's 
Education Department to supplement the Haitian Creole teaching and learning in our classrooms for the 2018-2019 
school year. For the 2018-2019 school year, we will open a Dual language class in the Second Grade. 

 

We departmentalized in Fifth grade with the students in that grade receiving daily instruction from two teachers on 
each grade that specialize in E.L.A/S.S and Math/Science. Teacher data reports reflect the subject areas that they 
teach and teachers are accountable for the subject areas for both classes. Teachers share discipline plans and 
homework plans as well as preps to provide them with opportunities to plan and discuss students. Classrooms are 
located next to each other for easy transitioning. 

For the 2018-2019 school year we will departmentalize in the Fourth Grade, so as to continue to strengthen teachers' 
practice in particular subject areas and promote further collaboration in lesson planning by the Fourth Grade 
teachers. 

 

Challenges 

● Within this diverse, bilingual, lower social economic school community, we struggle with parent involvement. Due 
to the long hours that our parents work , they cannot support or reinforce skills taught at school or help students 
complete homework, we struggle to provide before/after school care for students consistently to support academic 
challenges and deficits. 

● We register English as a New Language (ENL) students who get pulled out mid-year to visit their native country and 
return to the United States and back to our registers, during the latter part of the year. This has led to our attendance 
rate to become stagnant at 93% for the past several years. With the number of students entering and leaving the 
building we are afraid of further slippage. One of our goals will be to look to reinforce our strategies in increasing our 
attendance rates through supporting our schools' environment through increased community ties. 

● Student progress in ELA has increased this year. We continue to use the Teachers College Reading Curriculum 
School wide in Grades K-5. Teachers will be sent to Teachers College Professional Development Reading and Writing 
workshops to support the writing of lesson plans and differentiating among the unit and adding resources enrich the 
curriculum. Last year we piloted the Jump Math K-5 Curriculum in Grade 3. Research has proved that it produces high 
levels of student engagement one of the components we have sound developing during our classroom observation. 
The Jump Math curriculum is based on a teaching method called "guided discovery" whereby teachers provided 
students with the opportunity to solve problems and independently make their own discoveries while teaching 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          12 

 

 

through scaffolding with continuous assessment during instruction. Teachers will be provided with detailed lesson 
plans and professional development. At the end of the year, through our teachers' survey, we decided not to continue 
using Jump Math in Third grade as the main curriculum but to use it in the upcoming school year for Academic 
Intervention support. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          13 

 

 

School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 18K276 

School Configuration (2018-19) 

Grade Configuration 

PK,0K,01,02,03,04,
05 

Total Enrollment (2017-
18) 
English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 

616 

SIG Recipient (Y/N) 

Transitional Bilingual 

N/A 

Dual Language 

YES 

Self-Contained English as a Second 
Language 

Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) 

# Special Classes (ELA) 
# Special Classes (Math) 

# Visual Arts 
# Foreign Language 

% Title I Population 
% Free Lunch 
% Limited English Proficient 

52 
50 

 
 

% American Indian or Alaska Native 
% Hispanic or Latino 
% White 

# SETSS (ELA) 
# SETSS (Math) 
Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) 
# Music 
# Drama 
# CTE 
# Dance 

27 
22 

 
 

# Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) 
# Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) 

School Composition (2017-18) 

78.0%  % Attendance Rate 
74.2%  % Reduced Lunch 
14.1%  % Students with Disabilities 

Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) 

0.8% 
4.4% 
4.4% 

% Black or African American 
% Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 
% Multi-Racial 

Personnel (2015-16) 

Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) 
% of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate 
% Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 

7.86 
0% 
6% 

# of Assistant Principals (2016-17) 
% Teaching Out of Certification 
Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) 

Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) 

ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 

28.3%  Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 

Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 

83% 

Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-
17) 

Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) 

ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 
Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 
4 Year Graduation Rate 

Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 

N/A 
N/A 
N/A 

N/A 

Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 
US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 
6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) 
% ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures 
(2015-16) 

Reward 
In Good Standing 
Focus District 

Priority School 

Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) 

No 
Yes 
Yes 

Recognition 
Local Assistance Plan 
Focus School Identified by a Focus District 

No 

Focus Subgroups 

N/A 

Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) 

Elementary/Middle School 

Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) 

American Indian or Alaska Native 
Hispanic or Latino 
White 
Students with Disabilities 
Economically Disadvantaged 

American Indian or Alaska Native 
Hispanic or Latino 
White 
Students with Disabilities 
Economically Disadvantaged 

American Indian or Alaska Native 
Hispanic or Latino 
White 
Students with Disabilities 
Economically Disadvantaged 

American Indian or Alaska Native 
Hispanic or Latino 
White 
Students with Disabilities 
Economically Disadvantaged 

American Indian or Alaska Native 
Hispanic or Latino 
White 
Students with Disabilities 
Economically Disadvantaged 

American Indian or Alaska Native 
Hispanic or Latino 
White 
Students with Disabilities 
Economically Disadvantaged 

N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
NO 
NO 

Black or African American 
Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander 
Multi-Racial 
Limited English Proficient 
ALL STUDENTS 

Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) 
Black or African American 
Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander 
Multi-Racial 
Limited English Proficient 
ALL STUDENTS 

N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
NO 
NO 

Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) 

N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
YES 
High School 

Black or African American 
Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander 
Multi-Racial 
Limited English Proficient 
ALL STUDENTS 

Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) 

N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 

Black or African American 
Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander 
Multi-Racial 
Limited English Proficient 
ALL STUDENTS 

Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) 
Black or African American 
Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander 
Multi-Racial 
Limited English Proficient 
ALL STUDENTS 

N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 

Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) 
Black or African American 
Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander 
Multi-Racial 
Limited English Proficient 
ALL STUDENTS 

N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 

No 

N/A 

66 
64 

 
 

93.1% 
3.4% 
17.2% 

87.2% 
3.1% 
1.0% 

4 
2% 
8.4 

26.8% 

N/A 

N/A 
N/A 
N/A 

N/A 

N/A 
No 
No 

NO 
N/A 
N/A 
NO 
NO 

YES 
N/A 
N/A 
NO 
NO 

YES 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
YES 

N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 

N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 

N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          14 

 

 
 

Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans 

 

Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, 
motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged 
in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. 

Part 1 – Needs Assessment   

Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and 
formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not 
limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. 
Number responses accordingly. 
 
1.  What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element?  Indicate the data trends, source and year. 
2.  What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? 

Indicate the data trends, source and year. 

 
In analyzing our New York State Education Department (NYSED) exam results, 22% of all students performed at levels 
3 and 4 in ELA(English Language Arts) and 25% in 2017-2018. Using this data and looking at the student progress 
(Adjusted Growth percentile) for the school year 2018-2019 we were expected to: 

● Approach target, much closer in math when compared to our peer schools.  

Looking at Closing the Achievement Gap for 2017-2018 , we were expected to meet the following: 

● In ELA: meet the target for the Lowest Third, Self-Contained Integrated Co-Teaching/ Special Education Teacher 
Support Services (ICT/SETSS) and Black and Hispanic Males.  

● In Math: meet the target in Lowest Third and Black and Hispanic Males.  

According to our Quality Review from 2017-2018, we were Proficient in 1.1 and our focus area is in 1.2, developing 
teacher pedagogy and in 2.2 . Our teachers need to focus on the use of the instructional shifts and the competencies 
from the Danielson Framework for Teaching aligned to curricula to engage students in learning so that they can all 
produce meaningful work products. As a school, we need to continue to align our lessons and activities to the 
standards and curricula, ensuring that our students are producing meaningful work products.  

Our Benchmark Data from NYC SchoolNet for 2017-2018 also indicate that in ELA: 

Kindergarten: 53% Proficient 

First Grade: 46% Proficient 

Second Grade:23% Proficient 

 Third Grade: 23% Proficient 

 

We have made instructional decisions such as continuing to meet as Grade level teams as well as vertically twice a 
month to share practices and strategies that are being implemented effectively in classrooms. We collaborate with 
United Federation Teacher (UFT) Center and have monthly meetings whereby our teachers involved conduct whole 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          15 

 

school workshops on Looking at Student Work Protocols, the New Social Studies Standards, professional learning 
teams according to a needs assessment survey, revising curriculum and adapting current research to our teaching. We 
will continue to conduct teacher surveys and use our professional conversations to assess where our teachers need 
the most support to provide them with professional learning activities to help them be more effective in the writing 
and implementation of lesson as well as assessing students during instruction. 

 

Our Instructional Focus is to engage students in genuine discussions to respond to broad range of authentic texts. 

We will meet this focus by: 

 

Teachers: Collaborating to plan professional learning centered activities amongst themselves to improve their 
instruction as well as inter-visitations. 

Teachers learning to consistently ask students higher level order questions that will cause students to think, so as to 
deepen their understanding and engage them in discussion with one another.  

 

Administrators: 

Providing immediate actionable feedback to teachers after observations that will provide opportunities for teachers 
to refine their instructional strategies within the classrooms and better align activities to instructional outcomes, to 
become more effective teachers.  

 

Students: 

Respectfully making appropriate behavioral decisions within the building. 

Exhibiting the ability of going back into text to justify their answers or thinking as well as being able to engage with 
their peers in discussions formulating questions to ask that will challenge or deepen their understanding of a subject 
or content. 

 

 

 

 
Part 2 – Annual Goal 

Indicate  your  school’s  2018-19  goal  for  improving  student  outcomes  and  school  performance  that  addresses  this 
element  of  the  Framework  for  Great  Schools–Rigorous  Instruction.  Your  goal  must  be  responsive  to  the  identified 
priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-
bound.  
We will improve our literacy instruction focus with Assessment During Instruction in each and every reading and writing 
lesson resulting in improved student outcomes. 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          16 

 

 

By June 2019, 50% of our students will meet grade level reading F&P benchmarks as indicated below: 

Kindergarten: Reading Level D 

First Grade: Reading Level I 

Second Grade: Reading Level L 

Third Grade: Reading Level O 

Fourth Grade Grade: Reading Level R 

Fifth Grade: Reading Level U 

 

 

 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          17 

Target 
Group(s) 
Who will be 
targeted? 

Timeline 
What is the 
start and end 
date? 

Key Personnel 
Who is responsible 
for implementing 
and overseeing the 
activity/strategy? 

Students in 
Pre-K-5 

Sept. 2018-
June 2019 

Administration, 
Teachers and Math 
Cluster 

Pre-K-Grade 
5 th  

Sept. 2018-
June 2019 

Teachers and 
Administrators 

Pre-K-5 th 
Grade  

Sept 2018-
June 2019 

Monthly 
Grade 
Meetings 

Administration, 
LEAP Teacher, Math 
Cluster Teacher, 
Teachers 

 
Part 3a – Action Plan 

Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies 
your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for 
this Framework for Great Schools element, including: 

  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional 
development, and/or systems and structures needed 
to impact change. 
Strategies to address the needs of students with 
disabilities, English language learners, and other high-
need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-
credited, SIFE, STH). 

 

Rigorous Instruction  

● Instructional focus of questioning, discussion and self-
assessment will be embedded in the Teachers College Reading 
and Writing Curriculum for Grades K-5 PD in TCRWP. 

● Teachers will use different strategies in classrooms to deepen 
discussions and teach students to delve deeper by using higher 
order questioning through the use of Accountable Talk Stems, 
Socratic Circle, etc.  

 

● AIS (Academic Intervention Services) period will be 
embedded into the day during period 1 everyday, Monday – 
Friday provided by classroom teachers. 

● Professional Development will be provided to science and 
social studies teachers to ensure that curriculum is accessible 
to all learners and that there is increased hands-on learning 
and instructional recitation as well as the reading of complex 
text. Teachers will meet with classroom teachers on an ongoing 
basis during grade meetings to share Unit plans and collaborate 
on instruction. Teachers will meet with Fourth and Fifth grade 
teachers to help plan and refine Curriculum Maps and add 
resources for Departmentalization in those grades. 

 

  These Professional Development activities will include 

work with our Host school for Learning Partners Plus 
and the model teachers regarding best practices, using 
data to inform instruction and working with students in 
a Response to Intervention program. Cycles of Learning 
will be used among teachers to discuss Problems of 
practices and set goals and next steps on how to revise 
strategies used in classrooms to address challenges. 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          18 

● Sept. 2018-
June 2019 

Assistant principals 
and Principal 

● Ongoing 
basis 
throughout 
the year with 
review of 
Advance data 
amongst 
Administrators 
every 6 weeks 

 

● Teachers will be observed using Advance and provided with 
immediate feedback to improve their overall effectiveness and 
classroom practices. Components of Questioning and 
Discussions, Student Engagement and Assessment During 
instruction will be monitored closely for their alignment with 
the school’s Instructional Focus and direct link with building 
and implementing more rigorous lessons. 

Teachers in 
Grades K-5 
as well as 
Science and 
Social 
Studies 
Teachers 

 

- Provide targeted coaching assistance via the part time LEAP 
teacher part time Math cluster teacher to classroom teachers 
who have not achieved a rating of "effective" in all 
Components 1 and 3 consistently of the Danielson Framework 
for Teaching. 

 

*Teachers will engage in supporting students in conducting self 
assessment and peer assessment using exit slips and checklists. 
Students will also learn how to question each other and discuss 
with one another strategies they used to build comprehension 
of texts, find main idea, etc while teacher circulates and 
assesses during instruction offering students immediate 
feedback on discussions and attainment of learning target. 

  Professional Learning time will be allocated for work in 

the area of rigorous instruction. This professional 
learning will include: 

o  Working with data to inform instruction and 

All teaching 
staff 

Sept. 2018-
June 2019 

Principal, Assistant 
Principals, 
Professional 
Learning Committee 

flexible grouping 

o  Aligning lesson plans and curriculum maps to 
the CCLS (Common Core Learning Standards) 
and the instructional shifts in English Language 
Arts (ELA) 

o  Providing small group instruction during the 

school's AIS period to increase the numbers of 
students who achieve levels 3 and 4 on NYS 
(New York State) exams. 

  Actively engage families in the educational process so 
they can best support their children in achieving levels 
3 and 4 in ELA 

Classroom 
teachers 

Sept. 2018-
June 2019 

o  Utilize Parent Engagement time to provide 

demonstration lessons and debriefing sessions 
for families at all grade levels in ELA 

Principal, Assistant 
Principals, 
Instructional 
Leaders, Model 
Teachers 

 

 
 

 
3b – Parent and Family Engagement 
2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          19 

 

How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York 
State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible 
for implementation and oversight. 
Families will be engaged and supported through the use of a daily tracking homework chart placed in every classroom 
(K-5). The homework chart will represent each completed homework assignment completed by the students. For each 
full week of completed assignments, students will receive a specific colored "bee" plus a weekly certificate. The bees 
can be accumulated and exchanged for rewards in the school "BeeHive". 

 

 
Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 

Part  4a.  Indicate  resources  you will  leverage  to  achieve  this  annual  goal  and  implement this  action  plan,  including 
human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 
● Adjustments in school scheduling to accommodate classroom inter-visitations 

Per diem to support an inter-visitation schedule  

Paraprofessionals, including Arabic speaking para (translation for Arabic ENLS) to work with small groups of students 
in the Response to Intervention program and small group instruction in classes 

● Adjustments in the 2018-2019 Professional Learning calendar to include collaborative planning, curriculum 
mapping and strengthening effectiveness in Danielson components 1a, 1e, 3b and 3d 

● Refinement of the school’s Response To Intervention Team, specifically: 

1. Adjustments to the Professional Learning calendar to include biweekly Response To Intervention Team meetings 

2. Adjustments to the daily AIS (Academic Intervention Services) schedule, allowing for students to participate in a 
pull-out program, including Arabic paraprofesssional in classes with Arabic speaking ENLs. 

● Implementation of a research based literacy intervention program for the purposes of Response To Intervention for 
the ICT (Integrated Co-Teaching), special education teachers to utilize during AIS, greater evidence of progress 
monitoring of all students for all students, continuation of monitoring all students and analyzing data using Teachers 
College Running Records, and Benchmark Data. 

● Alignment of Parent Engagement time to support discussion of progress reports, and school-home link suggestions 

 

 

 
Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 
Title III, 

X 

Tax Levy 

X 

Title I SWP 

 

Title I TA 

 

Immigrant 

Title II, 
Part A 

X 

Title III, 
Part A 

 

 

C4E 

 

21st Century 

Grant 

 
Part 5 – Progress Monitoring  

 

SIG 

 

PTA Funded 

 

In Kind 

 

Other 

Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement 
planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 
● By January 2019, an increase of 3% of students will have reached the targeted goal for reading levels, as assessed 
by Fountas and Pinnell Running Record levels in Grades K-5. 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          20 

 

 

Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January 
Regents, etc.) 
Teacher's College Running Records 4x a year starting September 2018-June 2019. 

 
Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action 
plan, if applicable. 

 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          21 

 

Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans 

 
Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and 
school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. 

Part 1 – Needs Assessment   

Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and 
formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not 
limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. 
Number responses accordingly. 
 
1.  What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element?  Indicate the data trends, source and year. 
2.  What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? 

Indicate the data trends, source and year. 

3.  What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? 
We communicate high expectations about teaching and learning to all of our students. There are Readers are 
Achievers Bulletins Boards in every classroom encouraging students to read, Students are awarded Readers of the 
Month quarterly and Students of the Monthly. Their pictures are posted on bulletin boards on the second and third 
floors. Classroom doors are decorated exemplifying a theme that teacher and students collaborated and shared 
different ideas. Using a student created rubric, the SGO members choose the most educational door in each grade. 

Our parents are encouraged to participate as volunteers in our cafeterias and with our Parent Coordinator for alliance 
to further ensure safety and cohesion throughout our environment. Our parents through the PTA and School 
Leadership Team are asked to encourage each other to be active throughout our school to volunteer during our 
Senior Dance activities, Holiday shows and other school activities, as well as complete our Learning Environment 
Survey. 

 

Based on our performance on the New York State Assessment, MoSL (Measures of Student Learning), Performance 
Tasks and delving continuously through our data, we provide academic intervention and RTI to our struggling learners 
across classrooms and progress monitor every 4 to 6 weeks to ensure that teachers are providing ongoing 
differentiated support to meet the need of the students. To foster increased communication among parent and 
school, parents receive Progress Reports from teachers thrice yearly relating key information about students 
academic levels and challenges as well as feedback to improve challenging outcomes and /or personal behaviors. 
Monthly Workshops provided for parents by outside venues, teachers and Parent Coordinator keep them informed on 
Nutrition, CCLS, behavior management, PBIS (Positive Behavioral Intervention System), School Events, DOE initiatives 
and Academic Resources. 

Our OORS Data delineates an overall decrease from 2016/17-2017/18 by 34 of Level 1-5 incidents. PPO (Principals 
Performance Observation) show that we are moving continuously towards student discussion, questioning, and 
engagement. 

Our PBIS ( Positive Behavioral Intervention System) ensures that our students are consistently making the right 
decisions throughout the day. We begin our school year with an Anti-Bullying Assembly whereby our school mascot, 
the bee (A teacher dressed as a bee), is introduced to our students. The bee signifies our matrix: Bee Respectful, Bee 
Safe, Bee Responsible Bee Prepared. Our students are reminded each day of theses expectations. Every Friday 
Teachers and students are expected to wear their PBIS t-shirts setting a positive tone to the building. A climate of 
cohesiveness, A culture of students that are repeatedly working to make appropriate decisions.  

We have an active School Leadership team that meets monthly and whose team members participate in school 
events and are abreast of and in the making of certain school decisions. 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          22 

 

With the shift in focus to restorative practices in the most recent edition of the NYC DOE discipline code, there has 
been a high level of interest in "restorative circles" practice from elementary schools across the city. In response, 
Morningside Center developed the 4Rs circles Supplement, drawing on their gold standard 4Rs Program to teach the 
skills needed for students to engage in circles at a foundational level. 

The 4Rs is a unique program that combines excellent children's literature with social and emotional skill building.The 
program was developed to engage young people in learning essential social and emotional skills to support educators 
in making their schools (more) productive and respectful. 

A team of teachers and support staff have been trained in the use of Restorative Justice (circles). Teachers implement 
lessons three times a week, beginning on Monday mornings. 

 

 

 

 

 
Part 2 – Annual Goal 

Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this 
element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the 
identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, 
and Time-bound. 
We will strive to ensure that our students, staff and parents feel safe and supported within our school community. 
This will be evidenced by the results of our School Survey under Strong Family and Community Ties 

 

By June 2019, 3% more parents and teachers will participate in our workshops aimed at social-emotional learning, ESL 
strategies, homework help, conflict resolution, restorative practices...ensuring that they feel more secure and safe 
within our school. 

 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          23 

Target 
Group(s) 
Who will be 
targeted? 

Timeline 
What is the 
start and 
end date? 

Key Personnel 
Who is responsible 
for implementing 
and overseeing the 
activity/strategy? 

All students  September 
2018-June 
2019 

Administrators, 
Teachers,Parent 
Coordinator 

 
Part 3a – Action Plan 

Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies 
your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for 
this Framework for Great Schools element, including: 

  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional 

 

development, and/or systems and structures needed to 
impact change. 
Strategies to address the needs of students with 
disabilities, English language learners, and other high-
need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, 
SIFE, STH). 

We will develop an after-school program in conjunction with the 
ESDVP (Extended School Day Violence Prevention) Grant that we 
have been awarded to support students both academically and 
socially-emotionally.The school will collaborate with Leadership 
Within this program, students will be provided with snack 
immediately following dismissal and then, homework support for 
an hour and a half. Following that students will be engaged in 
enrichment activities such as Chess, drama, dance, and chorus. 
The grant provides 12 weeks of classroom intervention, which 
includes group discussions among students and counselors, skits, 
etc... 

All students will have the opportunity to engage within a 
diversified group of students and adults. 

Our students and teachers will participate in Restorative 
Practices a new District initiative in our building that will train 
teachers and administrators to take on a new way of conflict 
resolution. 

It is built on an engaging, interactive curriculum that uses great 
children's literature as springboard. In weekly lessons, teachers 
engage students in reading, writing, discussion, and skills 
practice aimed at fostering caring, responsible behavior, 
including that will help students and staff listen to each other 
better, build assertiveness, deal with diversity, cooperate with 
one another, learn how to problem solve, build community 
through classrooms and understand and learn how to handle 
feelings better. 

 

We will continue to have our Bee Squad (selected group of 
exemplary students) support in the Cafeteria and throughout the 
school. 

Quaterly assemblies will continue to recognize student 
achievements and progress, exemplary attendance and improve 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          24 

 

parental involvement. Students' pictures will be displayed on our 
bulletins boards in the foyer of the building. 

 

 
 

 
3b – Parent and Family Engagement 

How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to 
support  the  whole  child?  Include  the  timeline  and  identify  key  personnel  and  stakeholders  responsible  for 
implementation and oversight. 
Families will be engaged and supported through the use of a daily tracking homework chart placed in every classroom 
(K-5). The homework chart will represent each completed homework assignment completed by the students. For each 
full week of completed assignments, students will receive a specific colored "bee" plus a weekly certificate. The bees 
can be accumulated and exchanged for rewards in the school "Bee Hive". 

 

 
Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 
Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including 
human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 
ESDVP Grant funds will be placed in Galaxy to fund teacher per session by Century 21 Grant Offices and Principal will 
manage funds in Galaxy to match to fund this program in order to support PBIS goals within the school and build 
student independence, responsibility, citizenship, social emotional growth and self esteem.  

 
Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 

X 

Tax Levy 

 

C4E 

X 

X 

Title I SWP 

21st Century 

Grant 

 

 

 
Part 5 – Progress Monitoring  

Title I TA 

SIG 

 

 

Title II, 
Part A 

PTA Funded 

 

 

Title III, 
Part A 

In Kind 

 

 

Title III, 

Immigrant 

Other 

Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement 
planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 
By January 2019, we will conduct an educator/student survey questioning main points of the program. We will 
analyze the results to measure the effectiveness of the programs, revise and adjust, to ensure that we will meet our 
goal by June 2019. 

 
Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 
OORS data will be used in January 2019, and June 2019 to measure the number of infractions and revise our goals as 
well as revise the resources used to support positive student decisions and behaviors. 

 

Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action 
plan, if applicable. 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          25 

 

Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans 

Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success 
and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional 
development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. 

 

Part 1 – Needs Assessment   

Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and 
formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not 
limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. 
Number responses accordingly. 
 
1.  What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element?  Indicate the data trends, source and year. 
2.  What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? 

Indicate the data trends, source and year. 

Based on a comprehensive assessment of student achievement data, Advance Measures of Teacher Practice data, 
School Survey responses, review of the School Quality Snapshot and Quality Guide, the most recent Quality Review 
narrative and anecdotal evidence, the following has surfaced: 

Strengths: 

• Student performance as measured by NYS ELA and Mathematics exams revealed that P.S. 276 has met our target in 
closing the achievement gap (2016-17 School Quality Guide) 

• Attendance rates for students (93%) and teachers (94%) is high (2017-18 School Quality Guide) 

• All teachers at P.S. 276 achieved ratings of Effective or Highly Effective; One teacher rated Developing (Advance 
data) 

• Review of the 2017-18 Professional Learning calendar reveals that teachers were provided with opportunities to 
work collaboratively during more than 90% of the Professional Learning time. 

• Teachers collaboratively plan, revise curriculum maps, and have compiled grade-wide additional resources to use 
during instruction  

• P.S. 276 has implemented a school wide Academic Intervention period during each day, where students work in 
small groups and instruction is targeted to their specific needs 

 

• For the 2018-19 school year, P.S. 276 will continue to be part of the Learning Partners Plus program with a new 
cohort school Q65 in District 27. 

  P.S. 276 continue to be part of the CARP (Collaborative Action Project) for the 2018-2019 school year. CARP is 

a tool that will be used for professional learning among its members to enhance their practices instructional 
and professionally within their community to improve themselves. They will meet to develop way to address 
their problems and improve their practice through action based research. 

  The data team reviewed math scores based on the previous year's state exam. Overall the score though they 
showed a slight increase last year, are still not showing major or consistent growth. We decided to look into a 
different approach to teaching Math to see if that would help to improve the stability in our scores and also 
help our teachers in teaching Math more with a more consistent approach. We have chosen to continue using 
Jump Math in Grade 2/3 for the 2018-2019 school year during our Academic Intervention support period in 
the mornings.. 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          26 

 

  The data showed that students needed deeper understanding of operations and algebraic thinking. These 
standards were lower than other mathematical standards. Further investigation found that the underlying 
problem for students was number sense and place value. We will also be part of Algebra for All in Grade 5 this 
year. 

  The results from our Learning Walks showed that students need to receive specific instruction based on 

needs. Teachers need more of the facilitators and gradually release the learning to students. Students are to 
work more independently, have more student to student conversations to reinforce the S.O.L.V.E Method 
which is a school wide initiative to solving math problems. 

Priority Needs (as related to this element): 

• A more comprehensive review of MOTP (Measure of Teacher Practice) data on Advance revealed that while ratings 
on Domains 1, 2 and 4 for Danielson’s Framework for Teaching were within small percentage points of each other (3-
5% Developing, the remaining either Effective or Highly Effective), that percentage deviated for Domain 3, Instruction. 
A drill down of each component indicates that while component 3c (Engaging Students in Learning) was consistent 
with the other Domain ratings, components 3b (Using Questioning and Discussion) and 3d (Using Assessment in 
Instruction) had the greatest number of Developing ratings, at 20% and 18% respectively. 

• A review of the most recent available achievement data shows that students in all classes and subgroups showed 
growth during the 2017-18 school year. A more comprehensive review of student data indicates that both horizontal 
and vertical growth is not consistent. For example, Kindergarten End of Year MoSL (Measure os Student Learning) 
data shows an overall growth of 53%; however each classroom on the grade had growth percentages ranging from 
23% growth to 60% growth. This trend exists for grades K-5. 

 

 
Part 2 – Annual Goal 

Indicate  your  school’s  2018-19  goal  for  improving  student  outcomes  and  school  performance  that  addresses  this 
element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified 
priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-
bound. 
By June 2019, there will be a 3% increase in the number of teachers moving from "Developing" to "Effective" or "Highly 
Effective" as demonstrated by Advance Measures of Teacher Practice (MOTP) Ratings.. 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          27 

 
Part 3a – Action Plan 

Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies 
your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for 
this Framework for Great Schools element, including: 

  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional 

 

development, and/or systems and structures needed to 
impact change. 
Strategies to address the needs of students with 
disabilities, English language learners, and other high-
need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, 
SIFE, STH). 

Teachers will conduct classroom inter-visitations and debriefing 
sessions, focusing on Danielson components 3b and 3d 

Target 
Group(s) 
Who will be 
targeted? 

Timeline 
What is the 
start and 
end date? 

Key Personnel 
Who is responsible 
for implementing 
and overseeing the 
activity/strategy? 

Sept. 2018-
June 2019 

School Leaders, 
Instructional 
Leaders, Teachers 

Teachers 
with ratings 
of 
“developing” 
for 
components 
3b and 3d 

The focus of collaborative planning will shift from instructional 
materials to pedagogical practices, such as planning questions 
and assessment during instruction 

All classroom 
teachers 

Sept. 2018-
June 2019 

A portion of Professional Learning time will be designated for 
looking at student work (both vertically and horizontally), so that 
teachers can calibrate their instruction and classroom 
expectations. 

Implementation of a school wide Response to Intervention 
program, providing targeted assistance to struggling learners 
(research indicates that a student requiring intervention must 
learn at a faster pace than his/her peers in order to “catch up”) 

A plan of action developed by breaking down Go Math learning 
objectives into specific "I Can" learning targets. These targets 
helped teachers see specifically what needed to be planned and 
taught. 

Students also need to be aware of the learning targets to 
improve their own learning. The learning targets used to create 
exit tickets and Checklists. 

Teachers planning small group instruction for specific strategies 
based on data from summative and formative assessments 

Teachers create groups and individual tools for students to use 
be more independent in their group work. The tools provide 
strategies for tackling math word problems and computation.  

All classroom 
teachers 

Sept. 2018-
June 2019 

School Leaders, 
Instructional 
Leaders, Teachers 

School Leaders, 
Instructional 
Leaders, Teachers 

Sept. 2018-
June 2019 

School Leaders, RTI 
Team, Classroom 
Teachers, LPP Team 

General 
education 
students 
whose 
student 
achievement 
data places 
them in the 
lowest third 
grade-wide 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          28 

 

Problem of the Day to be used three times a week and "Number 
Talk" strategies will be used twice a week during the 2017-2018 
school year. 

Learning Walks to be conducted every three to four weeks 
focusing on small group instruction, guided reading, Math 
workshop model and classroom environment. 

Teachers will engage in weekly/monthly team meetings and two 
cycles of lesson studies that explicitly focus on elements of 
Component 3b. Teachers will keep agendas and minutes to 
weekly/monthly grade meetings and hand them in to 
administration, detailing discussion on student work, shared 
goals aligned to school's instructional focus and feedback from 
learning walks. 

Learning Partner Team (LPP) will collaboratively plan with 
teachers to plan focused inter-visitations to classrooms to 
observe lessons, take low inference notes and then debrief 
about lesson, structure, meeting of Danielson component 3b, 

AP and Principal uses cycle of observation to ensure that 
teachers receive continuous feedback that will further 
strengthen their practice resulting in improved student progress 
and achievement. 

 

 
 

 
3b – Parent and Family Engagement 

How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies 
to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and 
identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. 
Families will be engaged and supported through the use of a daily tracking homework chart placed in every classroom 
(K-5). The homework chart will represent each completed homework assignment completed by the students. For each 
full week of completed assignments, students will receive a specific colored "bee" plus a weekly certificate. The bees 
can be accumulated and exchanged for rewards in the school "BeeHive". 

 

 
Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 

Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including 
human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 
● Adjustments in school scheduling to accommodate classroom inter-visitations 

Per diem to accommodate inter-visitation schedule 

Per session for debriefing sessions, where applicable 

● Adjustments in the 2017-18 Professional Learning calendar to account for the shifts in collaborative focus 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          29 

 

● Refinement of the school’s RTI (Response to Intervention)Team, specifically: 

1. Adjustments to the Professional Learning calendar to include biweekly RTI Team meetings 

2. Adjustments to the daily AIS schedule, allowing for students to participate in a pull-out program 

3. Implementation of a research based literacy intervention program for the purposes of RTI 

 
Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 

X 

Tax Levy 

 

C4E 

X 

X 

Title I SWP 

21st Century 

Grant 

 

 

Title I TA 

SIG 

 

 

Title II, 
Part A 

X 

Title III, 
Part A 

PTA Funded 

 

In Kind 

 

 

Title III, 

Immigrant 

Other 

 
Part 5 – Progress Monitoring  

Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement 
planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 
 

By June 2019, there will be (a) a 2.5% decrease in ratings of “Developing” for components 3b and 3d during 
observations that have shifted to ratings of either “Effective” or “Highly Effective” and (b) a 2.5% point decrease in 
variability in student achievement data both vertically and horizontally.  

This will be measured against 2018-19 Advance data for PS 276 teachers, using the Advance Measures of Teacher 
Practice from September 2018 to June 2019. 

 
Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 
MOTP and Advance Data will be used to assess teacher progress starting September 2019 and ending June 2019. 

 

Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action 
plan, if applicable. 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          30 

 

Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans 

 

Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and 
nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional 
support that drives student achievement. 
 
Part 1 – Needs Assessment   

Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and 
formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not 
limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. 
Number responses accordingly. 
 
1.  What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element?  Indicate the data trends, source and year. 
2.  What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? 

Indicate the data trends, source and year. 

According to Quality Review Based upon our review of the Advance System and from our End of year Summative 
conferences and a survey conducted with teachers, the area we are in need of improvement is Questioning and 
Discussion and Assessment. During our summative conferences, we shared the need for teachers to embed Depth Of 
Knowledge questions within lesson plans to ask to students during lessons that will cause them to reflect and deepen 
their comprehension of the content as well as the need to model for students strategies to use in discussions that will 
enable them to explain and justify their reasoning and conclusions based on specific text based evidence. We also 
discussed the need to monitor student learning during instruction and provide immediate, constructive feedback that 
will further learning that will guide in improving performance and teaching students how to self and peer assess. 
Eventually building the effective aspects of these two components, culminate in increased student engagement and 
will support greater, measurable student progress. In summary, the teachers are able to effectively direct and lead 
instruction; they require strengthening in releasing to students the ownership of their learning, as assessed by 
Advance observation data. Based on our School Survey, teachers feel that they need a greater input when the 
administrative team are selecting instructional materials used in classrooms and in developing instructional materials. 
This has caused us to rethink and revise how our Instructional Team work. Usually our team meets at Cabinet and we 
share initiatives and then they meet with teachers during Grade Team meetings and replicate our Agenda. Due to the 
results of the Survey, we feel that this method has left many teachers feeling out of the loop so we asked them which 
mode of communication would best meet their needs when it comes to new materials in their classrooms. We 
decided to share during PLC and then have the UFT Chair put out a survey for teachers to complete whereby they can 
choose and then we can share their responses and discuss this openly at another PLC meeting. 

 

 
Part 2 – Annual Goal 

Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this 
element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the 
identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, 
and Time-bound. 
By June 2019, 80% of all teachers will show a normed understanding of the Danielson Framework with an increase of 
10% of teachers receiving an effective rating in Components 3d (Assessment In Instruction) as measured by 
observations conducted by school administrators and recorded in Advance. 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          31 

 
Part 3a – Action Plan 

Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies 
your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for 
this Framework for Great Schools element, including: 

  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional 

 

development, and/or systems and structures needed to 
impact change. 
Strategies to address the needs of students with 
disabilities, English language learners, and other high-
need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, 
SIFE, STH). 

Target 
Group(s) 
Who will be 
targeted? 

Timeline 
What is the 
start and 
end date? 

Key Personnel 
Who is responsible 
for implementing 
and overseeing the 
activity/strategy? 

Beginning September 2018 and ending in June 2019, teachers 
will identify their professional goals based on a review of their 
MOTP score tracker and last years’ observation results. 

Pre-K-5 
students 

Teachers will attend inter-visitations amongst within the building 
and at other school to observe components 1e, 3b, 3c and 3d, 
and debrief and assess upon its implementation within their own 
classrooms.  

Pre-K-5 
Grade 
students 

Monday Professional Development activities will be geared 
toward teacher survey results needs assessment for building 
greater effectiveness to maximize teacher potential, and improve 
teacher practice and student progress. 

Pre-K-5 
Grade 
students 

Teachers and Administrators will continue to have immediate 
feedback after observations as well as interim feedback about 
improving strategies used in the classroom and around the 
building to increase student engagement and build academic 
rigor. 

Pre-K -5 th 
Grade 
students 

Sept. 2018- 
ongoing 
until June 
2019 

Sept. 2018-
June 2019 

Assistant Principals, 
Teachers, TLP 
teachers 

Administrators, LPP 
Teachers, Coaches, 
TLP Teaches  

Sept.-2018-
June 2019 

Administrators, LPP 
Teachers, Coaches 

Sept. 2018-
June 2019 

Administrators, LPP 
Teachers, Coaches 

Teachers will conduct inter-visitations to observe, take low 
inference notes and debrief on assessment during instruction as 
well as on the use of resources such as checklists, peer and self 
assessment tools, exit tickets.... 

 

Our schedule is built to ensure that all grades have a common 
planning time. Special Ed and ENL teams will continue to meet 
with the English as a New Language team having a double 
planning period once a month to support professional learning 
with RBERN staff or the English as a New Language teacher. 
Funding will also be set aside for external and in-house PD for 
teachers, paraprofessionals and administrators. 

 
 

 
3b – Parent and Family Engagement 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          32 

 

How  will  your  school  engage  parents/families  and  support  their  understanding  of  Effective  School  Leadership  and 
strategies  to  promote  parent  leadership  and  engagement  in  order  to  support  their  children  at  home?  Include  the 
timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. 
Families will be engaged and supported through the use of a daily tracking homework chart placed in every classroom 
(K-5). The homework chart will represent each completed homework assignment completed by the students. For each 
full week of completed assignments, students will receive a specific colored "bee" plus a weekly certificate. The bees 
can be accumulated and exchanged for rewards in the school "Bee Hive". 

 

 
Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 
Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including 
human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 
Title 1 SWP funding and Title III will be used for absence coverage for professional development and for per session 
meetings after school when applicable. 

 
Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 

X 

Tax Levy 

X 

Title I SWP 

 

C4E 

 

21st Century 

Grant 

 
Part 5 – Progress Monitoring  

 

 

Title I TA 

SIG 

 

 

Title II, 
Part A 

PTA Funded 

 

 

Title III, 
Part A 

In Kind 

 

 

Title III, 

Immigrant 

Other 

Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement 
planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 
By February 2019, there will be a 5% increase in component ratings for 3b (Questioning and Discussion) using 
Danielson's Framework for Teaching, as measured by Advance observations and Measures of Teacher Practice. 

 
Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 
Advance Observations and MOTP will be used to assess progress in January 2019 and June 2019. 

 

Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action 
plan, if applicable. 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          33 

 

Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans 

 
Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a 
welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. 
 
Part 1 – Needs Assessment   

Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and 
formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not 
limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. 
Number responses accordingly. 
 
1.  What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element?  Indicate the data trends, source and year. 
2.  What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? 

Indicate the data trends, source and year. 

P.S. 276 demonstrated proficiency in the area of communicating high expectations to staff, students and parents and 
establishes a culture of learning as identified by component 3.4 of the 2017-2018 Quality Review. The reviewer 
observed that " ongoing communication and support has increased teachers' understanding and awareness of the 
schools' leaders expectations around teaching and learning. The schools' communication with families provides 
opportunities and support for them to understand student progress towards meeting those expectations " for college 
and career readiness. 

Parents observed in the School Survey, 89% reported that school staff regularly communicated about how they can 
further support their children's learning and staff work closely with them to meet their child's academic progress. 

An area of challenge we identified both from the Survey and discussed in our School Leadership Team meetings is the 
frequency that eventhough parents are invited to functions in our school through our yearly "Literacy Launch" in 
October, or classroom presentation, our Multicultural Show or when our Parent Coordinator has workshops inviting 
parents to visit classrooms to observe instruction, very few show up. On Tuesday Afternoons, Two teachers on a 
grade started the year by sharing with parents that they would be modeling Math and Reading lessons for them to 
come and observe. Only one parent on a grade showed up. We feel we can further strengthen student progress by 
further building our number of parent engagement. Our number of parents that attended PTA meetings and parents 
functions set up by our ESL teacher have increased a double fold over the 2015-2016 school year as measured by the 
sign in sheets. Overall, we set to further increase those numbers because our Survey depict 36% of parents who still 
feel the need to be asked to volunteer time to support the school and help in school-wide events 

 

School’s Strengths: 

● School Messenger alerts parents to school functions and closings. 

● Parent Teachers’ Association meets monthly to keep parents abreast of school activities and expectations. 

● Student Progress Report, are sent to parents 3 times a year, prior to Parent Teacher Conferences. 

● Grade Newsletters are sent to parents by grade each month. 

● Parent Coordinator meets and greets parents daily and share with parents, strategies to help students adapt and 
succeed in school. 

● Parent Workshops are coordinated monthly in partnership with community based organizations. 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          34 

 

● Tuesday Parent Meetings invite parents to observe classroom lessons and share strategies to support students at 
home in completing HW. 

● Parent Volunteers support students, teachers and school community daily in cafeteria, morning and afternoon 
dismissal and other office duties. 

● Century 21 ESVDP After-school Program provides academic, cultural and sports enrichment to students after-
school. 

School’s Needs: 

● Increased Parent Involvement 

● After-school programs for students 

● Workshops on ESL, Technology for ENL parents 

 

 
Part 2 – Annual Goal 

Indicate  your  school’s  2018-19  goal  for  improving  student  outcomes  and  school  performance  that  addresses  this 
element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the 
identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and 
Time-bound.  
By June 2019, there will be an 8% increase in the number of parents who attend school-wide parent events, as 
documented by sign in sheets and compared to 2018-19 parent attendance data.  

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          35 

 
Part 3a – Action Plan 

Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies 
your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for 
this Framework for Great Schools element, including: 

  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional 

 

development, and/or systems and structures needed to 
impact change. 
Strategies to address the needs of students with 
disabilities, English language learners, and other high-
need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, 
SIFE, STH). 

Target 
Group(s) 
Who will be 
targeted? 

Timeline 
What is the 
start and 
end date? 

Key Personnel 
Who is responsible 
for implementing 
and overseeing the 
activity/strategy? 

We meet and greet parents and children every morning in our 
foyer with a "Happy Monday", "Happy Tuesday", ...." or just a " 
Good Morning, I was waiting for you, welcome to school today... 
Have a great day parents ... See you later.." For us, This start our 
children's day off right, make our parents feel assured that their 
kids are going to be in a nurturing environment but the biggest 
secret of all is that it starts off our day right too. makes us 
remember why we went into the profession of teaching. 

All Parents 
and 
Guardians 

September 
2018-June 
2019 

 

 

Administrators, 
Teachers, Dean, 
Parent Coordinator, 
Guidance Counselor, 
Secretaries 

 

Parent Teacher Conferences: 

 

We encourage all parents to Parent Teacher Conferences (PTC) 
from "Meet the Teacher Night" we share with parents the 
importance of PTC. At Meet the Teacher Night all parents are 
given a copy of the Common Core Learning Standards for their 
children based on the grade the child is entering. Parents are 
also given a copy of the Learning Targets in child- friendly 
language using "I can statements..." 

Communication with parents begin during the month of October 
through our School Messenger. A memo is sent out to parents 
about PTC as well as "Questions to Ask at a Parent Teacher 
Conference." Teachers in grades 4-5 speak to their students in 
preparing work in their Skill Builders folders and Portfolios. The 
work compiled reflects each academic subject. Students prepare 
to discuss on their strengths and skills that they are working 
towards achieving at the conference with their parents. Teachers 
and parents at the conference will agree on the timeline to 
receive communication to review and discuss students' progress 
and develop new goals if necessary. A sign in sheet is kept by all 
of the teachers and is handed in at the end of the night to the 
Parent Coordinator to be tallied to measure the success of the 
PTC against previous PTCs. 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          36 

 

 

Teacher's will make appointments with parents on their prep 
periods if the parent is not able to attend Parent Teacher 
Conferences.  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

All parents 
and 
Guardians 

Sept. 2018-
June 2019 

Administration, 
Teachers, Parent 
Coordinator 

 

Monthly 

All parents 
and 
Guardians 

Sept. 2018-
June 2019 

Administration, 
Teachers, Parent 
Coordinator 

Through-out 
the year 

Parent Workshops: 

 

The Parent Coordinator conducts parents workshops monthly for 
the parents. Speakers are often brought in to address issues such 
as Breast Cancer Awareness and How to Support your child who 
is on the Spectrum. Parent Workshops include: Cornell University 
Health and Nutritional Workshops, Exercise and Healthy Living 
Workshop, Homework Help, Addressing Challenging Behaviors., 
Math Workshop: What Parents can Do at Home to help students 
with Math, Exploring the Achieve NYC Student Handbook. 
Supporting Student Daily Attendance, Preparing for College and 
Careers, Parents are Teachers Too Workshop, The Special 
Education Process, Fire Safety, and Turning Five: The 
Kindergarten Process. 

Workshops are offered mostly after-school to meet the needs of 
working parents. Parents are informed through our School 
Messenger, phone calls, class newsletters, and school posters. 

Parent Volunteers: 

 

Parents volunteer in our building to make our events more 
special. Whether its for our Multicultural Celebration, Staff 
versus Parents Basketball Game, Field Day, Literacy Launch, 
Holiday Show they take on an active role to ensure that the kids 
see them as our partners in learning. Parents also join me 
monthly as part of the School Leadership Team. We remind 
parents during PTA (Parent Teacher Association) meetings to 
come and attend our SLT (School Leadership) meetings as a guest 
to hear the topics we discuss, to keep them informed about how 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          37 

All Parents 
and  

Sept. 2018-
June 2019 

Teachers 

Guardians 

Through-out 
the school 
year 

 

we make decisions that ultimately make changes within the 
school community. 

 

Parents are invited to attend class trips and sit in classrooms to 
observe teachers teach ELA and Math lessons so as to note the 
strategies that teachers use and the skills that children are 
learning to further support at home. 

Parent Outreach (Tuesdays 2:20-3:00) 

 

We work with our parents to educate them on reading, the 
importance of reading to/and with their children each day. We 
encourage parents to stay after the 2:20 dismissal on Tuesdays in 
grades Pre-K - K and read with their child in the classroom from 
our classroom Libraries and our school Library. Parents are able 
to read to their child using books written in their native language 
which we have stocked in our school in Haitian Creole, Arabic, 
Urdu and Spanish.  

 

Teachers are also responsible to make contact with parents 
every Tuesday documenting their outreach using a Parent 
Contact Log, extending communication and keeping parents 
abreast of student progress, social emotional status, behavioral 
difficulties, etc. 

 

 
 

 
3b – Parent and Family Engagement 

If  any,  list  the  Community  Based  Organizations  or  other  partnerships  that  support  parent/family  and  community 
engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. 
Families will be engaged and supported through the use of a daily tracking homework chart placed in every classroom 
(K-5). The homework chart will represent each completed homework assignment completed by the students. For each 
full week of completed assignments, students will receive a specific colored "bee" plus a weekly certificate. The bees 
can be accumulated and exchanged for rewards in the school "Bee Hive". 

 

 
Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 

Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including 
human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 
● Ongoing partnerships with Parent/Guardian to address areas of concerns 

● Coordinate schedule with Key personnel to implement workshops 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          38 

 

Continued conversations with parents to build a cadre of parents from each and all languages that will support each 
other and act as translators when necessary to meetings and DOE events. 

 
Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 

X 

Tax Levy 

X 

Title I SWP 

 

C4E 

 

21st Century 

Grant 

 
Part 5 – Progress Monitoring  

 

 

Title I TA 

SIG 

 

 

Title II, 
Part A 

X 

Title III, 
Part A 

PTA Funded 

 

In Kind 

 

 

Title III, 

Immigrant 

Other 

Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement 
planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 
 

By January 2019 there will be a 3% increase of number of parents who are involved in school based activities from 
Parent Teacher Conferences and Parent Teacher Association Meetings 

Workshop attendance numbers, as assessed by attendance and sign in sheets from these meetings and events. 

 
Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 
Attendance and Sign In Sheets, Agenda, Minutes will be collected and reviewed to determine and assess progress in 
January 2018 and June 2019. 

 

Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action 
plan, if applicable. 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          39 

 

Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS)  

(Required for All Schools) 

  

Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services 
(AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records 
need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area 
listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. 
 

Type of program or 
strategy (e.g. 
repeated readings, 
interactive writings, 
etc.) 

AIS in the morning 
during period 1, AIS 
period during day 
with a Special Ed. 
teacher 

 
AIS in the morning 
during period 1, AIS 
period during day 
with a Special Ed. 
teacher 

 
AIS in the morning 
during period 1.  

 

Method for delivery 
of service (e.g. small 
group, one-to-one, 
tutoring, etc.) 

When the service is 
provided (e.g. during 
the school day, 
before or after 
school, etc.) 

Small group in cycles 

During school day 

 

 

Small group in cycles 

During school day 

 

 

Small group 

During school day 

 

 

AIS in the morning 
during period 1 

 

Small group 

During school day 

 

 

AIS in the morning, 
during period, during 
lunch periods 

Small group as 
needed 

 

 

During school day 

 

Type of Academic 
Intervention Service 
(AIS) 

English Language 
Arts (ELA) 

Mathematics 

Science 

Social Studies 

At-risk services (e.g. 
provided by the 
Guidance Counselor, 
School Psychologist, 
Social Worker, etc.) 

Criteria for 
determining AIS 
services (For 
additional guidance, 
refer to NYSED’s 
memo.) 
Students who scored 
the lowest third on 
the NYS ELA exam 
and the MOSL 
assessment 

 
Students who scored 
at lowest third on the 
NYS Math exam 

 

Students who scored 
at Level 1 or2 on the 
NYS Science exam 
and in MOSL 
assessments. 

 
Students who scored 
a Level 1 and/or 2 on 
MOSL assessments 
the NYS ELA and 
Math exams 

 
For all students who 
are demonstrate 
need as per 
PBIS(Positive 
Behavior Intervention 
Services) records, 
BIPs(Behavior 
InterventionPlans), 
and OORS(Online 
Occurrence 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          40 

 

 

Recording System) 
data 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          41 

 

Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH)  

 

Directions: 
-  All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. 
-  All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. 
 
Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) 
As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the 
federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and 
report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support 
your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: 
http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf   

Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 

 

1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your 
school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE 
systems and may change over the course of the year.) 

There are 
5 Students 
in 
Temporary 
Housing 
based on 
ATS data 
who are 
currently 
attending 
the school. 

 

2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. 

Students receive Check In/Check Out services with Staff like Counselors/AP/Teachers/Paras and Dean to find out how 
they are doing throughout the day. Parent Coordinator Williams ensures that they have clothes, underwear, coats, 
socks, shoes, sneakers or uniforms for school and provides them with these necessary items. She also touches base 
with their families as does the School Secretary who provides them with transportation and emergency MetroCards 
when possible to come to school. The School Psychologist, Social Worker and Guidance Counselor also support with 
outside agencies who can help students and speaks to their Social Workers to provide them with additional 
information that will necessitate smooth transitions to possible homes outside of shelters. 

 

Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 

1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school 
(please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). 

n/a 

 

2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          42 

 

n/a 

 

3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary 
housing.  If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation 
Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question.  If your school did not receive an allocation 
and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. 

n/a 

 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          43 

 

Directions: 

Section 8: Title I Program Information  

 

  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1. 
  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2. 
  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3. 
  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4. 
 

If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response 
can be found. 

  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. 

 
Part 1: Title I Status 

Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. 

X 

Schoolwide Program (SWP) 

 

Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools  

 

Non-Title I 

 
Part 2: All Title I Schools 

2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) 

Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support 
including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. 
97% of P.S. 276 staff are tenured and are highly qualified teachers. We continue to maintain their status by using 
needs assessment surveys 3 times a year for teachers to share their strengths and needs for professional 
development. We then use the results to revise our Professional Development Plan for the year. All of our teachers 
are embedded in improving teaching practices through the use of identifying strengths and weaknesses in the 
competencies of the Danielson Teaching Framework. Through Cycles of Learning , Inter-visitations and Learning Walks 
Teachers are debriefing about students needs in classrooms, student challenges seen through dissecting student 
work, and practices seen in our classrooms. Through our Learning Partners Plus collaboration with Q065 and K268, we 
are able to participate in inter-visitations and observe other classrooms outside of our building, to note 
commonalities in practices and challenges and share next steps with other colleagues to enable us to address issues 
and place structures for improved consistency and implement strategies that will increase student progress.  

We provide professional learning opportunities for all teachers, paraprofessionals and related service providers 
through: 

● Collaboration with the Learning Partners Program 

● Peer-Inter-visitations 

CARP Team Meetings 2x monthly 

● Weekly Common planning time and monthly grade meetings 

● Instructional Leaders Meeting, twice a month 

● Revising Go Math Curriculum, adding and aligning resources for enrichment and intervention 

● Biweekly Data Meetings by teachers, Looking at Student Work and devising Next Steps based on Common Core 
Standards and observable student misconceptions of the Standards  

Four week cycled observations with feedback to improve teacher practice and ultimately student performance 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          44 

 

● Each teacher devises their professional goals for the school year  

 

 
2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development 

Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, 
paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS).  
After reviewing the surveys, the Professional Learning Committee focused on areas that teachers requested further 
professional learning, such as differentiated instruction, behavior management, Special Education Student 
Intervention Systems, and using protocols to delve deeper into looking at student work. The surveys also showed the 
need for various teaching strategies in ELA and Math. 

We have embedded professional development in many ways: 

● Teacher Teams attend professional learning throughout the year and turnkey the strategies to staff during our 
professional learning time slots 

● The professional learning communities (including Administration) meet every Monday and Tuesday to analyze data, 
look at study student work and plan instruction aligned to the CCLS (Common Core Learning Standards)  

● Teachers will receive in-house professional learning multiple times throughout the year on unpacking the ELA and 
Math Standards and use that knowledge to plan lessons prepared to answer to student misconceptions. 

● Teachers attend anti-bullying, crisis intervention and PBIS workshops throughout the year as well as Restorative 
Practices for Circles in their classrooms weekly. 

● Teachers receive professional learning on the CCLS and the curriculum, especially Early Childhood, Special Education 
and English Language Learners.  

  Teachers, and paraprofessionals receive professional Development on Teaching Core Subjects (ELA, Math) 

 

 
Part 3: TA Schools Only 

3a. Use of Program Resources 

Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. 
N/A 

 

 
3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program 

Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., 
providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from 
the regular classroom during regular school day). 
N/A 

 

 
 
 
 
 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          45 

 
Part 4: SWP Schools Only 

4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only)  

Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary 
school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early 
intervention services, etc.). 
P.S. 276 will have five full day Pre-K programs housed in the main building. It is our goal to provide a program that 
meets young children’s needs for health, safety, and guidance for social-emotional development as well as providing 
opportunities for developmentally appropriate learning.  

 

Our Pre-K teachers and paraprofessionals support transition to kindergarten by meeting with families in early spring. 
We also set time on Tuesday’s during the parent collaboration time slot for parents to speak with the teachers and 
the assistant principal. This year we introduced a new reading program from Houghton Mifflin Harcourt to support 
Pre-K student. Teachers collaborate on planning and expanding learning by adding resources of their own where 
necessary. We are also a recipient of the Making Pre-K Count grant, which introduces pre-k students to Building 
Blocks, which is an evidenced based program that helps teachers promote children’s early math skills and that also 
provides support through professional development and training for teachers in the use of formative assessments and 
classroom management. 

 

Workshops are conducted for parent on setting up behavior management constructs at home, helping students 
become more independent, using everyday activities to promote learning, teaching socialization with peers, reading 
to their children; all skills that will aid in a smoother transition into Kindergarten. The Making Pre-K Count tracks 
students math data throughout their elementary school years. 

Pre-K uses the Explore Track Units of Study for Reading. Teachers meet weekly to plan lessons and compile resources 
to meet the needs of varied learners in the classrooms. 

 

 

 
4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments 

Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate 
multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to 
improve instruction.    
P.S. 276 has an Instructional Team that meets twice a month with the principal and the assistant principal from Pre-K 
to 5 th grade. The team collaborates on implementing the Expectations and on best practices in the building, analyzing 
the school data, and to discuss any concerns the teachers have on their grade.  

The team will implement, model and turnkey to their grade colleagues the following: 

* Based on learning goals, teachers will identify various solution pathways and anticipated challenges to plan 
assessments that check and deepen students’ understanding of challenging instructional tasks  

* The team will discuss the analyzed data from their grade and supports needed 

* The team will look for trends within their data ( item skills analysis) and decide on different strategies  

* The team will review the benchmarks and MOSL assessments to record any areas of strengths and weaknesses 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          46 

Funding Amount 
Indicate the amount 
contributed to 
Schoolwide pool. 
(Refer to Galaxy for 
school allocation 
amounts) 

435,494.00 

 
136,045.00 

 
12,366.00 

 
5,418.00 

 
3,768,701.00 

x 

 
x 

 
x 

 
x 

 
x 

Place an (X) in Column A below to verify 
that the school has met the intent and 
purposes of each program whose funds are 
consolidated.  Indicate in Column B, section 
references where a related program activity 
has been described in this plan. 

Column A 

Verify with an (X) 

Column B 

Section Reference(s) 
5A, 5B, 5C, 5D, 5E 

 
5A, 5B, 5C, 5D, 5E 

 
5A, 5C, 5E 

 
5A, 5C, 5E 

 
5A, 5B, 5C, 5D, 5E 

Title I Part A (Basic) 

Title II, Part A 

Title III, Part A 

Title III, Immigrant 

Tax Levy (FSF) 

Federal 

Federal 

Federal 

Federal 

Local 

 

Professional learning for both ELA and math will continue throughout the year to all team members. The team 
members will turnkey this information to all teachers on their grade during common prep meetings.  

 

 
4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools 

Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and 
Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible 
for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide 
plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the 
consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and 
purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, 
and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount 
each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the 
intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. 
Program Name 

Fund Source 
(i.e. Federal, 
State or Local) 

 

 

 

 
1Explanation/Background: 
Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and 
programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and 
advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools 
may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, 
State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This 
gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students.   
 
Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a 
single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual 
identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool 
to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds 
used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from 
which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to 
combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used 
conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the 
dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds.  
 
Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages: 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          47 

 

  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program 

separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different 
sources when accounting for their use. 

  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the 

statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., 
semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent 
and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended 
beneficiaries are met. 

 
2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as 
follows: 

  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to 
improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes 
provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH). 

  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement 

plans that aims to  improve instruction and address the identified needs  

  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in 

grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not 
available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional 
program. 

  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, 
develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and 
achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another 
purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-
quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in 
effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the 
participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language 
instruction programs. 

  Title III Immigrant:  Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of 

English language acquisition and content area achievement. 

 
Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated: 

  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and 
programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent 
representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities 
funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with 
student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. 
IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education 
designed to meet their individual needs. 

 

  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by 

the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 

 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          48 

 

Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)  

 (Required for All Title I Schools) 

 

Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and 
representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will 
participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I 
program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson 
that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the 
parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school 
will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic 
achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family 
Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. 
 
The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current 
S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent 
Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent 
involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen 
family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy.  
 
Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample 
Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) 
as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. 
 
 

Parent and Family Engagement Policy 

Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. 
The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of 
parents and community in the school. P.S. 276, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every 
Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen 
the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is 
designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the 
education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent 
Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. 

 

P.S. 276 will support parents and families of Title I students by: 

Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students 

 

● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., 
literacy, math, and use of technology; 

● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision 
making in support of the education of their children; 

● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor 
their child’s progress; 

● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 

● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in 
languages that parents can understand; 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          49 

 

● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve 
outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other 
members of the school community; 

The school’s Parent Involvement  

 

Parental Involvement and School Quality 

The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all 
parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The 
school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement 
policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school 
surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and 
enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school.  

 

In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the 
school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership 
Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for 
additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: 

● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I 
program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title 
I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; 

● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated 
directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; 

● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as 
described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; 

● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent 
Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support 
and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills;  

● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. 
The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the 
parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and 
inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents 
each month and file a report with the central office.; 

● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, 
grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and 
technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home;  

● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g.,ESSA/State accountability 
system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning 
Environment Survey Report; 

● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of 
children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          50 

 

the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable 
sections under the ESSA; 

● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning 
or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and 
allow parents to provide suggestions; 

● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed;  

● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and 
workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; 

 

 

The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: 

Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement 

 

● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; 

● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; 

● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher 
Association) and Title I Parent Committee; 

● supporting or hosting Family Day events; 

● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; 

● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; 

● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their 
children’s progress; 

● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school 
activities and student progress; 

● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, 
and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. 

 

 

School-Parent Compact (SPC)  

 

School-Parent Compact (SPC) 

The Louis Marshall School, P.S. 276, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student 
Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student 
achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and 
programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          51 

 

share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be 
developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. 

 

 

I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum 

Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating 
children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: 

 

● using academic learning time efficiently; 

● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; 

● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; 

● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; 

● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the 
Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); 

 

 

I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships 

Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: 

 

● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be 
discussed as well as how this Compact is related; 

● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students 
participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to 
be involved; 

● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds 
are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; 

● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation 
services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education;  

● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of 
participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; 

● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent 
Involvement Policy and this Compact; 

● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results 
for each child and other pertinent individual school information;  

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          52 

 

● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents 
each year; 

 

 

Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: 

I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff 

 

● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited 
English speaking parents;  

● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff 
member; 

● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to 
observe classroom activities; 

● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences;  

 

 

I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents 

Provide general support to parents by: 

 

● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment 
for parents and guardians; 

● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their 
child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of 
parents can attend); 

● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all 
members of the school community; 

● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents;  

● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in 
this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; 

● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and 
consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; 

 

 

 

II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          53 

 

● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate 
procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; 

● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and 
his/her age; 

● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; 

● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes);  

● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; 

● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports 
and/or quality family time; 

● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; 

● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; 

● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education;  

● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by 
prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; 

● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; 

● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy 
and this Compact; 

● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn 
more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; 

● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on 
advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams;  

● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; 

 

 

Student Responsibilities: 

 

III. Student Responsibilities 

● attend school regularly and arrive on time; 

● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; 

● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; 

● show respect for myself, other people and property; 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          54 

 

 
 
 
 

● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; 

● always try my best to learn. 

 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          55 

 

Division of English Language Learners and Student Support 
Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 
52 Chambers Street, Room 209  
New York, New York 10007 
Phone:  212-374-6072 
http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY 
Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components: 

 

 

  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high 

academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas.  

o  The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need 
o  These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154.  
o  Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. 
o  Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.   

  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on 

the teachers’ performance in classrooms.”  

o  Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term 

workshops and conferences.  

  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet 

community needs.   

o  These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process.  

 
NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional 
development, and 20% to OTPS.   
  
For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and 
Performance Specialist.  Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30.   
 

Part A: School Information 
Name of School:            
This school is (check 
one): 
 

DBN:            

conceptually consolidated (skip part E below)                
NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below)     

 

Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information  
The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): 

Before school                After school             

Saturday academy        

Total # of ELLs to be served:            
Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply):  

1       
7       

2       
8       

K       
6       

4         
10       
Total # of teachers in this program:            
# of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers:            
# of content area teachers:            

3       
9       

5 
11       

12 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          56 

 

Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information  
Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the 

rationale 

 
  subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  
  schedule and duration 
 
language of instruction 
  # and types of certified teachers 
 

types of materials  

Begin description here:            
Measurable 
corresponds 
  
  
Rationale: 
Public School 276's Title III After-school Literacy and Math Tutorial Institute is designed to 
supplement instruction for English Language Learners (ELLs). The program is designed to 
develop and increase English proficiency and literacy skills through science and social studies 
content. Students will have opportunities to develop their speaking and listening skills through 
engaging in small groups and paired activities. Students' Mathematics skills and knowledge will 
increase through building vocabulary, practicing strategies to solve problems and engaging 
students in projects that will promote mathematical conversations. 
 Maximizing instruction to develop Listening, Speaking, Reading, and Writing that will address 
Title III's focus on helping students attain proficiency and meet academic standards as well as 
Math problem solving skills for ELLs. 
Based on an analysis of the NYSESLAT ( New York State English as a Second Language 
Achievement Test), many ELLs  have increased to one or two levels. A few have remained at the 
same level. Results of the ELA (English Language Arts) indicate that most ELLs  need to 
improve on Reading comprehension and writing skills. 
The mathematics state test showed that six of our current fourth grade ELLs scored level two and 
four of our Ell scored level one.  Altogether ten fourth graders were tested.  Four of our fifth 
grade ELLs scored level two and ten scored a level 1. Altogether 15 students were tested. 
The ELA showed that five of our Fourth grade ELLs scored level 1 and 2 scored level2.  Seven 
students were tested. Eight of our fifth grade ELLs scored level one, three scored level2, and one 
scored level3. Altogether twelve students were tested. 
Due to the large number of our ELLs scoring levels one and two on the state math and ELA State 
tests,  we will need to provide them with additional support in the Title III after-school program. 
 
In addition, all of the  ELLs need to improve on operations, persevere in problem solving, 
constructing models, and better arguments. In order to improve our students' abilities, an 
emphasis of instructional time in the Title III After School Program will be devoted to 
developing reading, writing, vocabulary development, and grammar for level one and two 
ELLs in order to increase their levels of proficiency on the NYSESLAT reach level 3 on the 
ELA . 
  Home Language support is being provided through content glossaries to be used to complete 
tasks.  Teachers who speak Spanish, Haitian Creole, and  Arabic will be part of the team to 
support students and families. Parents receive Letters and calls in Haitian Creole, Arabic, and 
Spanish.  
Subgroups will be created to service target ELLs.  The Focus will be on our 39 first and second 
graders. Ensuring that they are immersed in tasks to develop their language abilities through 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          57 

 

Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information  
Math, Science, and Social Studies content while developing their social skills through speaking 
and listening activities. 
As for our 69 Third through fifth graders, we will use scaffolding strategies throughout the 
lessons to develop their thinking skills and develop understanding and deepening their 
knowledge in Math, Science, and Social Studies. 
Students will be broken according to their NYSESLAT levels for the Literacy Groups: Entering 
and Emerging students together, Transitioning students together, and Expanding and 
Commanding together for Reading, Writing, Listening, and Speaking days, differentiating 
according to their specific needs. 
Students will be grouped by grade on Math Days. Grades one and two will be together. Grades 
3,4, and 5 will meet separately.  
The Title III instruction  will be conducted in English and we will provide teacher support in the 
following languages: Haitian Creole and hopefully Arabic. 
 Subgroups and Grade Levels to be Served: Schedule and Duration the Title III After-school 
Literacy 
Program will target ELLs in grades 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5, which includes newcomers.  ELLs receiving 
service 0-3 years), ELLs receiving service 4-6 years and SWD (Students with Disabilities)  ELLs 
in grades  1, 2, 3, 4, and 5.  This program will provide the students with instruction on 
Wednesdays,Thursdays, and Fridays from 2:30 to 4:30pm for 15 weeks. 
 
The program will run from the week of October 15th, 2018 to the week of 
January 28th,  2019.  The teachers who work on Wednesdays will hold Bilingual Certification 
and/or an ESL Extension to their Common Branch License. 
 
 
 
Wednesdays' instruction will focus on Reading  through Social Studies and Science content. 
Thursdays' instruction will focus on the development of Math skills strategies. Fridays' 
instruction will focus on the development of Listening and writing skills. 
 
Wednesdays' Schedule: ELA (English Language Arts) Focused Instruction through Social 
Studies and Science Content will be taught in a co- teaching model by the content area and ENL 
teacher. 
Group 1 
44 Entering and Emerging students to be served in this group. 
Group 2 
16 Transitioning  students will be served in this group.  
Group 3 
27 Expanding and Commanding  ENL Students will be served. 
On Wednesdays, a total of 87 students are to be served.   
 
Thursdays' Schedule : Mathematics Focused Instruction   
Group 1 
This group will consist of 38 ELL students in grades 1-2 ranging from entering to Expanding 
and  levels 1 to 4. From 2:30-3:30 Mathematics will be taught by a licensed common branch 
teacher. 
3:30-4:30 ENL will be taught by the certified ENL teacher through co-teaching mathematics 
with the common branch teacher.   
  Group 2 
This group will consist of 22 ELL students in grade 3 ranging from Entering to Expanding, and 
levels 1 to 4. From 2:30-3:30 ENL will be taught by the certified ENL teacher through co-

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          58 

 

Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information  
teaching Mathematics with the bilingual certified teacher and 3:30-4:30 mathematics will be 
taught by the licensed bilingual teacher.  
 
Group 3 
This group will consist of 20 ELL students in grade 4 ranging from Entering to Expanding, and 
levels 1 to 4. From 2:30-3:30 Mathematics will be taught by a licensed common branch teacher. 
3:30-4:30 ENL will be taught by the certified ENL teacher through co-teaching practices. 
 
Group 4 
This group will consist of 26 ELLs in grade 5 ranging from Entering to Commanding, and levels 
1-4 from 2:30- 3:30. Mathematics will be taught by a licensed common branch teacher. 3:30-
4:30 ENL will be taught by a certified ENL teacher through co-teaching practices. 
  The certified ENL teachers will rotate between the four groups for one hour to co-teach and 
provide ESL through content.  
  On Thursdays, a total of 106 ENLs are to be served.  
  
Language of Instruction  
The language of instruction will be in English. However, Haitain Creole and Spanish and Arabic 
will be used to clarify directions for newcomer ELLs as needed to support the students' learning 
needs. Research based ESL strategies and methodologies will be used to scaffold and support 
instruction.  
 
Friday Schedule: Focus Instruction, Writing 
Group 1 
This group will consist of 44 ELL students that are at Entering and Emerging Level. 
2:30-3:30 Writing strategies will be taught by the licensed common branch teacher. 
3:30-4:30 the ENL Teacher will co-teach using scaffolding strategies with the common branch 
teacher. 
 
Group 2 
This group will consist of 16 Transitioning students. 
2:30 -3:30 ENL Teacher will co-teach with the Content teacher implementing scaffolding 
strategies for writing. 
3:30-4:30 Content Teacher will ensure that students are using these strategies towards their tasks. 
 
Group 3 
This group will be divided into two in order to support the 27 Expanding and Commanding 
ELLs. 
2:30-3:30 Students will be engaged in writing activities with the Common Branch Teacher. 
3:30-4:30 ENL Teacher will support the Common Branch Teacher through co-teaching practices. 
 
On Fridays 87  ENL Students will be served 
  
Number and types of certified teachers who will serve the students in this program: 
1 Licensed ENL Teacher 1 licensed Bilingual Teacher 
4 Common Branch Teachers  
  
Materials 
Instructional and classroom materials will be purchased for the program from Title III funds, and 
will be used exclusively in the Title III program for the duration of the 
program.   These instructional materials are not used during the school day. 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          59 

 

 

Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information  
  
English language skill development, vocabulary and grammar instructions will be provided to 
Transitional and Expanding leveled ENLs. Students will engage in Vocabulary Links from 
Pearson. This instructional material is geared towards the Common Core Learning 
Standards  and provides students with motivating non-fictional text focused on vocabulary 
development.  It also provides ELL students with English language skill development instruction 
that corresponds to the text and vocabulary. Building vocabulary and language skills will lead to 
greater success in students' reading comprehension. There are multiple levels available in order 
to gear instruction toward students' proficiency levels.   
  
Entering and Emerging students will engage in Phonics from Sadlier. Each book combines 
systematic and explicit phonics instructions with articles, visuals, questions, and listening and 
speaking activities to build comprehension and critical thinking skills. It lays the groundwork to 
build reading-for-information skills students need for daily classroom tasks and assessments. 
  
A license of Reading A-Z and Raz-Kids for ELLs will also be purchased with Title 3 funds for 
the exclusive use in the T3 program for the duration of the program.This program will provide 
further support in reading comprehension, oral reading fluency, and vocabulary development for 
all ELLs. This program is aligned to Common Core and engages students in reading a variety 
of literary and informational text at their individual levels. Students listen to the text, read the 
text and then are assessed on the text.  Teachers can generate reports to analyze the students' 
growth and areas of need.  This program can also be accessed by students at home to reinforce 
their reading comprehension.  
  
The Math Program will assist ELLs to acquire and reinforce basic math skills and concepts 
in order to be successful with grade level mathematics. Students will grasp an understanding of 
key math skills and will move into achieving higher levels on the state math test. 
  
ELL Math Group will be using GO Math task performances . This is a great support for students 
to engage in during the school day. This support is aligned to the Common Core Standards and 
offers assessments along the way to monitor student progress.  
  
ELL Students will be engaged in writing tasks from Engaged NY. This is a great support for all 
leveled students to practice their writing traits. Students will focus on ideas, organize structure, 
creating a voice, word choice, sentences, and conventions. 
 
All records will be maintained including student attendance and program notification in the 
parent's preferred languages by both the Title III teachers  and in a secure closet in MS. Pierre-
Louis' room. 

Part C: Professional Development  
Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as 
other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs.   

rationale 
teachers to receive training  

 
 
  schedule and duration 
 
  name of provider 

topics to be covered 

Begin description here:            

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          60 

 

 

Part C: Professional Development  
To support effective instruction that leads to student achievement in Language Acquisition and 
content area skills and knowledge, ongoing professional development is provided for all teachers 
of ELLs. Support is provided fo classroom teachers of ELLs through planning/coaching 
Facilitated by NYU R-BERN (Regional Bilingual Educational Resource Network) and School 
ELL Co-ordinator. Ongoing PDs are conducted on First and Second Tuesdays of each month.  
 
Ms. Myriam Augustin  , from the offices of R-BERN   will provide PD ( Professional 
Development) for all teachers in the building pertaining to ENL (English as New 
Language) methodologies and SIOP (Sheltered Instruction Observation Program). 
  
On Tuesdays, for one period Ms. Augustin will have a rotating schedule to push-in to classrooms 
to provide ESL support to the teachers.   
  
One Tueday  each month, the ENL Team will meet with Ms. Pierre-Louis and Ms. 
Augustin during an extra Common Prep period provided by Administration during the school 
day.  Workshops, turn-key PD and planning for the ENLs with take place during this time.  This 
will provide the opportunity to analyze challenges and successes in the classroom and provide 
feedback for ENL support.  Areas of needs wioll be identified, from data collected from student 
work and observable teacher practice, and teachers will be provided with  different strategies, 
specific scaffolding and differentiation techniques that will support increased learning and 
student progress.  During these meetings, there will also be a review of students' socio-emotional 
data in order to address individual student needs, and ascertain continuous achievement and 
emotional growth. Ms. Pierre-Louis will also provide created and turnkey PD pertinent to those 
needs with the support of the schools'psychologist and social worker and through our restorative 
circles.  Next steps will be discussed, documented and shared with the Instructional Team during 
Cabinet meetings, to ensure all ENLs are making progress.  
In addition, P.S.276 takes advantage of PD opportunities offered by OELL, the Network, the 
Fordham RBERN and the Language RBERN and the Language RBERN at NYU. Throughout 
the year, teachers will attend various workshops and conferences on topics such as: Dual 
Language, the Bilingual Common Core Progressions, Effective Language and Literacy for ELLs, 
Literacy Instruction through the Content Areas, Improving Math Instruction for ELLs. 
 
Ms. Augustin will join our Professional Development Sessions beginning on October 2018 and 
will continue throughout the year ending on June 2019. This component is at no cost to the 
program. These PDs will positively impact the progress of our ELLs ELA, NYSESLAT, and 
Math exams. 
  
In addition, PS 276 takes advantage of PD opportunities offered by DELLSS (Division of 
English Language Learners ans Student Services) and the BFSC (Borough Field Support 
Centers). 
 
Records will be maintained by the ENL Coordinator. Records such as Attentance, Agendas, Sign 
In Sheets, and hand outs. 
  

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          61 

 

 

Part D: Parental Engagement Activities   
Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact 
higher achievement for ELLs.  NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as 
parent orientation during ELL identification process.   

rationale 

 
  schedule and duration 
 
  name of provider 
  how parents will be notified of these activities 

topics to be covered 

Begin description here:            
   Parents of the ELL population will have the opportunity to participate in PS276's 
Title III Computer Connection Afterschool Program which will increase parents' knowledge 
about 
computers, general computer use, ways in which computers can support education, literacy and 
awareness. Computer knowledge will enable parents to learn how to use the internet (websites) 
for 
research to assist their children with homework, research reports, book reports, support of the 
internet 
and to learn what their children know about using the computer. Parents will learn computer 
programs 
such as Microsoft Word and Microsoft Power Point. ELL parents will become familiar with and 
how 
to access the ARIS parent link. The skills parents acquire will enable their individual 
effectiveness with 
computers as well as support their children educationally in accordance with increasing 
technological 
demands.  
  
The Computer Connection will be taught by a computer teacher who has an abundance of 
knowledge of computers and various programs. There will be from 8-10 parents in the class. The 
class will meet on Tuesdays from 3:30-4:30pm for 9 one hour sessions. Invitations will be sent 
home to parents. Parents meetings specifically for this program will commence the week of 
October 15th, 2018 and end the week of January 28th, 2019.  
  
The teachers who are teaching the student math group on Thursdays will be used as an Arabic, 
Haitian-Creole and Spanish interpreters for the parent computer program as needed. 
 
 Records will be maintained by the ENL Coordinator and Parent Coordinator. This will include 
attendance, invitation letters in English, Haitian Creole, Spanish, and Arabic. Notifications are 
given through letters and phone calls. Calls are translated in home languages as well. In addition, 
we will keep the sign in sheets and agendas. 
  

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          62 

Part E: Budget  
FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY.  Ensure that your 
Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. 
Allocation Amount: $           
Budget Category 

Budgeted Amount 

Explanation of expenditures in this 
category as it relates to the 
program narrative for this title. 
           
           

 

 
 
 
 

Professional salaries 
(schools must account for 
fringe benefits) 

           
           

  Per session 
  Per diem 

Purchased services 

  High quality staff 

and curriculum 
development 
contracts. 

Supplies and materials 

  Must be 

supplemental. 

  Additional 

curricula, 
instructional 
materials. 

  Must be clearly 

listed. 

Educational Software 
(Object Code 199) 
Travel 

Other 

TOTAL 

           
           

           
  

           
           
           
$0.00 
           
$0.00 
           
           

 

           
           

           
   

           
  
           
           
           
           
           
           

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          63 

 

DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT 

GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY 

SUBMISSION FORM 

2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR 

 

DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information 

necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English 

language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a 

part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the 

services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should 

be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily 

available on file in the school.  When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces.  For 

additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. 

Part I: School ELL Profile 

 

 

 
 

A. School Information 

District  18 
School Name   Louis Marshall 

Borough  Brooklyn 

School Number   276 

 
B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant 

principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. 
 

Principal   Yasmine Fidelia 
Coach  K. Turner 
ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher  
 Guerlene Pierre-Louis 
Teacher/Subject Area Rose Musto 
Teacher/Subject Area Sandra Grant Lessie 
Related-Service Provider Natalya Birmakher 
Superintendent Beverly Wilkins 

 

Assistant Principal  Leslyn Ward 
Coach Matilda Mendez Keegan 
School Counselor  
Fara Saracino 
Parent  Mrs. Campbell 
Parent Coordinator Trevor Wyatt 
Field Support Center Staff Member Souerette Fougerre  
Other (Name and Title) type here 

C. Teacher Qualifications  
Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section.  Press TAB after each number entered to calculate 
sums and percentages.  
     
Number of certified 
ENL teachers currently teaching in the 
ENL program 

Number of teachers who hold both content 
area/common branch and TESOL certification 

1 

2 

0 

Number of certified 
bilingual teachers not currently 
teaching in a bilingual program  
Number of certified foreign 
language/world language teachers 
providing home language arts 
(HLA) to students in bilingual 
programs [applicable to grades 7–
12] 
Number of teachers currently 
teaching a self-contained ENL class 
who hold both a common branch 
license and TESOL certification 
[applicable to grades K–6] 

0 

0 

Number of teachers who hold both a 
bilingual extension and TESOL 
certification 

Number of special education teachers 
with bilingual extensions 

1 

0 

Number of certified 
bilingual teachers currently 
teaching in a bilingual program 

Number of certified ENL teachers 
not currently  teaching in the ENL 
program  

 

1 

0 

D. Student Demographics  
Total number of students in 
school (excluding pre-K) 

613 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          64 

Total number of ELLs 

130 

ELLs as share of total student population 
(%) 

21.21% 

 
 
 
 
Part II: ELL Demographics 
 
 
 
 
 
A. ELL Programs 

This school serves the following grades (includes 
ELLs and non-ELLs) 
Check all that apply 

 
 
This school offers (check all that apply): 

K

    1

    2

     3

     4

     5

 

6

   7

     8

    9

     10

     11

    12

 

Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) 

Yes

             No

Dual language program (DL) 

Yes

             No

Freestanding ENL 

Yes

             No

 

 

 

If yes, indicate language(s):    

If yes, indicate language(s): 
        Haitian Creole   

 

 
Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a 
separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. 
 

Bilingual Program Breakdown 

School 
Year 

Opened 
(e.g., 2013-14) 

 
 
 

2016-
2017 
2017-
2018 
2018-
2019 

Program 
TBE 
TBE 
TBE 
DL 

DL 

DL 

Lang. 

 
 
 

Haitian 
Creole 
Haitian 
Creole 
Haitian 
Creole 

 
 

1 

 

 

 
 

 

1 

 

 

 

1 

1 

Total 
 
 
 
Part III: Assessment Analysis 
 
 

0 

1 

0 

K 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

8 

9 

10 

11 

12 

         

         

         

         

         

         

         

         

         

         

         

         

         

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

       

       

       

       

       

       

       

       

       

       

       

 

1 

 

 

 

 

 

 

0 

 

 

0 

 

 

0 

 

 

0 

 

 

0 

 

 

0 

 

 

0 

 

 

0 

Tot # 
0 
0 
0 

1 

1 

1 

3 

After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 

1.  What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, 

teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? 
P.S. 276 uses DIBELS, Fountas and Pinnell, and MOSL to determine early literacy skills of our ELLs. These assessments are 
implemented at the beginning and end of the school year to determine student needs and progress in literacy.   
  
Students in grades K-5 are assessed using DIBELS which consist of multiple literacy components.  
  
DIBELS Component and Descriptions: 
Measure of Phonemic Awareness: Initial Sound Fluency: Assesses a child's skill at identifying and producing the initial sound of 
a given word. Phonemic Segmentation Fluency: Assesses a child's skill at producing the individual sounds within a given word. 
  

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          65 

 

Measure of Alphabetic Principle and Phonics 
Nonsense Word Fluency: Assesses a child's knowledge of letter-sound correspondences as well their ability to blend letters 
together to form unfamiliar "nonsense" (e.g., ut, fik, lig, etc.) words.  
  
Measure of Accuracy and Fluency with Connected Text:   
Oral Reading Fluency: Assesses a child's skill at reading connected text on grade level materials. 
  
Measure of Comprehension:  
Oral Reading Fluency and Retell Fluency: Assesses a child's understanding of verbally read connected text. 
  
Measure of Vocabulary and Oral Language:  
 Word Use Fluency: Assesses a child's ability to accurately use a provided word in the context of a sentence. 
  
Elements of Fountas and Pinnell  
This assessment provides leveled readers for teaching readers how to focus or expand their thinking through talk and writing 
before, during, and after reading. The goal is to help students use literacy to think in three ways.  
  
1. Thinking Within the Text 
Noticing and using the information that is directly stated in the text 
  
2. Thinking Beyond the Text 
Noticing what is implied, not explicitly stated 
  
3. Thinking About the Text 
Analyzing the writer's craft and thinking critically about the whole text. 
  
These assessments help to guide instruction and understand how well ELLs are comprehending reading, oral retelling, phonics 
and fluency, as well as their knowledge of academic vocabulary. This will help to inform instruction through an analysis of the 
data and plan adjustments to Tier I instruction according to the needs of each ELL.  
   
 

2.  What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 

We have Common Planning for Teachers . A ELL Planning period every week  for all teachers that teaches ELLs in their 
classroom, A double period on Tuesdays once a month for Professional development.  Professional development occurs by R-
BERN professionals, BFSC  or District Administrators as well as ESL Coordinator.  Teachers are surveyed to share their 
challenges and concerns in the classroom as well as to  look at student data. During these common periods, they are able to 
plan to meet their goals, analyze students, work, and formulate strategies to target the needs of the students.. 
 

3.  What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL 

Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? 
There are several ways to evaluate the success of our program for ELLs.  
We look at the data from many sources: NYSESLAT, results of the NYS ELA, Math, and Science assessments, conference notes, 
student work rubrics, DIBELS and Fountas and Pinnell, MOSL, BOY, MOY, and EOY assessments, benchmark Unit assessments, 
and performance tasks. Through an analysis of the most current scores to those of the past, we identify the progress each 
child has made in comparison to the previous year(s). If ELL students demonstrate growth in the areas of listening, speaking, 
reading, and writing, then the program is successful. 
Additionally, we use the Periodic Assessments implemented in  the Fall and Spring and compare the scores to ensure progress 
is being made. This allows us to compare the fall results to those of the spring results, which provides us with the 
improvements in listening, speaking, reading, and writing our ELLs are enduring.   
 The RLAT is analyzed to identify the students who have and have not made progress. When the state report card is released, 
we analyze the data to determine if we are meeting Annual Yearly Progress for ELL students. Factors that are considered 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          66 

include but are not limited to: student’s home language, length of time in country, gaps in educational services, SIFE status, 
attendance and socio-economic status. We then make a plan and discuss students’ strengths and weaknesses during common 
preps, grade meetings, and inquiry time.     
  
 

4.  What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered?  

Teachers meet during common ENL periods weekly to discuss and plan how they will address interventions through AIS and 
RTI  and constantly Looking at student data. Teachers provide students with work in student Skills Builders Folders aligned to 
challenges noted in assessment data. Teachers keep track of student  progress in logs in folders and discuss student progress 
when they meet and set new goals for students. 
 

5.  How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-
5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.]  
P.S. 276 uses data to guide instruction for ENLs within the RTI framework in the following way.  We follow the three levels of 
Response to Intervention.  All ENLs participate in the school's Universal Screeners.  This assessment battery (described above) 
addresses multiple components of literacy in order to gather a detailed picture about the student's individual needs, 
particularly as it relates to Tier I instruction.  Results from the assessment are reviewed at the school, grade and class level in 
order to identify areas of need.  After reflecting on the trends shown, plans are established to adjust Tier I instruction when 
many students are below established expectations.  Best practices are implemented to refine Tier I instruction for ENLs and 
the rest of the student population. Tier I consists of rigorous evidence-based curriculum including English language 
development for ENLs.   
  
Struggling students who are not meeting established benchmarks and are performing in ways that are different than their 
peers are offered small group Tier II interventions.  These interventions are offered on a short term basis, with regular 
progress monitoring to determine the effectiveness of the selected intervention. Tier II provides extra attention, activities and 
experience targeted to specific students in addition to core instruction. Students who are not making progress after sufficient 
time and adequate interventions may progress to Tier III Interventions. These intensive interventions provide 1:1 instruction to 
address the student's unique need(s).   
  
 

6.  What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? 

([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS].  
Based on an analysis of the data from the NYSITELL and the 2018 NYSESLAT, the RLAT report indicates that the patterns across 
proficiency levels show that ELLs on every grade scored higher on the Reading, listening, and Speaking modalities.  ELLs scored 
the poorest on the  writing modality. 
According to the NYSITELL scores, most students have the greatest difficulty in the areas of Listening and Speaking.    
 The data patterns summarized below is based on the Spring 2018 NYSESLAT.  This data is broken down by proficiency levels.  
Spring 2018 NYSESLAT and Fall 2018 NYSITELL: 
10/130 of our students scored Entering 
16/130 of our students scored Emerging 
33/130 of our students scored Transitioning 
21/130 of our students scored Expanding 
25/130 of our students scored Commanding 
16/130 of our students are Former ELLs 
    
 

7.  What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? 

Teachers will meet once a week with one another, once a month with ESL teacher or R-BERN Administrator to share  findings 
and discuss how to use data to adjust, modify, differentiate or enhance instruction and groupings in the classroom. 

 

 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          67 

 
 
 
Part IV: ELL Programming 
 

Programming and Scheduling Information 

1.  How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented 
as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students 
regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in 
one class]).  

a.  Freestanding ENL program. 

The Freestanding ENL program at P.S. 276 consists of a combination of Integrated  and Stand Alone programs where 
the ENL teacher and the classroom teachers collaborate in order to deliver seamless instruction for the ELLs. Whether 
the lessons are integrated with the mainstream students or in small group in the ENL classroom, the students will 
develop language through units being currently taught.  ENL instruction includes research-based methodologies 
including elements of SIOP and home language support through student discussion to enrich vocabulary and 
comprehension.  
 When lessons are instructed in Stand Alone Time out of the classroom, students are grouped within two consecutive 
grade levels. The groups consist of heterogeneous proficiency levels.  Grouping provides the ELLs with enriched 
language instruction to enable them to acquire the English language proficiency and academic knowledge they 
need.  The students receive language arts and subject matter instruction in English while participating in various 
planned activities with a focus on listening, speaking, reading, and writing based on the Language Progressions. Topics 
in which are taught are based around science and social studies units.   
  

b.  TBE program.  If applicable.   

Not applicable. 

c.  DL program.  If applicable.    

The Dual language Program is a self- contain model in Kindergarten through second Grade.   Students will learn in 
English for two days and two days in the Haitian Creole  On Fridays ,the classes will combine and students will work 
together in the classrooms in self chosen centers using their preferred language. 

 

2.  How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each 

program model? 

a.  How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 

below)? 

           English Language Learners at P.S. 276 participate in an ENL Program, which consists of a combination of integrated and 
pull-out services. Mandated minutes and program type depend on the proficiency level of each student. The proficiency levels 
are determined by the NYSITELL and the most current NYSESLAT taken by the student. This data is retrieved using the RLER, 
RLAT, and RLAB on ATS.   
  
According the current CR Part 154 requirements, ELL students in grades k-8 are to receive the following minutes of service per 
week and program type: 
  
Level              Total minutes       Minutes in standalone    Minutes in integrated           Flexibility minutes  
Entering                360                           180                      180                                          0  
Emerging              360                             90                      180                                         90 
Transitioning         180                               0                        90                                         90                      
Expanding            180                              0                       180                                         0 
Commanding          90                               0                        90                                          0 
  
  
The ELL teachers collaborate with the classroom teachers who are involved in the education of ELLs.  Articulation between the 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          68 

 

ELL teachers and the ELLs classroom teacher is ongoing.  They articulate student progress, ESL methodologies, ESL materials, 
testing concerns, and units of study that are being taught.  They articulate about ELLs requiring instruction that focuses on 
academic English and instruction that is scaffolded to meet their academic backgrounds and linguistic needs.  Instruction for 
general and special education ELLs integrate the major skill areas of listening, speaking, reading and writing.  Instruction for 
ELLs is aligned with the Common Core State Standards along with the Language  Progressions, performance indicators and 
Citywide Comprehensive core curriculum and Mathematics.  GO Math and  Jump Math (Grade 3) and Teacher's College 
Reading Program (ELA curriculum) are used in grades K-5. As of this year ENL Teachers, Teachers with Commanding ELLs, and 
Principal will meet to decide which choice of option ( A: Small Group Learning, B: Individualized Target Learning, C: Project 
Based Learning,D: A minimum of 90 minutes per week of Integrated ENL )services will best fit for the Commanding individuals. 
 GO Math and Jump Math are mathematics program developed to support the Common Core State Standards for Mathematics 
and the NCTM Curriculum Focal Points. The program emphasizes Big Ideas and depth of understanding through interactive 
lessons, research based instructional approaches, best practices from around the world, and differentiated instructional 
resources to ensure success for all students. 
 Teachers College Reading is aligned to Common Core Standards and works within the Balanced Literacy model.  This 
curriculum incorporates the areas of listening, speaking, reading, and writing into each lesson, in addition to an emphasis on 
academic vocabulary and reading complex texts. 
  
 

3.  Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and 

methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core 
Learning Standards.  
   In both Stand-Alone ENL and integrated ENL models SIOP elements are implemented such as; visuals, realia, manipulatives, 
charts and graphs, graphic organizers, wait time, speech rate, and vocabulary charts in order to provide ELLs with 
comprehensible input.  ELL strategies such as Total Physical Response activities, cooperative learning, language experiences, 
peer talk, and hands on activities support ELLs to develop skills and assist them in achieving the same standards expected of all 
students in ELA and other content areas.  Rigorous instruction in standards based academic instruction is 
ongoing.  Cooperative planning is used to teach study units to prepare ELLs to think critically, solve problems, demonstrate a 
deep understanding of text, use the computer and communicate in English.  Literacy is stressed by adapting ESL techniques for 
read aloud, shared reading, guided reading, independent reading, modeled and independent writing.  Integrating literature 
that reflects students’ various cultures provides a positive and enjoyable experience for ELLs and enhances the development of 
their speaking, listening, reading and writing skills.  Instructional time for reading and writing address oral language and 
literacy development in all modalities (listening, speaking, reading, writing, viewing and presenting.) 
 Language is an important focus for teaching.  Learning academic language is effective when the focus is on integrating 
language and content area.  Thematic readings in the content areas of social studies, science, music, art and multicultural 
literature provide meaningful vocabulary, relevant language and experiences, and grammatical conventions. ELLs are exposed 
to relevant and familiar vocabulary which is essential for language acquisition.  To ensure literacy, ELLs need a strong and 
growing vocabulary base that requires knowledge of words, word parts and word relationships.  Language is made 
comprehensible through teaching content area concepts using concrete items, photos, pictures, realia, graph organizers, 
charts,  and vocabulary charts.  To elicit ELLs prior experiences and knowledge will foster both concept and language 
development.  ELLs participate in multiple assessment activities that provide the ENL teacher with formative data and 
information on the students’ mastery skills and English language development.  Multiple informal assessment activities are 
used to differentiate instruction to meet the ELLs needs. 
  P.S. 276 implements the Teachers College Reading Program (TC) which is aligned to the Common Core Literacy Standards. The 
teachers in the general education classrooms along with the bilingual teacher use these materials. They meet on the same 
grade level and collaborate in order to teach a sequenced curriculum. The curriculum is cumulative, the knowledge and skills 
the students’ learn each year become the students’ foundation for learning in the school years to follow.  The content within 
these programs are modified during common prep periods to make the material comprehensible for ELLs.  ELLs build a 
foundation for understanding rich content.  Teachers use strategies/methodologies and adapt them to support and meet the 
needs of the ELLs through scaffolding TC Reading  materials.   
 A range of instructional strategies and different learning modalities are provided for ELLs.  Each ELLs' individual attitude, 
interests, experiences, skills, knowledge and learning styles are profiled.  Assessment activities are used to help the ENL 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          69 

 

teacher make instructional decisions.  The ENL teachers uses data from the NYSITELL, NYSESLAT, and the ELL Periodic 
Assessment to drive instruction.  The assessment strategies help the ENL teachers find out what the ELL students know and 
can do.  Each assessment activity has a specific objective linked purpose.  The ENL teachers conducts multiple forms of 
evaluation (anecdotal records, observations, checklists, rubrics, test scores) to assess the progress of her ELLs and to plan 
instruction. Besides the use of dictionaries, glossaries and materials in the home language, the ENL teachers buddies students 
of the same language and are grouped for certain activities so that they can assist each other and respond in the home 
language.  School personnel provide support to students during the school day and are utilized to provide clarification for ELLs 
who might be struggling with content and concepts in the content areas.  
  
     
 

4.  How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? 

   When our assessment team meets in October, we order assessments in the students native languages as needed.  Our 
assessment coordinator ensures that these assessments are accurately ordered.  Classroom teachers allow students to 
respond to questions in their native language-both in class discussions and on formal tests.  Classroom libraries contain 
literature in students’ native languages. Students can give answers orally and the information is translated back into English 
and they can also write their answers in their native language and it will be translated.  Also, native language exams are given 
for New York State Math and Science tests when it is helpful to the student.  Whenever possible, exams are given in a 
student's native language, and if no paper exam is available, the student has the exam translated orally into his/her native 
language or on paper to ensuring that all students are assessed on the content, regardless of their English proficiency.  At our 
common prep meetings on Tuesdays, we use time as needed to discuss and analyze assessments for planning and grouping 
purposes.   
Our Dual Language Classes assess students throughout the year through oral engagements and class projects in their Home 
Language, which is also the Target Language. 
   
 

5.  How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? 

SIFE   

a. 
b.  Newcomer  
c.  Developing   
d. 
e. 

Long Term 
Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status  

 There are various ways in which we differentiate and scaffold instruction regularly for ELLs. According to CR Part 154, SIFE is 
defined as students who: have interrupted formal education who function at least two years below expected grade level in 
literature and mathematics;  attention must be given to address the learning gaps in his/her instruction. Our instructional plan 
for the situation where we have SIFE students is made in conjunction with the parents, ENL staff, the administration, and the 
classroom teacher(s).  Placing the student in a lower grade is not an option. Grade level is determined on child's age. 
Instruction is accommodated by providing an extra period of ENL daily, as needed, in addition to the mandated unit as per CR-
Part 154 regulations, providing academic intervention services through AIS conducted first period five times a week and the 
Title III after school program offered in grades 3-5 three times per week.    
 Newcomers are students who have received 0-3 years of ENL/ Bilingual services.  They usually range from the entering to 
transition stages of second language acquisition. Instruction is modified and scaffold for newcomers by focusing on building 
vocabulary, developing listening comprehension, promoting speaking through small group discussions, modeling reading and 
writing, using graphic organizers, visuals, realia, and providing active contextualized engagement activities. A combination of 
different second language acquisition strategies (The Natural Approach and TPR) are used to introduce the students to school 
routines and basic English language skills. At this stage, teachers may utilize the student’s native language to ensure the 
students’ understanding of content area subjects while the student is acquiring English. The students may also use their native 
language while working in small groups to gain clarity of the topic and tasks. The ENL teacher has available bilingual picture 
and word-to-word dictionaries as well as academic vocabulary glossaries available in the subject areas for the students to 
utilize when needed.   
 When a new ELL student arrives to our school, the ENL teacher takes the student on a tour of the school to familiarize them 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          70 

 

with the building and key staff members they can communicate with in their native language.  The guidance counselor, social 
worker, and parent coordinator also work with the students and family to ease the transition and acclimate into their new 
community.   
For Developing ELLs receiving service 4 to 6 years the plan is to design activities that are more complex and scaffolds are more 
limited.  The ELLs note relationships in text such as; comparison and contrast, cause and effect, problem and solution. The ELLs 
are challenged to think across cultures, and time periods.  Other activities include poems, a biographical sketch of their self or 
another literary character, and narrative, informative writing.  Data indicates that these ELLs need improvement in their 
reading and writing skills.  Reading and writing skills are being addressed while incorporating listening and speaking activities 
on order to help bridge the gap between the modalities of language acquisition. 
For Long Term ELLs, data is evaluated from the NYSESLAT, ELL Periodic Assessment, city and state tests and are used to 
determine where their weaknesses and strengths are.  Tiered activities are used.  Visual, auditory and kinesthetic options are 
provided.  Students are expected to make text to self, text to text and text to world connections.  Reading and writing practice 
skills are addressed. ELLs having special needs are provided with auditory, visual and kinesthetic options.  The IEP goals are 
read and addressed through instruction.  Data is taken from the city and state tests to drive instruction. Tiered activities are 
used.  Reading and writing skills are addressed.   
Former ELLs are monitored and offered Integrated services for 90 minutes for two additional years after testing 
Commanding.  These students are also afforded ELL accommodations on classroom and City/State Assessments.  
 

6.  What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic 

content areas and accelerate English language development?  
 A number of instructional strategies and grade level materials are used with the ELL-SWDs.  Instructions are given in smaller 
increments so the students are able to keep up with the class. Language Power, Imagine Learning, and Reading A-Z are 
intervention programs that are used. They consist of a mix of non-fiction reading to acquire basic reading skills.  The program 
offers intensive instruction to accelerate learning of the skills. ELL-SWDs use guided reading  books, visuals, flash cards and 
picture cards for vocabulary development. 
When working in math the student is provided with appropriate manipulatives for the specific topic.  Visual methods and 
tactile materials are utilized too. Teachers modify the curriculum to the ELL-SWDs level. Providers of the ELL-Students With 
Disabilities (SWDS) collaborate with one another to not interfere with the student's classroom English Language Arts 
instruction.  The ENL teacher works with the classroom teachers  focuses on the same skills as the classroom teachers. 
  
For Long Term ELLs, data is evaluated from the NYSESLAT, ELL Periodic Assessment, city and state tests and are used to 
determine  their weaknesses and strengths.  Tiered instructional activities are implemented to review skills and provide clarity 
to previous taught lessons. Visual, auditory, and kinesthetic activities are planned and implemented to meet the needs of all 
learning types.  Students are expected to make text-to-self, text-to-text and text-to-world connections.  Reading and writing 
practice skills are addressed in daily English Language Arts  and content area lessons.  
 

7.  How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and 

attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? 
The ESL and Special Education Teachers Support Services will be scheduled to support both as a push in and pull programs. 
They meet with teachers to plan lessons to see where they can best work with students to use modified strategies and ESL 
methodologies to enhance and differentiate instruction in the classroom to best serve the students.  
 

8.  Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups 

targeted).  List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which 
they are offered. 
Academic Intervention Services is offered every morning in classrooms by classroom teachers during the first period. Special 
education Integrated Co-Teaching  teachers support in small groups instruction push in services in some classrooms.  Title 3 
After-school programs such as the Immigrant and Title III Supplement are in place to support Wednesdays, Thursdays, and 
Fridays from 2:20 P.M. to 4:20 P.M.  In addition, we also have the ESDVP after-school program exist to provide  academic 
support to students in grades 2-5 from 2:20pm-5:30PM Monday - Friday. The Immigrant After school program will be available 
for students three days a week, Wednesdays to Fridays 2:20 PM to 4:20 PM. 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          71 

 

An Arabic Speaking ENL Teacher was hired to support entering students in ESL classrooms. The Teacher will push in to 
classrooms and work in small groups with students who speak Arabic, translating when necessary or explaining the content or 
learning target of the lesson or helping in supporting discussion in the classroom. He also has Stand alone time with the 
Entering and Emerging students. In addition, a second Arabic teacher was hired to teach our incoming Kindergarten students.   
 

9.  Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year?    

We will be piloting Jump Math  in Third Grade  as well as TC Reading in Grades 3-5. A Reading Specialist will be working with 
students Grades K-2 and providing Professional development for teachers and modeling best practices for teachers in the 
classrooms. 
 

10.  If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? 

Transitional Bilingual Programs were phased out so that the Dual Language Program can be opened from Kindergaten as 
parents requested. 
 

11.  How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs?  Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in 

your building. 
ELLS are  included in all programs and activities. There are staff members who translate for students when required to do so. 
Students are placed in classrooms with other children who also speak their language whenever possible and are given a buddy 
to  help guide them when they are newcomers as they transition to their new school community.  In their class library and the 
school library there are books in their language for them to borrow and read.    
 

12.  What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language 

materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. 
ELLS are supported by CCLS aligned ELA and Math curriculum as well as ESL materials specifically research to support them 
instructionally.  Bilingual word-to-word dictionaries, glossaries, textbooks in various languages are available for the ELLs in the 
ENL program classrooms and home classrooms . Computers are used to reinforce listening, speaking, reading, and writing 
skills. Teachers implement the use of projectors, ELMOs, and SMARTboards during class lessons to provide ELLs with visuals 
and interactive activities. Programs on the computer are used to support the ELLs.  Starfalls is used to learn the alphabet 
letters and sounds, and beginning reading. Soar to Success Math is a skill based program on the computer which differentiates 
instruction.  Other Instructional materials include a wide range of print, visuals, realia, manipulatives and resources designed 
for increasing English language proficiency.  
 

13.  How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? 

ELLs can take state and citywide content area exams in their home language. If the math exam does not come translated in 
their native language an interpreter from The Big Word is hired to interpret the exam. Some teachers and paraprofessional 
and students are fluent in some of our ELLs native language.  The ENL teacher and classroom teachers use multicultural 
literature and decorate the classroom with posters and objects that reflect students’ diversity of language and culture. When 
available, ELLs have the opportunity to take city and state content area tests in their native language.   
  
During standalone and integrated ENL classes and additional subject areas, students provide clarity in directions, group tasks, 
and whole group discussions using their native language on as needed basis. Paraprofessional are also available throughout 
the building to come the classes and interpret as needed. If a newcomer would like to participate in whole class or small group 
discussion, however, does not have the language in English to express him or herself, they will use their native language and a 
peer will translate the information.  
 
As the student's English progresses the native language transitions into English.  Additionally, Raz-Kids offers books and 
assessments in Spanish to build content knowledge and comprehension in the native language.   
 

14.  Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels.  

 Both GoMath, Jump Math (Grade 3) and TC Reading are developed by grade level standards and implemented in this manner 
during the school day.  
Reading A-Z and Language Power is corresponds to grade bands K-2 and 3-5 where as topics and vocabulary is age 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          72 

 

appropriate.  
ReadWorks articles also correspond to students grade level to ensure content and language is also age appropriate.  
Raz-Kids and Imagine Learning are computer programs that are individualized based on each students literacy and language 
acquisition levels. Additionally they are assessed at their individual levels  
 

15.  If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the 

ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met?   
ELLS are supported by CCLS aligned ELA and Math curriculum as welll as ESL materials specifically research to support them 
instructionally.  Bilingual word-to-word dictionaries, glossaries, textbooks in various languages are available for the ELLs in the 
ENL program classrooms . Computers are used to reinforce listening, speaking, reading, and writing skills. Teachers implement 
the use of projectors, ELMOs, and SMARTboards during class lessons to provide ELLs with visuals and interactive activities. 
Programs on the computer are used to support the ELLs.  Starfalls is used to learn the alphabet letters and sounds, and 
beginning reading. Soar to Success Math is a skill based program on the computer which differentiates instruction.  The 
Bilingual classes have leveled libraries in English and the native language.  Smart boards, computers and the balanced literacy 
model is used in English and native language instruction. Other Instructional materials include a wide range of print, visuals, 
realia, manipulatives and resources designed for increasing English language proficiency.  
 

16.  Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for 

new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, 
parent coordinator).  
 PS 276 provides support for newly enrolled ELL students before the beginning of the school year.  The ENL teacher, parent 
coordinator, a school administrator and translators are available to assist newly arrived parents with registration, paperwork 
involved in the registration process, pupil placement and parental concerns. Support and information is given to the newly 
arrived students and parents. Parents are encouraged to ask questions about the school.  Parents and newly enrolled students 
are taken on a school tour by the ENL teacher or the parent coordinator.  The tour showcases our school and introduces them 
to staff members who share the same home language.  The parent coordinator is introduced to the newcomers and parents to 
give them support with the information they need to know about our school and the community.  This helps the newly 
enrolled students and parents to feel welcome and get acclimated to the school. A translator is available, who speaks Arabic, 
Spanish or Haitian Creole,  as needed and Interpretation services are used as needed. There are assemblies for our ELLs and 
Newcomers. We welcome them, honor their progress, celebrate their cultures,and inform their parents of their language 
developments. Throughout the school year, the Parent Coordinator, ENL teacher, and administrator support are provided 
to  newly enrolled ELLs   
 

17.  What language electives are offered to ELLs?  

 No language electives are offered at this time. However, the Dual Language Programs in Kindergarten and Grade 1 teach 
Haitian Creole as Home Language Arts. 
 

18.  For schools with dual language programs: 

a.  What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day 

(percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. 
In which language(s) is each core content area taught? 

b. 
c.  How is each language separated for instruction? 
d. 

Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same 
time (simultaneous)? 

A self contained model is used in our Dual Language classrooms. Two days are in English and two days are 
in Haitian Creole. On Fridays the classes work together in centers whereby the students are free to use 
which ever language they are comfortable in using. They usually share language among each other 
practicing what they have learned in class or speak in their native language and the other child responds 
in their native language or English as best as possible. All in all it makes for an interesting conversation 
among the children practicing skills they had been taught in class. 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          73 

 

 

 ELA and Math and Fundations are taught in English. Native Language Art, Science, Social Studies, Art 
,Poetry, Math and Alphabet are taught in Haitian Creole.   
 

Professional Development and Support for School Staff 

1.  Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic 

staff.)  What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs 
as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? 
Professional development is available for all personnel who work with ELLs.  Included are common branch teachers, special 
education teachers, guidance counselors and assistant principals, secretaries, parent coordinator, paraprofessionals, school 
psychologist, occupational/physical therapists, and speech therapists. They are provided with professional development in ENL 
strategies, SIOP that includes research based methodology, approaches, planning, delivery of instruction, and assessments. 
Bilingual Progressions and I can indicators are also addressed during PD blocks.    
Conferences and meetings allow information to be shared.  These include but are not limited to: reorganization meetings, 
grade conferences, LPT (Language Proficiency Team) meetings, September and June planning meetings, SIT meetings, and June 
clerical ½ days teachers share and discuss data, information, and student work that is essential for planning and helping our 
ELLs move to the next grade level and help the teachers prepare for the upcoming school year.   
  
Turnkey PDs are also provided by the ENL teacher to staff to ensure we are implementing effective research based strategies 
to our ELLs that are aligned to Common Core Standards. Teachers learn ways they can improve instruction for 
ELLs.  Professional development makes the staff sensitive and aware of the needs of our ELLs.  Professional development 
activities will take place during common preps and faculty conferences.  Teachers and staff attend various workshops and 
conferences throughout the year focused around the common core and strategies to aid achievement for ELLs. These 
workshops will then be presented to teachers during common prep periods. Thus far the ESL teacher has attended and 
provided PD to mainstream teachers. 
  
October - Developing a plan for integrated lessons and grouping using NYSESLAT scores    
November - SIOP introduction, Component 1(Lesson preparation) 
December - SIOP Component 2 and 3 (building background and comprehensible input) 
January - SIOP Component 4 and 5 (strategies and interaction)   
February - SIOP Component 7 and 8 (lesson delivery, assessment&review) 
March- Preparing for the NYSESLAT 
April- NYSESLAT- From standards to assessments. 
May- Promotional criteria for ELLs. Use of multiple criteria. 
June- Books and resources for ELL students during the summer. 
  
These monthly PDs support teachers in delivering Common Core aligned instruction.  They provide teachers strategies to 
scaffold the standards for ELLs in order to breakdown information to make it comprehensible to them.     
  
The ESL teachers provides the staff with support to assist ELLs as they transition from one school grade to the next.  The ESL 
teachers articulates and conferences with the ELLs new teacher.  Information about the child’s strengths, weaknesses and 
goals are discussed.  Checklists, anecdotal records, rubrics and data from the LAB-R, ELL Periodic Assessment  and NYSESLAT 
are used to show progress made. The ESL teachers provides guidance and support explaining the routines and differences in 
middle school as compared to elementary school. Question and answer meetings are organized for the ELLs concerning 
transition to middle school. The guidance counselor has ongoing meetings with teachers to provide them with instruction to 
assist the ELLs concerning transition to the middle school and how to complete their applications to middle school. Our school 
provides Lunch and Learns, half day and full day PD that revolve around the Common Core standards and Danielson 
Framework. Citywide PD and Network PD are also offered to help teachers align their instruction with the CCLS while ensuring 
our ELLs have equal access to the content.  
   

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          74 

 

 

 

2.  Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all 
teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include 
how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance).  Refer to ELL Policy and Reference 
Guide, Professional Development section. 
  As of September 2017, per Part 154 regulations, 15% total hours ELL-specific professional development will be completed by 
all teachers. 50% total hours of ELL-specific professional development for bilingual education and ENL teachers.  
All teachers with ELLs in their classrooms are required to attend weekly Professional Developments  provided by ENL Teacher/ 
Coordinator and  or R-BRN Representative. ENL Teachers are also required to attend district Professional Developments 
provided by ELL Specialists in order to turn key to staff. 
Everyone in the ELL Team are encouraged to attend Professional Developments provided by R-BRN through UFT, 
DELLS, NYU and Fordham University.   
 
 

Parental Involvement 

1.  How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language 
development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? 
Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent 
orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences?  
 Parents meet with Teachers and ENL Teacher throughout the year. Tuesdays are dedicated to meeting with parents.  Parents 
have the opportunity to ask questions regarding ELL services and progress towards Language and social developments.. Goals 
are updated at least twice a year to ensure that students are active in their learning.  Translation/Interpretation services are 
available by teachers in the school that speak the native language of some of the parents as well as through over-the-phone 
interpretation services.    

2.  Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. 
ELL parents are informed and encouraged to attend on site Tuesday parent workshops. If needed translators can be available. 
Parents are encouraged to schedule reading to their child's class in their native language on Language Awareness Days. They 
also attend weekly Adult English Language Learning classes. 
They are informed about Parent Teacher Association (PTA) meetings, parent teacher conferences, and special school events via 
letters and calls in their native language.  This helps the parents of ELLs to be actively involved in their child’s education.   
ELL parents are asked to volunteer two hours to help the children in our school.  The program is the "Two Hour Power 
Program".  Parents would be involved in school events, office help, lunch help, mom and dad events.     
Let's not forget the parents workshops and information sessions sponsored by Fordham, NYU, and Brooklyn College. We also 
partner with NYU Lancome for Health Awareness. The Arab Support Center to help us service our Yemenese families. 
 

 

 

Additional Information 

Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for 
ELLs.  You may attach/submit charts.   This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted.   
N/A   
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          75 

 
 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          76 

Part V: ELL Identification Attestation 

Principal Certification 

2. 

3. 

4. 

5. 
6. 

7. 

8. 

9. 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 

In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL 
Policy and Reference Guide, I, Yasmine Fidelia, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are 
adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 
 
1. 

The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for 
students entering with IEPs). 
Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined 
a. 

If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status 
relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level.  

The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue.   
a.  The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services 
are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality 
translation service.   

Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined.   
a. 

If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility 
to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. 

Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible.   
Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language.  
a.  Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. 
If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish 
LAB.  
Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources 
available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-
education-sife.  
If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting.  
a.  Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent 

video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask 
questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided 
throughout the meeting. 

10.  ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected.  

a. 

b. 

If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program 
in accordance with DOE transfer policies. 
If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent 
choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice.   

11.  Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process).  
12.  If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose 

ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 
 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          77 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 

Part VI: LAP Assurances 

School Name:   Louis Marshall School                                                                              School DBN: 18k276 
Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate.  Names listed in Part A, should align with this 
section.  

Name (PRINT) 

Yasmine Fidelia 

Leslyn Ward 

Mr. Wyatt 

Title 

Principal 

Assistant Principal 

Parent Coordinator 

Guerlene Pierre Louis 

ENL/Bilingual Teacher 

Mrs. Campbell 

Parent 

Natalya Birmakher 

Teacher/Subject Area 

Rose Musto 

Ms. Turner 

Teacher/Subject Area 

Coach 

Matilda Mendez Keegan 

Coach 

Fara Saracino 

School Counselor 

Beverly Wilkins 

Dr. Soeurette Fougere 

Superintendent 
 
Field Support Center Staff 
Member 
               

           

           

           

Other            

Other            

Other            

 

Signature 

Date (mm/dd/yy) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

10/29/18 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

1/1/01 

1/1/01 

1/1/01 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          78 

 

 
 

2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS 

Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools 

 

DBN: 

18K276 
 

School 
Name: 

Louis Marshall 
 

Superintendent:  Ms. Beverly Wil 

 

 
The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. 
If there is more than one LAC, list all. 
 

First Name  

Last Name  

Title  

Has the LAC attended a 

2018-19 training 

The LAC was involved in 
the development of this 

conducted by the Field 

plan? Yes/No  

Language Access 

Coordinator? Yes/No  

Guerlene 

Pierre Louis 

ENL Teacher/LAC 

Yes 

Yes 

   

 
* The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs 
on translation,  
interpretation, compliance and budget.  
 

School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful 
opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's 
Regulation A-663).  
 
By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and 
interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). 
 
Part A:  Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 
 
1.  Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written 

and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from: 

  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS) 
  Automate The System (ATS) reports 
  Student Emergency Contact cards 
  Surveys conducted by your school. 

 

Part 3 (Parent Information) on the Home Language Survey (HLIS) indicates to our school community the language 
of choice that the parent would like to receive written information and the language the parent prefers to 
communicate orally. Each child has a HLIS form in their cumulative record card. On each child's blue emergency 
contact card, a language preference is indicated. Upcoming parent meetings, workshops, and school events that 
are on a telephone relay are if needed, translated into the parents preferred language.  

 

We conducted our assessment of written translation based on parental involvement. A number of letters in the 
native languages are sent out to notify the parents of a Parent Association meeting and fundraising event. We 
realized that our translation services were successful. The ENL teacher and parent coordinator work 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          79 

 

collaboratively to provide teachers and staff in the school community the parents who need language access 
support.  

 

 
 
2.  List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, 

which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language 
Report (RCPL) ATS report. 
 

Language  

Written 
Preferred  

Percent 
Written  

Oral Preferred  

Percent Oral  

Of our 638 parents at PS 276, the 
following number of parents have 
requested oral interpretation services in 
languages other than English; 

Haitian Creole=51 

Spanish=5 

French=1 

Arabic=6 

The following number of parents have 
requested written interpretation 
services in languages other than 
English; 

Haitian Creole=51 

Spanish=5  

French=1 

Arabic=6 

These findings are shared with our 
school community through a generated 
list which is provided to the teachers, 
Parent Teacher Association (PTA), and 
Parent Coordinator indicating the 
parents requests for spoken 
interpretation and written translation. 
This list is kept on file with the PTA, 
Parent Coordinator (PC), and in the 
classrooms. The ENL teacher provides 
updated information with this staff to 
ensure the needs of the parents are 
being met as requested.  

   

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Haitian 
Creole = 
4.31 

Spanish = 
1.08 

French = 
0.31 

Arabic = 
4.31 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Haitian 
Creole =51 

Spanish = 7 

French = 2 

Arabic = 28 

Urdu = 1 

Japanese = 
1 

Urdu = 
0.15 

Japanese = 
0.15 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Haitian 
Creole= 57 

Haitian Creole = 8.78 

Spanish = 10 

Spanish = 1.54 

French = 2 

Arabic = 29 

Urdu = 1 

French = 0.31 

Arabic = 4.47 

Urdu = o.15 

Japanese = 1 

Japanese = 0.15 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          80 

 

 

3.  From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at 

least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, 
French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. 
 

No parents preferred language represent at least a 10% population of our school. 

 

 
 
Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 
 
1.  List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be 

distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents.  
 

Document Name  

Month/Frequency Distributed to 

How do you plan to translate? Include 

The following documents that are 
sent home require 
translation:Parent Handbook, 
Parent Teacher Conference, 
Entitlement Letters, rNew York 
State Assessment Calendar,This is 
in addition to all parent 
communications that are not 
automatically generated in the 
preferred language of the parent.  

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Families  

procedures to ensure timely provision of 

translated documents to parents.  

Letters to families are translated by bilingual 
school staff as well as through the Department 
of Education's Translation Unit prior to the 
event.  

 

September 2018 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          81 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Middle School Applications 

 

Sept/Nov. 2018, 
March/May 2019 

  October 2018 

Pre-K/ Kindergarten Applications  October 2018/November 2018 

Parent Engagement/Parent 
Workshops 

Monthly Prior to the engagement 
as well as by school messenger 

Translated Middle School Directories are 
delivered to our school in late September based 
on the home language data stored in ATS and 
we distribute it to parents in early October. The 
ESL teacher//LAC is given all the translated 
materials to give out specifically to parents in 
their preferred languages by the Guidance 
Counselor who handles the Middle School 
application process. 

  We package K admissions Flyers to pre-k 

families in their preferred language 
translated and downloaded, from the K 
Admissions Page in late November. The 
flyers are also posted around the school 
and near the Pre-K arrival and dismissal 
exit in all parents preferred languages as 
well. K directories which are delivered in 
mid December are also available for 
parents in their preferred language. We 
can order additional copies through 
ESPublications@schools.nyc.gov when 
necessary. 

 

 

  Classroom teachers will also place 

Parent Coordinator conducted 
Workshop on their Newsletters to keep 
parents informed. Translators in Haitian 
Creole, Spanish, and Arabic are usually 
available to share information with 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          82 

 

   

 

parents during workshops an to answer 
their questions. 

2.  List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as 

parent-teacher  
conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings.  
   

Meeting Name  

Month/Frequency of Meetings  

How does your school plan to provide 

interpretation service(s)?  

Back to School Night 

 

 

 

 

 

September 13, 2018 

Fall Parent Teacher Conferences 

November 16, 2018 

Spring Parent Teacher Conferences  March 2019, May 2019 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Staff will be available to translate 
for parents who do not speak 
English fluently. Letters will be 
sent home prior to conferences 
in parents preferred languages. 
For those languages not spoken, 
we would call the phone 
interpretation services. 

Staff will be available to translate 
for parents who do not speak 
English fluently. Letters will be 
sent home prior to conferences 
in parents preferred languages 
For those languages not spoken, 
we would call the phone 
interpretation services. 

Staff will be available to translate 
for parents who do not speak 
English fluently. Letters will be 
sent home prior to conferences 
in parents preferred languages 
For those languages not spoken, 
we would call the phone 
interpretation services. 

   

 

3.  Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of 

a school emergency.  
 

Parents will be contacted via school messenger in their preferred languages to state the emergency at the school. The 
District Office will be made aware of the school's emergency situation to see how they can further support with 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          83 

 

translation services. Parents will also be called independently by staff who speaks their language to share the nature 
of the school emergency.  

 
 

 
 
Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure

 

 
Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and 
what resources are available to meet compliance.  
 

  We will provide a copy of the Chancellor's Reg A-663 upon the beginning of the year staff PD and discuss the 

importance of ensuring that on emergency card of all students that parent's preferred languages are noted 
and that all communications to parents are forwarded in that language. Also, it will be noted in our CEP that 
teachers will make all possible efforts to send translated materials to parents and to use a translator when 
speaking to parents about students' goals and academics and not use a minor or the student themselves. 
during parent teacher conferences. Teachers' will seek the schools' Arabic a, Haitian Creole paraprofessionals 
and Spanish speaking staff to translate for them at all times to ensure that parents are well served and are 
receiving up to date information about their children's instruction and progress or note the signage in our 
hallways and offices to make the calls to the translation units for translation and interpretation services. 

 

 
 
Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services 
 
Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive 
information. Include any: 

  Translated signage 
  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents 
  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) 

 

The school with the support of the Parent Coordinator and ESL Coordinator / LAC will determine the parent's need for 
translation services within the required time, and will distribute all translated documents in the preferred language of 
the parent. Signage exist in the schools' vestibule, Main Office and Parent Coordinator's Office to share with the 
parents that Language translation exist. At PTA meetings and other school events, a Translator is usually available to 
parents to inform them of the information being shared at the meetings so that they can be fully inform and viable 
participants. In addition, phone calls go out weekly to inform parents of current school events in English, Haitian 
Creole, and Arabic.  

 

 
 
Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services 
Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the 
language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services?   
 

We will utilize DOE translation and interpretation services to provide a brief exit slip to parents after utilizing the 
service to assess whether it has been effective and useful for parents.  

We will also provide a Language Evaluation Slip to all parents who are receiving translations ( orally and written). 

 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          84 

