 
 

 

 
 

 
  
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

2018-19 

COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN 

(CEP) 

 
 
 
 

 

DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 

16K309 

School Name: 

P.S. 309 THE GEORGE E. WIBECAN PREPARATORY ACADEMY 

Principal: 

TANYA BRYANT 

 
 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                          
 

 

 

 

 1 

 

Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline  

 
 
Section 1: School Information Page 
 
 
Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page  
 
 
Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) 
 
 
Section 4: CEP Overview  
 
 
Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  

  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction 
  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment 
  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers 
  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership 
  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties  

 
 
Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS)  
 
 
Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) 
 
 
Section 8: Title I Program Information  
 
 
Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 
 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          2 

 

 

 
School Name: 

BEDS Code: 

Grades Served: 

School Address:  

Section 1: School Information Page 

 

School Information 

 

The George E. Wibecan Preparatory 
Academy 

 
N/A 

 
PreK – 5 

 
794 Monroe Street, Brooklyn 

 
718-574-2381 

School Number (DBN): 

 

16K309 

718-423-0643 

Fax: 

 

Phone Number: 

 

TanyaBryant 

TBryant4@schools.nyc.gov 

School Contact Person:  

 

Principal: 

UFT Chapter Leader: 

Parents’ Association President: 

SLT Chairperson: 

Title I Parent Representative (or 
Parent Advisory Council 
Chairperson): 

Student Representative(s): 

 

Email Address: 

 

Tanya Bryant 

 
Lenore Tripoulas 

 
Suzanne Cope 

 
ElyseWilliams 

 
ElyseWilliams 

 

 
NA 

 
N/A 

 
Matthew Laurino(New York Edge) 

CBO Representative: 
 

 

 

District Information 

 

Geographical District: 

16 

 

Superintendent’s Office Address: 

RaheshaAmon 

Superintendent: 
1010 Lafayette Ave., Brooklyn, NY 11221 

 

 
RAmon@schools.nyc.gov 

Superintendent’s Email Address: 

(718) 574-2834 

 

Phone Number: 

 

(718) 935-4467 

Fax: 

 

 
 

Field Support Center (FSC)  

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          3 

 

Brooklyn North 

Bernadette Fitzgerald 

FSC: 

 

Executive Director’s Office Address: 

Executive Director: 
131 Livingston St., Brooklyn, NY 11201 

 

 
BFitzge2@schools.nyc.gov 

Executive Director’s Email Address: 

(718) 935-3954 

 

Phone Number: 

 

718 935-2382 

Fax: 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          4 

 

Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page  

 

All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this 
Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to 
support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention 
Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal 
number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with 
Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. 
 
Directions: 

 

1.  List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 
2.  Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization 
(CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an 
asterisk*. 

3.  SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member 

does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, 
which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT 
member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval.   

4.  The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file 

in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. 

 

Name 

Position and Constituent Group 

Represented 

Signature 
(Blue Ink) 

Tanya Bryant 

 
Lenore Tripoulas 

 
Suzanne Cope 

 
N/A 

 
Robin Lester-Kenton 

 

N/A 

 

N/A 

 

*Principal or Designee 

*UFT Chapter Leader or Designee 

*PA/PTA President or Designated Co-
President 

DC 37 Representative (staff), if 
applicable 

Title I Parent Representative or 
Parent Advisory Council Chairperson  

Student Representative  
(optional for elementary and middle 
schools; a minimum of two members 
required for high schools) 

Student Representative  
(optional for elementary and middle 
schools; a minimum of two members 
required for high schools) 

Sandra Cauthen, SASF 

CBO Representative, if applicable 

 
LenoxSmall 

 
PamelaBovelle 

 
Heather Allen 

 

 
Member/ UFT 

 
Member/ UFT 

 
Member/ UFT 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          5 

 

 

Name 

Position and Constituent Group 

Represented 

Signature 
(Blue Ink) 

MatthewAguillera 

 
Lavern Powers 

 
Kerry Ann Fletcher 

 
ElyseWilliams 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Member/ Parent 

 
Member/ Parent 

 
Member/ Parent 

 
Member/Parent 

 
Member/  

 
Member/ 

 
Member/  

 
Member/  

 
Member/  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          6 

 

Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan  

 

The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to 
support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing 
school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, 
monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. 
This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the 
school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, 
Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. 

Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools 

The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect 
the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms 
where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity 
and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and 
classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more 
attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and 
Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our 
families and students. 

Strong Schools, Strong Communities  

The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, 
educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school 
prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult.  

The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers 
and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of 
schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, 
school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that 
all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New 
Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students.  

The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development 

The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and 
external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase 
learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently 
ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan 
(CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school 
community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and 
address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for 
students. 
 

Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish 
high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the 
Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community 
members concrete ways to improve. 
 
In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in 
consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to 
participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a 
comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          7 

 
the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all 
the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements 
work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing 
that it likely addresses other elements as well. 
 

The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools  

Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards 
are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical 
thinking skills. 
Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, 
and challenged by their teachers and peers. 
Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. 
They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous 
improvement. 
Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, 
developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. 
Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by 
welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. 
Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school 
and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value 
each other. 

 

The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools 

In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in 
improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative 
and qualitative data. 

NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) 

The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by 
coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality 
Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 
Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below:  

I.       Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) 
II.    School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4)  
III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and 

Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) 

  
School Quality Guide  

The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to 
set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to 
accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also 
available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s 
practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. 
For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. 
The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of 
similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set 
based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. 

 

Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          8 

 
Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, 
professional development, and parent and family engagement. 
 
To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in 
improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will 
serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the 
administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish: 
 
 
 
It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School 
Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the 
joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% 
parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% 
budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent 
and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on 
establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. 

a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; 
a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) 

 
Next Steps for CEP Development 

School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  

  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the 

requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655. 

  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability 

status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year. 

  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed 

by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are 
SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you 
monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school 
community know when you’ve reached your goal. 

  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action 
plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement. 

  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I 

schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). 

  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall 

cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action 
plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. 

Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful 
implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to 
accomplishing desired results. 

1.  What is your school’s mission statement? 

P.S. 309 Mission Statment 

Section 4: CEP Overview 

 

P.S. 309K, The George E. Wibecan Preparatory Academy, is committed to making manifest in all our thoughts, 
words, and actions a spirit of collaboration, cooperation, and cohesion. We are committed to providing a student 
centered, upwardly mobile, education to all of our learners; facilitated by a knowledgeable, diverse, professional 
teaching staff; so that every child can go as far as their potential takes them. We are committed to collaborating 
with families and the local community to cultivate downwardly stable practices that will produce thoughtful 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          9 

 

scholars whose world views are grounded in family, community and identity. We are committed to delivering a 
rigorous, standards based, cross-curricular education, through S.T.E.A.M, that is tailored and communicates high 
expectations for all learners, across all disciplines. We are committed to delivering a comprehensive social-
emotional learning curriculum that grows the whole child, advancing citizenship, character development, and self-
advocacy. We are committed to creating an outwardly global, culturally mediated, school environment that 
celebrates all the talents and skills that come through our doors, so that every learner may know and enjoy an ever 
expanding horizon of ambition and possibilities.  

 

Mission statement Explanation:  

At P.S. 309, we agree with Brown University’s Educational Alliance that “Culture is central to learning. It plays a role 
not only in communicating and receiving information, but also in shaping the thinking process of groups and 
individuals. A pedagogy that acknowledges, responds to, and celebrates fundamental cultures offers full, equitable 
access to education for students from all cultures.” As a result, we have revised our school’s mission to reflect those 
Culturally Relevant Educational (CRE) practices that research shows to be essential in the production and delivery of 
wholesome educational opportunities which will produce turn of the century, world class scholars.  

Our mission statement begins with an emphasizes on student centered learning within a collaborative, cooperative, 
and cohesive environment because research not only shows that children learn best when interacting with both 
adults and their more knowledgeable peers; but such an environment gives them opportunities to hypothesize, 
experiment with new ideas, and receive feedback in real-time; which ultimately leads to the development of self-
confident, self-directed, proactive scholars and community leaders.  

Additionally, our mission statement places a premium on diversity and culturally mediated instruction, which helps 
our students to integrate diverse ways of knowing, understanding, and representing information. This skill not only 
allows them to become active participants in their own learning, it makes them stronger competitors in the global 
market place because they learn to develop insight and perspective, and share information in different ways.  

Also, our mission statement indicates that we seek to establish and maintain closer family and community ties. 
Whether through informal chats as parents brings their children to school, or in phone conversation or home visits, or 
through newsletters sent home, our school’s mission makes forging stronger family and community ties a top priority 
because research shows that these critically important partnerships results in better scholastic achievement for all 
students. 

Similarly, our focus on creating an environment in which students can learn about themselves and the world around 
them within a positive cultural context is important because it reduce ‘psychic alienation,’ which research shows can 
interfere with emotional and cognitive development, and result in academic engagement and attendance patterns 
predictive of school failure. Moreover, reshaping our curriculum to present our students with an interdisciplinary 
approach to education through S.T.E.A.M empowers them to assume leadership roles in the school and their local 
communities, which research shows to be a predictor of school success. Reshaping our curriculum signals to our 
students and their families that the education they are receiving is meaningful for this century and beyond because 
they are invited to make use of their own identity, experiences, and varied technical know-how to generate the 
innovations they need to achieve and preserve their comforts and happiness.  

Lastly, our mission focuses on messaging to all students the expectation that they will attain high standards in their 
school work because research shows this helps young learners develop a healthy self-concept and the intrinsic 
motivation need for them to demonstrate mastery of their grade level curriculum. When high expectations are 
peered with caring, culturally responsive teaching, the connection between culturally/community-based knowledge 
to classroom learning experiences is made more fluidic and dynamic; facilitating the transfer of what is learned in 
school to real-life situations. This conveys that school is important and necessary.  

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          10 

 

 

 

2.  Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, 

including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented.  
Throughout the year, we plan field trips that align to the different units of study. Through these trips we enhance the 
students’ knowledge and provide real life experiences. We use videos and/or movies to support the content being 
taught throughout the various subject areas. Through these activities, the students can visualize what they have 
learned and watch the content come to life.  

Our school is partnered with many fabulous community based organizations. We thank Councilwoman Darlene 
Mealey for providing us with an exciting and enriching afterschool program through SASF. Parents appreciate the 
tutoring support that students receive through the program and the sports activities that students participate in daily. 
Another program that our school is currently partnered with is Morningside Center for Teaching Social Responsibility. 
Through this program students’ are learning problem solving skills, as well as developing their social and emotional 
well - being.  

 

Students and families learn how to create healthy and nutritious meals through our partnership with CookShop, a 
program provided by the New York City Food Bank. Our students explore, discover and prepare healthy foods and 
learn about nutrition. The best part of the experience is that parents who participate leave with fresh ingredients to 
cook at home and share with their families. We also work with the City Parks Program, which supports our efforts to 
teach the students we serve how to grow various types of fruits, vegetables, herbs and flowers that thrive in our 
community. Students bring their knowledge back into the classroom and participate in various activities to extend 
what they have learned. 

We use “Move to Improve” to engage our students in movement and exercise to promote a healthy lifestyle as well 
and the Mighty Milers program is used to excite and stimulate our students in the areas of health and fitness during 
physical education time. We also provide our students with clinical support through an extension of the Bedford-
Stuyvesant Family Health Center which is housed right on our main floor as a community resource. They provide our 
students and families with immediate medical attention and care. Our fourth and fifth grade students explore 
nutrition through the arts as they participate in a program brought to us by Studio in a School. Through this program, 
a nutritionist educates our students about different fruit and vegetables found in our community. Through discussions 
and tastings, students learn to appreciate the various textures and nutritional value of specific fruits and vegetables. 
They use their newly found knowledge to create artwork that represents what they have learned.  

 

At PS309K, students receive a high quality academic experience that is enhanced through the use of several programs, 
partnerships, and community based supports. We are proud to say that P.S. 309K is a school that provides a rich, 
warm, and safe learning environment that parents, families and community members can rely on to give children 
what they need to be valuable members of our society and successful future leaders in our world. 

  

3.  Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          11 

 

Historically a significant number P.S. 309 students have been 'Students with Disabilities' (SWDs). However, during the 
course of the last few years number of SWD's identified on our roster has been declining. According to 2016-17 NYS 
SIRS data, 38% of our schools population were SWDs. NYC Public School s ATS data indicates that for the 2017-18 
academic year, about 18% of the student population were identified as SWDs. It is projected that a comparable 
percentage (16.3 %) of the students body will be SWD's for the 2018-19 academic year, NYC Public School s ATS data. 
Most of our SWD's will be housed in ICT or self-contained settings. Most of our SWD's are currently classified as 
having a Speech & Language Impairment or Learning Disability. Less common identifications include, Other Health 
Impairment (OHI), Intellectual Disability (ID), Autism, and Emotional Disturbance (ED). The performance of this sub-
group of students continues to lag far behind their Gen. Ed. peers on state and local assessments. These students will 
require the services of special education teachers and access to academic support programs. 

Additionally, P.S. 309 has a significant economically disadvantaged population. According to NYS SIRS data, in 2016, 
79% of the student body was economically disadvantaged; and in 2017, 82% of our student body was identified as 
economically disadvantaged. An estimated 33% of our students are either doubled up or living in transient housing 
within and outside the school zone. These factors affect attendance and punctuality, which may negatively impact 
academic performance. It is anticipated that allotments for school uniforms, supplies, and transportation may be 
necessary for many of these students. Additionally, segments of this population may require the coordinated services 
of a school social worker, guidance counselor, and attendant teacher.  

Lastly, according to NYS SIRS data about about 10% of the school's population were classified as ENL students in 2016; 
and 12% received this classification in 2017. In school case management rosters indicate that a comparable number of 
ENL students (10-12%)will be enrolled during the 2018 academic year. These students will require the services of an 
ENL teacher and their parents/ family may require translation services when engaging the school community.  

 

4. 

Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over 
the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. 

We are very proud of the efforts that our scholars are making towards reaching proficiency. This year, we have chosen 
to focus on high rigor and collaboration, as noted in the Framework for Great Schools, to strengthen writing and math 
so that our students master more academic standards in both areas. Students are finding reading to be enjoyable, 
writing to be an opportunity to share their deep understanding of new topics and concepts, and math to be an 
exciting challenge, now that we have adopted ReadyGen and GoMath as our chosen curricula for mathematics and 
ELA. We believe that our students are finding their learning experience to be rewarding and fun, resulting in academic 
success, growth, improvement, and proud children.  

 

 

 

 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          12 

 

 

School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 16K309 

School Configuration (2018-19) 

Grade Configuration 

PK,0K,01,02,03,04,
05 

Total Enrollment (2017-
18) 
English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 

210 

SIG Recipient (Y/N) 

Transitional Bilingual 

N/A 

Dual Language 

N/A 

Self-Contained English as a Second 
Language 

Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) 

# Special Classes (ELA) 
# Special Classes (Math) 

# Visual Arts 
# Foreign Language 

% Title I Population 
% Free Lunch 
% Limited English Proficient 

31 
31 

13 
 

% American Indian or Alaska Native 
% Hispanic or Latino 
% White 

# SETSS (ELA) 
# SETSS (Math) 
Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) 
# Music 
# Drama 
# CTE 
# Dance 

11 
8 

13 
13 

# Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) 
# Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) 

School Composition (2017-18) 

84.0%  % Attendance Rate 
80.5%  % Reduced Lunch 
9.5% 

% Students with Disabilities 

Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) 

% Black or African American 

1.0% 
28.1%  % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 
5.2% 

% Multi-Racial 

Personnel (2015-16) 

Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) 
% of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate 
% Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 

2.09 
0% 
7% 

# of Assistant Principals (2016-17) 
% Teaching Out of Certification 
Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) 

Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) 

ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 

22.6%  Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 

Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 

80% 

Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-
17) 

Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) 

ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 
Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 
4 Year Graduation Rate 

Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 

N/A 
N/A 
N/A 

N/A 

Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 
US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 
6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) 
% ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures 
(2015-16) 

Reward 
In Good Standing 
Focus District 

Priority School 

Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) 

No 
Yes 
Yes 

Recognition 
Local Assistance Plan 
Focus School Identified by a Focus District 

No 

Focus Subgroups 

N/A 

Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) 

Elementary/Middle School 

Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) 

American Indian or Alaska Native 
Hispanic or Latino 
White 
Students with Disabilities 
Economically Disadvantaged 

American Indian or Alaska Native 
Hispanic or Latino 
White 
Students with Disabilities 
Economically Disadvantaged 

American Indian or Alaska Native 
Hispanic or Latino 
White 
Students with Disabilities 
Economically Disadvantaged 

American Indian or Alaska Native 
Hispanic or Latino 
White 
Students with Disabilities 
Economically Disadvantaged 

American Indian or Alaska Native 
Hispanic or Latino 
White 
Students with Disabilities 
Economically Disadvantaged 

American Indian or Alaska Native 
Hispanic or Latino 
White 
Students with Disabilities 
Economically Disadvantaged 

N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
NO 

Black or African American 
Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander 
Multi-Racial 
Limited English Proficient 
ALL STUDENTS 

Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) 
Black or African American 
Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander 
Multi-Racial 
Limited English Proficient 
ALL STUDENTS 

N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
NO 

Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) 

N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
YES 
High School 

Black or African American 
Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander 
Multi-Racial 
Limited English Proficient 
ALL STUDENTS 

Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) 

N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 

Black or African American 
Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander 
Multi-Racial 
Limited English Proficient 
ALL STUDENTS 

Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) 
Black or African American 
Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander 
Multi-Racial 
Limited English Proficient 
ALL STUDENTS 

N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 

Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) 
Black or African American 
Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander 
Multi-Racial 
Limited English Proficient 
ALL STUDENTS 

N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 

No 

N/A 

33 
32 

13 
 

90.7% 
3.3% 
22.9% 

58.6% 
4.3% 
3.8% 

2 
11% 
10.3 

14.5% 

N/A 

N/A 
N/A 
N/A 

N/A 

N/A 
No 
No 

NO 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
NO 

NO 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
NO 

N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
YES 

N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 

N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 

N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          13 

 

 
 

Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans 

 

Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, 
motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged 
in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. 

Part 1 – Needs Assessment   

Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and 
formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not 
limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. 
Number responses accordingly. 
 
1.  What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element?  Indicate the data trends, source and year. 
2.  What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? 

Indicate the data trends, source and year. 

 
Strengths: 

Within the P.S. 309 learning community, there is a vibrant culture of collaboration supported by ongoing teacher 
team meetings to revise/ adjust instructional units; ensuring rigorous mathematics instruction, aligned to the CCLS, 
and assessed by a series of performance tasks and end of unit assessments. Additionally, the school provides ongoing 
professional development to address the needs of individual teachers. According to the 2016-17 Quality Review, 
“Teachers articulate that the principal provides learning opportunities that “bring out the best” in teachers, sharing 
that training activities are specific, hands on and engaging. There are many lunch and learns and opportunities for 
teachers to support other teachers. Administrators enhance teacher growth through regular attendance at grade 
meetings. Teachers further state that after walkthroughs and observations, they receive timely follow- up training, 
guidance for areas of improvement, tools to implement and time to make corrections to grow.” The culture of 
continuous improvement emerging within the professional learning community can be leveraged to raise student 
achievement in mathematics. Moreover, the school enjoys favorable relations with the parents and family members 
of its student body, having achieved an 85% positive response on the 2015-16 school survey from parent participants. 
This can be leveraged to more effectively deploy efficacy tools that will help the students within our learning 
community adopt and internalize attitudes that support scholarship in all subject areas. 

 

Need: 

Historically, P.S. 309 has struggled with student achievement in mathematics and has performed below its district and 
city counterparts. Though the gains made on the 2016 NYS mathematics assessment were statistically insignificant 
(where the school moved from 18% proficiency in 2015 to 21% proficiency in 2016), it was perceived that this positive 
increase correlated with the kinds of incremental gains one would expect from newly implemented adjustments to 
mathematics instruction within the learning community. However, the fact that these gains were not sustained in the 
2017 NYS assessment cycle has presented great cause for concern. In 2017, 16% of testing population was proficient 
in mathematics, as indicated by NYS Student Information Repository System (SIRS) data. This 5 % decrease is of 
statistical significance. Between the 2016 and 2017 assessment window, the percentage of students performing at: 
level 1 increase by 12% (4 students); level 2 decreased by 7% (9 students); level 3 decreased by 3% (4 students); and 
level 4 decrease by 3% (2 students). Currently, student proficiency in mathematics at P.S. 309 is 4 percentage points 
below that of the school’s district counterparts. 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          14 

 

While female students seemingly made gains (moving from 5% to 6% proficiency), these gains were statistically 
insignificant and are representative of the fact that fewer female students were tested in 2017 than in 2016 and 1 
extra female student demonstrated proficiency in mathematics in 2017 than in 2016. During this same time period 
the percentage of female students achieving a level 1 increased 13 % and the percentage of female students achieving 
a level 2 decreased 16%. In 2017, female students represent 54% of the total testing population and 46% of the 
students who were unable to demonstrate proficiency in mathematics. 

 

Male student achievement in mathematics was also diminished between the 2016 and 2017 assessment cycle. In 
2016, 31% of the male students were proficient in mathematics and in 2017, 18% of the male students were 
proficient. This discrepancy in performance is in part the result of 12 fewer male students testing in 2017, and the raw 
number of students achieving a level 1 and level 2 remaining consistent. What is significant is the fact that half as 
many male students achieved a level 3 in 2017 than in 2016, and no male students achieved a level 4 (a loss of 2 
students). In 2017, male students represented 46% of the total testing population and 38% of the students who were 
unable to demonstrate proficiency in mathematics. 

 

Additionally, SWD’s performance in 2017 (a total of 19 individuals) was consistent with their performance in 2016. A 
3% decrease in the proficiency was the result of 1 less student achieving a level 3. This subgroup represented little 
more than 25% of the testing population; and the number of level 1’s increased 13 percentage points to 84% while 
the number of level 2’s decreased 10 percentage points to 11%. Similar trends held true for the school’s ENL students, 
which represented little more than 20% of the testing population. Though 50% more ENL students tested in 2017 (a 
total of 15 individuals) than in 2016, 80% of the ENL’s achieved a level 1 and 20% achieved a level 2 in 2017. (It should 
be noted that within this time frame there was a 10% decrease in level 1’s and a 20 increase in level 2’s for the 
school’s ENL population). In 2017, SWD’s and ENL’s combined, represented 46% of the testing population and 45% of 
our students who were unable to demonstrate proficiency in mathematics. 

 

Systemic failures in mathematics achievement across all subgroups demonstrates the need for a comprehensive 
overhaul of the school’s design and delivery of math instruction. It also demonstrates the need for building wide 
professional development in the areas of designing and delivering rigorous math instruction; and a continued focus on 
differentiation (particularly for ENL’s and SWD’s) through horizontal and vertical collaboration that affords teachers 
the opportunity to build a shared understanding of effective differentiation across the content area; expanding upon 
teachers’ content and pedagogical knowledge. Additionally, the data indicates a need for revision of the school’s 
continuum of Academic Intervention Services (AIS) with a specific focus around adopting/ established new and/or 
modified instructional tools, systems and protocols to support remediation in mathematics. Moreover, there is a need 
to support the staff in the use of data to drive instruction; and to implement regular cycles of “problem of practice” 
within the content area to identify and troubleshoot instructional issues. 

 

 
Part 2 – Annual Goal 

Indicate  your  school’s  2018-19  goal  for  improving  student  outcomes  and  school  performance  that  addresses  this 
element  of  the  Framework  for  Great  Schools–Rigorous  Instruction.  Your  goal  must  be  responsive  to  the  identified 
priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-
bound.  
By June 2019, the number of grade 3-5 students achieving a level 3 or better on the 2019 NYS Math Assessment will 
increase at least 5 percentage points when compared to grade 3-5 student performance on the 2018 NYS Math 
Assessment. 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          15 

Target 
Group(s) 
Who will be 
targeted? 

Timeline 
What is the 
start and 
end date? 

Key Personnel 
Who is responsible 
for implementing 
and overseeing the 
activity/strategy? 

K-5 

Sept. – June 

 

 

 

Teachers (Primary), 
Administrators, 
Educational Support 
Staff 

 
Part 3a – Action Plan 

Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies 
your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for 
this Framework for Great Schools element, including: 

  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional 

 

development, and/or systems and structures needed to 
impact change. 
Strategies to address the needs of students with 
disabilities, English language learners, and other high-
need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, 
SIFE, STH). 

Curriculum: 

 

1. All grade level teams will narrow instructional focus within the 
Envision math curriculum by identifying and planning around a 
subset of strategies in each unit for which at least 75 % of 
students are to demonstrate mastery (3 out of 4 consecutive 
trials); ensuring that students have enough trials to develop and 
demonstrate mastery of key concepts within the grade. 

 

2. All grade level teams will make use of exemplars tasks to teach 
students how to engage in productive struggle and support the 
development of critical thinking, deep conceptual understanding 
of math concepts, and the application of problem solving 
strategies within multi-step problems.  

Professional Development: 

K-5 

Sept. – June 

 

1. All grade level teams will continue to receive and implement 
PD on the 5 practices for orchestrating productive math 
discussions. 

 

 

 

Teachers, 
Administrators 
(Primary), 
Educational Support 
Staff 

 

2. All grade level teams will receive professional development 
around teaching students to develop and maintain cooperative 
partnerships and collaborative groups. 

 

3. All grade level teams will be provided with professional 
support from an outside consultant in the form of data analysis, 
along with collaborative in-service workshops around Data 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          16 

 

Driven Instruction (DDI) and content knowledge and Pedagogical 
skills development.  

 

4. All grades k-2 teacher teams will receive PD around: 

A) making use of a "problem of practice" tool to troubleshoot 
persistent instructional/learning challenges; 

B) developing and implementing a protocol to facilitate 
participation in a series of horizontal and vertical inter-visitations 
focused around observation, discussion, and reflection on 
effective skill based math practices. 

 

5. All grade 3-5 teacher teams will participate in: 

A) Teacher Lesson Study to diagnose and troubleshoot persistent 
instructional/ learning challenges within the instructional 
community; 

B) a series of intra-visitation within the P.S. 309 learning 
community, along with a series of inter-visitations with partner 
schools in district 23 to facilitate the exchange of high leverage 
instructional practices around identified skill sets; 

C) the development/deployment of tools and protocols to 
engage students and families in the process of strengthening 
their capabilities and mindset to be successful in mathematics; 

D) professional development sessions with Carnegie Learning 
focused on identified grade level needs with regards to content 
knowledge development and delivery.  

Assessment: 

 

1. All teacher teams will make use of the following diagnostic 
assessments to determine student achievement levels and 
needed supports: Chapter Pre-Tests/ post tests and exemplars 
tasks. 

 

2. All teacher teams will make use the end of year grade level 
assessment to track student progress towards mastery of grade 
level skills. 

 

k-5 

Sept.-June 

Teachers (Primary), 
Administrators, 
Educational Support 
Staff 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          17 

 

3. All teacher teams will implement a calendar of weekly 
assessments of the skills taught within their current chapter and 
biweekly assessments of the skills taught in previous chapters. 

 

Teacher Practice: 

 

1. Daily, all teachers will create opportunities for students to 
engage in math grand conversations, discussions and/or peer-to-
peer conferences grounded in key math concepts and driven by 
H.O.T questions. 

 

2. All grade level teachers will establish clear whole year goals 
based on the grade level mathematics standards of their 
students, along with suitable unit goals for individual students 
based on learning progressions, all of which will be used to help 
guide instructional decision. 

 

3. All grade level teachers will identify and implement strategies 
to help their students build procedurally fluency around 
mathematical skills and concepts taught. 

 

4. All grade level teachers will direct and encourage students to 
show all their mathematical and procedural thinking when 
attacking word problems and/or executing calculation. 

Efficacy: 

 

1. Once every six weeks, each teacher team will design and 
facilitate at least one parental engagement workshops with the 
explicit outcome of: 

A) conveying/ reminding parents/ families of the grades Math 
goal; B) inform parents/ families of supports that can be accessed 
at home to help their child achieve mastery of grade level math 
concepts, skills and strategies; 

C) updating parents on their child's performance in mathematics. 

 

k-5 

Sept. - June  Teachers (Primary), 

Administrators, 
Educational Support 
Staff 

k-5 

Sept. - June  Teachers (Primary), 

Parents, 
Administrators, 
Educational Support 
Staff 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          18 

2. All teacher teams will develop IAP's for level 1 and level 2 
students who currently do not have an IEP as part of a 
comprehensive AIS program. 

 

3. Targeted students will be assigned a community based math 
mentor who will provide them remediation (as needed), support 
in acquiring current unit/grade level skills, and coaching towards 
developing a growth mindset in mathematics (using the "Habits 
of Mind" or similar efficacy tool). 

 

4. Students will be invited to join an upper or lower grade 
student lead math club, where they will collaboratively attack 
exemplar mathematics problems. 

 

 
 

 
3b – Parent and Family Engagement 

How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York 
State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible 
for implementation and oversight. 
A major part of our school’s mission is to build a cooperative, collaborative, cohesive learning environment. This is 
aligned with our identified Culturally Relevant Educational (CRE) practices because research not only shows that 
children learn best when interacting with both adults and their more knowledgeable peers; but such an environment 
gives them opportunities to hypothesize, experiment with new ideas, and receive feedback in real-time; which 
ultimately leads to the development of self-confident, self-directed, proactive scholars and community leaders. 
Towards this end, all grade level teams will receive professional development around teaching students to develop 
and maintain cooperative partnerships and collaborative groups, which they will implement in their classrooms. 
Gaining proficiency in developing and maintain cooperative partnerships and collaborative groups has the additional 
benefit of facilitating another CRE practice, culturally mediated instruction. Once our students are able to create and 
function in cooperative partnerships and collaborative groups, they will be able to more efficiently integrate diverse 
ways of knowing, understanding, and representing information. In practical terms, this will translate into our 
students: A) making better use of the multiple strategies taught within any given math unit to solve real world, grade 
level math word problem; B) being able to engage in longer, more meaningful conversations around H.O.T/essential 
questions; C) having opportunities to practice what they have learned from the S.E.L curriculum, improving the quality 
of classroom rapport. It is anticipated that by October 2018, school administrator(s) (or identified designee) will 
proved the identified professional development which will be implemented in all classrooms by November 2018.  

Additionally, this action plan includes a provision to help the school establish and maintain closer family and 
community ties, which will also aid culturally mediated instruction. According to the action plan, once every six weeks, 
each teacher team will design and facilitate at least one parental engagement workshops with the explicit outcome 
of: A) conveying/ reminding parents/ families of the grades Math goal; B) inform parents/ families of supports that 
can be accessed at home to help their child achieve mastery of grade level math concepts, skills and strategies; C) 
updating parents on their child's performance in mathematics. It is anticipated that through closer collaboration 
between P.S. 309 educators and families, our students will demonstrate better scholastic achievement around the 
topics covered in their grade level mathematics curriculum because: A) parents will be provided opportunities to 
review their child's portfolio and receive targeted guidance on how to help their child overcome identified challenges; 
B) parents will be provided opportunities to network with each other and exchange information an information and 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          19 

 

resources to support their children. It is anticipated that by October 2018, grade level teachers will engage in this 
work, pursuant to administrative approval, and provide periodic updates to their assigned supervisor. 

Included in this action plan, also, are provisions to ensure that high expectations, along with a tailored curriculum 
are made available to all students. All teacher teams are expected to develop IAP's for level 1 and level 2 students 
who currently do not have an IEP. All teacher teams are also expected to establish clear whole year goals based on 
the grade level mathematics standards of their students, along with suitable unit goals for individual students based 
on learning progressions, all of which will be used to help guide instructional decisions. These provisions will help our 
students develop a healthy self-concept and the intrinsic motivation needed to engage in productive struggle and 
demonstrate mastery of grade level math concepts. It is anticipated that by Sept. 30, 2018, grade level teachers will 
enagage in this work and provide periodic updates to their assigned supervisors.  

Lastly, within this action plan are provisions to support student centered instruction. For example, students will be 
invited to join an upper or lower grade student lead math club, where they will collaboratively attack exemplar 
mathematics problems. Additionally, struggle students will be offered an opportunity to receive math tutoring from 
former students, members of the P.S. 309 PTA, and/or local community volunteers. These provisions will help our 
students achieve and demonstrate mastery of their grade level curriculum because children develop cognitively by 
interacting with both adults and more knowledgeable peers. When provided the opportunities to participate in a 
math club or receive tutoring, our students are more like to internalize the math skills and habits of mind necessary to 
fully engage their grade level curriculum. It is anticipated that by October 2018, the parent Coordinator, along with 
the guidance counselor and selected grade level teachers will select P.S. 309 parents/ family and local community 
members as tutors to identified students. Students and their tutors will meet at a pre-designated space and time at 
the principals discretion. Additionally, by October 2018, the parent Coordinator and guidance counselor will 
coordinate with the school's after school program to establish the math club, pursuant to administrative approval.  

 

 
Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 

Part  4a.  Indicate  resources  you will  leverage  to  achieve  this  annual  goal  and  implement this  action  plan,  including 
human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 
Envision curriculum and materials, Test Ready materials, outside consultants and professional development, per 
session opportunities for teachers to design, create, and facilitate workshops as necessary . Additionally, resources 
will also be used to fund music and dance programs within the school which research shows supports the academics 
growth of students in mathematics. Lastly, field trips related to the curriculum and unit themes will be sponsored. 

 
Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 
Title III, 

X 

Tax Levy 

X 

Title I SWP 

 

Title I TA 

 

Immigrant 

Title II, 
Part A 

 

Title III, 
Part A 

 

X 

C4E 

 

21st Century 

Grant 

 
Part 5 – Progress Monitoring  

 

SIG 

X 

PTA Funded 

 

In Kind 

 

Other 

Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement 
planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 
By February 2019, the number of grade 3-5 students achieving a level 3 or better on the January 2019 Interim Math 
Assessment will increase at least 5 percentage points when compared to grade 3-5 student performance on the 
January 2018 Interim Math Assessment. 

 
Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January 
Regents, etc.) 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          20 

 

 

The NYS mathematics assessment, agendas from parent engagement sessions and grade level meetings, along with a 
sampling of the completed student I.A.P will be used to assess progress of this goal and implementation of the action 
plan.  

 
Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action 
plan, if applicable. 

 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          21 

 

Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans 

 
Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and 
school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. 

Part 1 – Needs Assessment   

Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and 
formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not 
limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. 
Number responses accordingly. 
 
1.  What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element?  Indicate the data trends, source and year. 
2.  What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? 

Indicate the data trends, source and year. 

3.  What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? 
Strengths: 

P.S. 309 has a diverse staff and PTA who cares deeply for the school and are willing to support a clear vision for 
growth and development. As indicated by 2017-18 SLT and PTA meeting notes, both the Staff and the PTA recognizes 
the need to close the ‘achievement gap’ and are concerned by the fact that absenteeism and tardiness hamper efforts 
to raise student achievement. Additionally, the 2016-17 School Survey reports that 100% of parent respondents felt 
respected by the staff and 90% of parent respondents felt that they were treated like equal partners in the child’s 
education. This is significant because it presents a viable avenue through which information sharing and advocacy, 
targeting absenteeism and tardiness, may result in lasting shifts in parental attitudes regarding the importance of 
improvements in attendance and punctuality. Moreover, it was found in the 2016-17 Quality Review that “school 
leaders consistently communicate high expectations to staff, students and families ... establishing a culture of mutual 
accountability,” in which information can be shared freely and difficult conversations can be held regarding 
appropriate responses to identified challenges. This sets the stage for the full implementation of a tiered intervention 
tool that targets and holds parents/ families more accountable for improvements in their child’s attendance. At P.S. 
309, there is also an expansive array of communication mediums through which parents can receive monthly, weekly, 
or daily attendance updates; affording us the opportunity to keep attendance at the forefront of the school's agenda. 

 

Need: 

Over the course of the past several years, chronic absenteeism (defined as two or more absences per month) and 
tardiness (defined as two or more post 8:00 A.M. arrivals per week) has presented challenges to student achievement 
within the P.S. 309 learning community. While research shows “teacher effectiveness is the strongest school-related 
determinant of student success ...chronic student absence reduces even the best teacher's ability to grow and move 
students.” When average attendance falls below 90%, students not only struggle academically, widening the 
achievement gap; they begin to foster attitudes that place them at risk as they ascend to the next grade level. . 
According to the School Quality Snapshot, during the 2015-16 academic year, P.S. 309’s average attendance rate fell 
to 92% (2% less than the city average) and 30% of the student population was defined as chronically absent (11% 
greater than the city average). For the 2016-17 academic year, ATS data indicated that P.S. 309’s year to date 
attendance average was slightly above 90%. Similarly, for the 2017-18 academic year, ATS data indicated that P.S. 
309's year to date attendance was about 90%. On going patterns of chronic absenteeism and tardiness signals the 
need for a coordinated series of initiatives to reverse the school’s downward attendance trend. 

 

 
Part 2 – Annual Goal 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          22 

 

Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this 
element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the 
identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, 
and Time-bound. 
 

  By June 27, 2019, P.S. 309 will improve aggregate student attendance at least 5 percentage points over the 

June 27, 2018 year- to date attendance rate of 90.7%, as indicated by the year-to-date attendance data in ATS 
on June 27, 2019.  

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          23 

 
Part 3a – Action Plan 

Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies 
your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for 
this Framework for Great Schools element, including: 

  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional 

 

development, and/or systems and structures needed to 
impact change. 
Strategies to address the needs of students with 
disabilities, English language learners, and other high-
need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, 
SIFE, STH). 

 

Weekly attendance team meetings comprised of administration, 
attendance teacher, guidance counselors, lead teachers and 
parent coordinator to: A) review attendance reports; B) discuss 
persistent building wide attendance issues/ challenges; C) assess 
on-going open attendances cases; D) open new attendances 
cases; E) close resolved attendance cases; F) arrange home visits; 
and/or G) share out critical information including information 
about 407s.  

Target 
Group(s) 
Who will be 
targeted? 

Timeline 
What is the 
start and 
end date? 

Key Personnel 
Who is responsible 
for implementing 
and overseeing the 
activity/strategy? 

Parents/ 
guardians & 
Students of 
K-5 

Oct. 2018  

to 

June 2019 

Administrator/ 
administrator 
designee (Primary), 
Parent Coordinator, 
Guidance Counselor, 
Attendance Teacher 

 

 

Implementation of modified attendance intervention plan (& 
maintenance of related records) to provide tiered intervention 
for students (and their parents) with an established pattern of 
tardiness and/or absenteeism. 

Parents/ 
guardians & 
Students of 
K-5 

Oct. 2018 

to 

Attendance Teacher 
(Primary), Parent 
Coordinator 

Parents/guardian will be invited to participate in two feedback 
sessions where they will be given an opportunity to evaluate the 
various components of the school's attendance initiatives.  

Parents/ 
guardians of 
K-5 

June 2019 

Dec. 2018 

& 

Apr. 2019 

Parent Coordinator, 
PTA president 
(Primary) 

Monthly newsletters will include a column dedicated to the 
recognizing and praising of parents as a reward for helping their 
child achieve excellent attendance. Also, personalized thank you 
letters and cards will be sent to parents/ guardians of students 
with year to date attendance averages of 95%+. 

Letters/ notices regarding unexcused absences will be generated 
and disseminated to parents the week before major holidays and 
long weekends to reduce days lost from elective term time 
holidays. 

Bi-monthly attendance extravaganza in recognition and 
celebration of all students with year to date attendance average 
of 95+ %. 

Parents/ 
guardians of 
K-5 students.  

Sept. 2018 
to 

Parent Coordinator , 
Attendance Teacher  

June 2019 

Parents/ 
guardians of 
K-5 students.  

Sept. 2018 
to 

Attendance Teacher 
(Primary), Parent 
Coordinator 

June 2019 

Students 

Oct. 2018 

K-5  

to 

Monthly town hall meetings will include an opportunity for 
students to receive praise and celebration for excellent 
attendance(as defined by the attendance committee), 

Parents/ 
guardians & 

June 2019 

Oct. 2018 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          24 

Administrator/ 
administrator 
designe, PTA 
President (Primary), 
Parent Coordinator  

Guidance Counselor 
(Primary), 
Administrator/ 

outstanding academic performance, and exemplary acts of good 
citizenship within the learning community. Additionally, gifts/ gift 
cards will be issued to families of students who have 
demonstrated excellent and/or significant improvement in 
attendance. 

Students of 
K-5 

to 

administrator 
designee, 

May 2019 

At least 3 family/ community workshops will be facilitated by 
members of the attendance team to discuss current attendance 
patterns and challenges, along with how attendance relates to 
middle school educational opportunities, and higher education 
and career readiness. 

Parents/ 
guardians of 
K-5 students. 

Sept. 2018 
to 

June 2019 

Parent Coordinator 

( Sept. Primary), 
Attendance teacher 
(Jan. Primary), PTA 
President (May 
Primary) 

The daily attendance percentage and the aggregate year to date 
attendance percentage, along with the schools attendance goal 
will be posted and stated every day by 9:00 A.M. Additionally, 
individual classrooms will be encouraged to compete for the title 
of 'Class with best attendance,' for which they will receive a pre-
determined classroom prize in the form of a pet, science, math 
or art exploration kit.  

Students & 
Teachers of 
grades  

K-5 

Sept. 2018 
to 

PTA president 
(Primary) 

June 2019 

Guidance Counselor 
Attendance teacher, 

Administrator/ 
administrator 
designee, 

 

 
 

 
3b – Parent and Family Engagement 

How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to 
support  the  whole  child?  Include  the  timeline  and  identify  key  personnel  and  stakeholders  responsible  for 
implementation and oversight. 
Our school’s mission makes forging stronger family and community ties a top priority because research shows that 
these critically important partnerships results in better scholastic achievement for all students. Whether through 
informal chats as parents brings their children to school, or in phone conversations or home visits, or through 
newsletters sent home, we will work hard to ensure that all P.S. 309 families know that we care for their children, 
strive to provide a safe and supportive environment, each and every hour of the day, and want all of our students in 
school every day.  

Additionally, within the action plan, you will find provisions for weekly attendance meetings, facilitated by building 
administration (or assigned designee), beginning Oct. 2018. These meeting will provide opportunities to: A) regularly 
review/analyze attendance data, the result of which will be shared with faculty and staff, students and their families; 
B) meet with individual families to discuss attendance related issues, and identify and prescribe solutions for potential 
challenges affecting members of the learning community; C) plan the strategic deployment of the PBIS attendance 
intervention plan; D) receive feedback from families regarding their interaction(s) with the attendance team and the 
quality of support received.  

Moreover, this action plan has provisions for a series of workshops, focused on attendance related issues, which will 
be collaboratively developed and facilitated by members of the PTA and school staff, including the Parent Coordinator 
and Attendance Teacher, as of effective September 2018. Also, monthly Townhall meetings will include an 
opportunity for students to be educated about the importance of attendance and punctuality, and receive praise and 
celebration for excellent attendance (as defined by the attendance committee), outstanding academic performance, 
and exemplary acts of good citizenship within the learning community. At these meetings, gifts/ gift cards will be 
issued to families of students who have demonstrated excellent and/or significant improvement in attendance, as 
well. This provision arose from a 2017 SLT meeting, where a deliberate shift was made towards focusing more 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          25 

 

attention on engaging parents and families to improve student attendance, given the high likelihood that students 
have limited control over their attendance and punctually at the elementary level. Effective October 2018, the 
school’s guidance counselor will oversee the execution of the monthly Townhall meetings.  

Lastly, effective October 2018, the Attendance teacher and the parent coordinator will contribute a column to the 
school’s monthly newsletter dedicated to the recognizing and praising parents for helping their child achieve excellent 
attendance. Personalized thank you letters and/or postcards will be sent to parents/ guardians of students with year 
to date attendance averages of 95%+ monthly, as well.  

The above mentioned provisions should have the cumulative impact of setting high expectations for attendance and 
punctually for all students. Additionally, by creating opportunities to engage families one-on-one and in small groups, 
the professional staff will be able to tailor all initiatives to better meet the needs of our diverse learning community; 
the net impact of which will be improved attendance, resulting in improve scholastic performance.  

 

 
Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 
Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including 
human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 
Guidance Counselor 

SAID 

Attendance Teacher 

Parent Coordinator  

 
Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 

X 

X 

Tax Levy 

X 

Title I SWP 

C4E 

 

21st Century 

Grant 

 

 

 
Part 5 – Progress Monitoring  

Title I TA 

 

Title II, 
Part A 

SIG 

X 

PTA Funded 

 

 

Title III, 
Part A 

In Kind 

 

X 

Title III, 

Immigrant 

Other 

Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement 
planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 
By February 01, 2019 the aggregate year to date attendance rate at P.S. 309 will be at least 96%, as indicated by ATS 
data.   

 
Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 
ATS data reports will be used to assess progress of this goal. Additionally, attendance team meeting agendas and 
notes, copies of letters/ notices sent to parents/ guardian, and annotated photographs of related school events will 
be used to assess fidelity to the action plan related to this goal.  

 
Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action 
plan, if applicable. 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          26 

 

Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans 

Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success 
and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional 
development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. 

 

Part 1 – Needs Assessment   

Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and 
formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not 
limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. 
Number responses accordingly. 
 
1.  What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element?  Indicate the data trends, source and year. 
2.  What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? 

Indicate the data trends, source and year. 

 

Strengths: 

Within the P.S. 309 learning community, there is a vibrant culture of collaboration supported by ongoing teacher 
team meetings to revise/ adjust instructional units, maintaining rigorous ELA instruction, aligned to the CCLS and 
assessed by a series of performance tasks. Additionally, the school provides ongoing professional development to 
address the needs of individual teachers. According to the 2016-17 Quality Review, “Teachers articulate that the 
principal provides learning opportunities that “bring out the best” in teachers, sharing that training activities are 
specific, hands on and engaging. There are many lunch and learns and opportunities for teachers to support other 
teachers. Administrators enhance teacher growth through regular attendance at grade meetings. Teachers further 
state that after walkthroughs and observations, they receive timely follow- up training, guidance for areas of 
improvement, tools to implement and time to make corrections to grow.” The culture of continuous improvement 
emerging within the professional learning community can be leveraged to raise student achievement in ELA. 
Moreover, the school enjoys favorable relations with the parents and family members of its student body, having 
achieved an 85% positive response on the 2015-16 school survey from parent participants. This can be leveraged to 
more effectively deploy efficacy tools that will help the students within our learning community adopt and internalize 
attitudes that support scholarship in all subject areas. 

 

Need: 

A review of student achievement across all subgroups at P.S. 309 indicates that our students continue to struggle with 
demonstrating proficiency in ELA. Though gains have been made, our students continue to perform significantly 
below their district and city counterparts, whose respective average proficiency ratings currently stand at 30% and 
39%, as indicated by the NYS SIRS data. Additionally, over the last several years, our female students continue to 
significantly outperform our male students in ELA. For example, in 2016 females students were responsible for 88% of 
the gains made in ELA; indicating the need for targeted interventions to reduce the disparity between male and 
female achievement in ELA. Moreover, current NYS SIRS data indicates the performance of our SWD’s and ENL’s 
continues to lab significantly behind that of our general education students. In fact, from 2016 to 2018, none of the 
SWD’s were proficient in ELA. Similarly, across the last several years, our ENL students were demonstrating 
proficiency at half the rate of our general education students. This indicates the need for a continued focus on 
differentiation through horizontal and vertical collaboration that affords teachers the opportunity to build a shared 
understandings of how to most effectively make use of available school resources and manipulate identified 
strategies to support student achievement, expanding upon teachers’ content and pedagogical knowledge.  

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          27 

 
 
Part 2 – Annual Goal 

Indicate  your  school’s  2018-19  goal  for  improving  student  outcomes  and  school  performance  that  addresses  this 
element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified 
priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-
bound. 
 

By June 2019, all teachers will demonstrate evidence of explicit instruction and teaching models through intensive 
professional development and book study groups, as measured by Advance observation reports, evidenced in Domains 
1a and 1e.  

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          28 

 
Part 3a – Action Plan 

Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies 
your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for 
this Framework for Great Schools element, including: 

  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional 

 

development, and/or systems and structures needed to 
impact change. 
Strategies to address the needs of students with 
disabilities, English language learners, and other high-
need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, 
SIFE, STH). 

Target 
Group(s) 
Who will be 
targeted? 

Timeline 
What is the 
start and 
end date? 

Key Personnel 
Who is responsible 
for implementing 
and overseeing the 
activity/strategy? 

Personnel: 

K-5  

Oct. 2018 

1) All grade level teams will make use of available data to: A) 
determine grade level and individual students’ ELA goal(s) by 
September 30, 2018; B) complete a root cause analysis 
(Fishbone) and develop a "Theory of Action" related to their 
specific grade level goal(s), which will be implemented by 
October 31, 2018 and revised by January 31, 2019. 

 

to 

June 2019 

Classroom 
Teachers, 
Special 
Education 
Teachers, & 
AIS  

Teachers 

Teachers (Primary), 
Administrators, 
Educational Support 
Staff 

2) All grade level teams will submit a description of a subset of 
strategies in each unit for which at least 75 % of students are to 
demonstrate mastery, along with data tracking sheet. 

 

3) The following grade level bands will make use of available data 
to complete a root cause analysis and develop a "Theory of 
Action" for the following school wide persistent challenges: 

* Pre-K and Kindergarten Teachers and Para-Professionals - 
("Increasing and leveraging legacy initiatives and student 
community service to raise student achievement in ELA). 

* Grade 1 & Grade 2 Teachers and Para-Professionals - 
("Increasing and Leveraging Parent Engagement to raise student 
achievement in ELA"). 

* Grade 3, 4 & 5 Teachers and Para-Professionals - ("Increasing 
and leveraging community engagement to raise student 
achievement in ELA"). 

 

4) The following grade level teams will create a framework for 
engaging parents/families and make use of protocols to facilitate 
the following workshops for families: 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          29 

 

*Pre-K & Kindergarten Teachers, Art Teacher and Para-
Professionals ("Simple ways to develop oral language skills at 
home"). 

* Pre-K & Kindergarten Teachers, Art Teacher and Para-
Professionals - "Simple ways to cultivate phonics and phonemic 
awareness at home.” 

* Pre-K & Kindergarten Teachers, Art Teacher and Para-
Professionals -"Simple ways to cultivate positive attitudes 
towards language, literature, and literacy.” 

* Grade 1 & 2 Teachers, Speech Teacher, and Para-Professionals - 
"Strategies to cultivate word recognition skills at home.” 

* Grade 1 & 2 Teachers, Speech Teacher, and Para-Professionals - 
"Strategies to support comprehension of Literary texts.” 

* Grade 1 & 2 Teachers, Speech Teacher, and Para-Professionals - 
"Strategies to support comprehension of expository texts.” 

* Grades 3, 4 and 5, Science, and ENL Teacher, and Para-
Professional - "Building composition skills at home.” 

* Grades 3, 4 and 5, Science, and ENL Teacher, and Para-
Professional – “Simple ways to cultivate an understanding and 
manipulation of the difference between formal and casual 
register” (i.e. grammar in speaking, reading, and writing). 

* Grades 3, 4 and 5, Science, and ENL Teacher, and Para-
Professional - "5 Techniques to build vocabulary acquisitions.” 

 

5) The ENL teacher will meet and work with grade level teams to 
provide support in addressing the needs of English language 
learners by: A), embedding language objectives and scaffolds in 
instructional units; B) providing materials/ resources that 
students may make use of in the classroom, C) providing regular 
updates on skill(s) progression towards mastery. 

 

6) All grade level teams will participate in the design and 
maintenance of an on-line catalog of guided reading and writing 
lesson plans, leveled according to the TCRWP running records 
system and specific writing genres. 

 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          30 

 

 

Professional Development: 

K-5  

Oct. 2018 

 

All grade level teams will receive professional development on: 

 

to 

May 2019 

Classroom 
Teachers, 
Special 
Education 
Teachers, & 
AIS  

A) revising, refining, implementing and evaluating instructional 
units and using data to drive instruction (DDI) 

Teachers 

Teachers, 
Administrators 
(Primary) , 
Educational Support 
Staff 

 

B) forming a collaborative culture and engaging in vertical and 
horizontal planning teams.  

 

C) engaging parents, families, and community based 
organizations around helping students to meet identified goals.  

 

E) using Google drive (the one drive system, outlook, and/ or 
similar platforms) to create and maintain schedules, store and 
retrieve class data, facilitate meetings, and engage in vertical/ 
horizontal collaborative planning session.  

 

G) Understanding and making use of Fishbone and "Theory of 
Action" to troubleshoot lingering instructional challenges.  

 

F) Designing and implementing adult learning experiences.  

Initiatives: 

 

1) A building wide instructional schedule will be created and 
disseminated that provides time for teachers to collaborate on 
grade level teams to revise and adjust implementation of units of 
study to meet students learning needs based on formative data. 

 

Teachers, 
Administrators 
(Primary) , 
Educational Support 
Staff 

K-5  

Oct. 2018 

to 

June 2019 

Classroom 
Teachers, 
Special 
Education 
Teachers, & 
AIS  

Teachers 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          31 

2) A calendar of planned "Parent Engagement Workshop" will be 
created and disseminated to P.S. 309 parents/ family members, 
and community institutions.  

 

3) In conjunction with grade level teachers, P.S. 309's after 
school program and/or other CBO's will be engaged in the 
creation and maintenance of an upper and lower grade Book 
Club and Journalism club.  

 

4) In conjunction with the PTA, CBO's, and local Intermediate and 
High Schools, create and maintain an ELA tutoring program.  

 

 
 

 
3b – Parent and Family Engagement 

How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies 
to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and 
identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. 
This action plan includes provisions to help the school establish and maintain closer family and community ties, which 
will also aid culturally mediated instruction. Beginning October 2018, grade level teachers, pursuant to administrative 
approval, will facilitate a series of horizontal and vertical planning session, combined with an on-going series of 
parental workshops, intended to collaboratively engage P.S. 309 families and members of the local community in 
the work of identifying and jointly implementing meaningful solutions to persistent challenges related to student 
performance in ELA. These session will help to not only make parents more knowledgeable about what our scholars 
are learning, but they will help the staff to better provide culturally mediated instructional opportunities to our 
students; the net result of which will improve the quality of rapport among all constituents of the learning 
community, positively impact the scholastic performance of all students.  

Additionally, beginning October 2018, once every four weeks, each teacher team will design and facilitate at least 
one parental engagement workshop with the explicit outcome of: A) conveying/ reminding parents/ families of the 
grades ELA goal(s); B) inform parents/ families of supports that can be accessed at home to help their child achieve 
mastery of grade level ELA concepts, skills and strategies; C) updating parents on their child's performance in ELA. It is 
anticipated that through closer collaboration between P.S. 309 educators and families, our students will demonstrate 
better scholastic achievement around the topics covered in their grade level ELA curriculum because: A) parents will 
be provided opportunities to review their child's portfolio and receive targeted guidance on how to help their child 
overcome identified challenges; B) parents will be provided opportunities to network with each other and exchange 
information an information and resources to support their children.  

Included in this action plan, also, are provisions to ensure that high expectations, along with a tailored curriculum 
are made available to all students. All teacher teams are expected to contribute to an on-line data base of guided 
reading and writing lesson plans and associated resources. All teacher teams are also expected to establish clear 
whole year goals based on the grade level ELA standards of their students, along with suitable unit goals for individual 
students based on learning progressions, all of which will be used to help guide instructional decisions. These 
provisions will help our students develop a healthy self-concept and the intrinsic motivation needed to engage in 
productive struggle, resulting in a greater number of students demonstrating mastery of grade level ELA concepts.  

Lastly, within this action plan are provisions to support student centered instruction. For example, students will be 
invited to join an upper or lower grade student lead Book Club or Journalism Club. Additionally, struggle students will 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          32 

 

be offered an opportunity to receive ELA bases tutoring from former students, members of the P.S. 309 PTA, and/or 
local community volunteers. These provisions will help our students achieve and demonstrate mastery of their grade 
level curriculum because children develop cognitively by interacting with both adults and more knowledgeable peers. 
When provided the opportunities to participate in a student lead clubs or receive tutoring, our students are more like 
to internalize the ELA skills and habits of mind necessary to fully engage their grade level curriculum.  

 

 
Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 

Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including 
human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 
Ready Gen replenishments & required TC resources. 

 

Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 

X 

X 

Tax Levy 

X 

Title I SWP 

C4E 

 

21st Century 

Grant 

 

 

Title I TA 

SIG 

 

 

Title II, 
Part A 

X 

Title III, 
Part A 

PTA Funded 

 

In Kind 

 

 

Title III, 

Immigrant 

Other 

 
Part 5 – Progress Monitoring  

Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement 
planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 
By February 2019, the number of students proficient in ELA (performing on or above grade level) will increase at least 
5% as indicated by the aggregate performance of grade 3-5 students on the January 2019 Interim ELA Assessment 
when compared to the January 2018 Interim ELA assessment.  

 
Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 
The 2019 NYS ELA Assessment will be used to assess progress of this goal. Additionally, Advance observation 
data/reports, grade level meeting notes, instructional cabinet meeting notes, PD agendas and attendance sheets, 
parent engagement powerpoints and/or photographs, revised/ modified units of study will be used to assess fidelity 
to the action plan for this goal.  

 
Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action 
plan, if applicable. 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          33 

 

Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans 

 

Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and 
nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional 
support that drives student achievement. 
 
Part 1 – Needs Assessment   

Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and 
formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not 
limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. 
Number responses accordingly. 
 
1.  What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element?  Indicate the data trends, source and year. 
2.  What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? 

Indicate the data trends, source and year. 

Strengths: 

According to the 2016-17 Quality Review, at P.S. 309, school leaders consistently communicate high expectations to 
staff and strive to provide comprehensive training aligned to those expectations, resulting in the establishment of a 
culture of mutual accountability. Also, school leaders use classroom observations and Advance data to determine 
professional development needs for the staff and administrators work to enhance teacher growth through their 
regular attendance at grade meetings and daily instructional walkthroughs. In the 2016-17 Quality Review, “Teachers 
articulate that the principal provides learning opportunities that “bring out the best” in teachers…training activities 
are specific, hands on and engaging…[and professionals] receive timely follow- up training, guidance for areas of 
improvement, tools to implement and time to make corrections to grow.” Additionally, school advance data indicates 
that teachers demonstrated professional growth in the area of student engagement (domain 3C) across the 2016-17 
academic year; having made use of the targeted professional development provided them during that term.  

 

Needs: 

At P.S. 309, there is a continued need to establish a continuum of professional development services that is informed 
by the school’s CEP and more closely coordinated with specific student learning and staff development needs. There 
is also a need to create systems to: A) provide weekly PD options for all members of the learning community; B) 
monitor participant application and track performance results of professional development opportunities provided to 
the staff. Towards this end, a professional development menu, containing elements of the school’s identified 
professionals development core should be presented to the faculty/staff regularly. 

 

 
Part 2 – Annual Goal 

Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this 
element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the 
identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, 
and Time-bound. 
By June 2019, school leadership will align feedback and professional development support directly at improving student 
academic performance, and ensure that 95% of teachers will receive feedback in a timely fashion. 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          34 

 
Part 3a – Action Plan 

Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies 
your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for 
this Framework for Great Schools element, including: 

  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional 

 

development, and/or systems and structures needed to 
impact change. 
Strategies to address the needs of students with 
disabilities, English language learners, and other high-
need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, 
SIFE, STH). 

Target 
Group(s) 
Who will be 
targeted? 

Timeline 
What is the 
start and 
end date? 

Key Personnel 
Who is responsible 
for implementing 
and overseeing the 
activity/strategy? 

Continue to increase the frequency of evaluative and non-
evaluative timely feedback based on Danielson’s Framework so 
that all teachers receive targeted and differentiated feedback 
and support at least once a month and focus on support given to 
specific subgroups of students. 

Teachers,  

September 
2018-June 
2019 

Teachers , 
Administrators 
(Primary) 

Continue to follow a plan designed using Danielson’s Framework 
and the Common Core Standards to support teachers with 
Developing MOTP ratings. 

Specific 
Teachers,  

September 
2018-June 
2019 

Developing 
Teachers, 
Administrators 
(Primary) 

 

Implement the P.S. 309 Professional Development Core: 

PD Team, 
Teachers 

September 
2018-June 
2019 

PD Team (Primary), 
Administrators 

 

A). SEL (Responsive Classroom & 4R’s) Professional Development 
Topics: 

 

1. Adopting and integrating morning meeting into classroom life/ 
culture (Collaborative Implementation of "Responsive 
Classroom” book study findings). 

2. Making use of 4R’s to support rapport in and outside the 
classroom 

3. Become the thermostat: Crisis intervention and De-escalation 

 

B). Navigating the CEP and making sense of the schools goals and 
related action plan: 

 

1. Understanding each section of the CEP 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          35 

 

2. Developing a shared understanding of the school’s CEP Goal(s) 
and related action plans (4 part series for Goal %A,) 

3. Understanding subgroup professional roles in furthering the 
schools educational agenda 

 

C). Developing and maintaining a culture of Data Driven 
Instruction (DDI) (see engageny/ carnegielearning): 

 

1. Collecting and analyzing data 

2. Analyze data and prioritize student needs 

3. Review and revising incremental smart goals 

4. Determining and selecting common instructional strategies 

5. Determine results and indicators 

6. Celebrate, reflect, reset 

 

D). Making use of Danielson as a tool to grow and develop 
professionally: 

 

1. Making use of engageny video album to dissect Domain 2: The 
Classroom Environment 

 

2. Making use of engageny video album to dissect Domain 3: 
Instruction 

 

E). Designing, developing, and implement high quality parent 
engagement initiatives: 

 

1. Creative ways to link all parent/ family engagement activities 
to student learning 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          36 

 

2. Creative ways to help parents fully engage in educational 
relation between parent & child and parent & teacher to 
advance specific educational goals 

3. Fixing/ establishing and maintaining collaborative working 
relationships with parents/ families 

4. Planning and delivering more interactive parent engagement 
activities/ sessions 

 

F). Identifying how specific school wide initiatives promote the 
development of the school and understanding teach/staff role in 
furthering specific initiatives: 

 

1. Attendance initiatives 

2. Enrolment initiatives 

3. ELA initiatives 

4. Math initiatives 

 

G). Developing and maintaining a culture that supports vertical 
and horizontal collaboration: 

 

1. Understanding the strengths and weakness of schoolwide 
assessments in advancing student learning 

2. Making use of action theory to create and implement 
backward design action plans 

3. Utilizing electronic intervention tools to help students develop 
mastery of literacy skills 

4. Systems and procedures to facilitate normed peer 
observations using NYCDOE Danielson Rubric and providing 
actionable feedback 

 

H). Strengthen teacher craft in mathematics - a series of in-
service workshops: 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          37 

 

 

1. How to best develop number sense 

2. Teach fractions, decimals, and ratios with accuracy and 
efficiency 

3. Advancing grade level computational skills 

 

I). Strengthen teacher craft in ELA - a series of in-service 
workshops: 

 

1. Promoting productive struggle and grit in writing 

2. Implementation of "Power of Words" book study findings 

3. Literacy supports for SWD's and ENL's  

 

J). Creating a collaborative learning community (5 part series): 

Building Trust: 

 

1. Creating and maintain systems to keep everyone on the 
wagon 

2. Mining for conflict: using agitation to advancing identified 
goals and objectives  

3. Overcoming ambiguity and building a culture of commitment 

4. Establishing standards of excellence: Building and maintain 
strong systems of accountability. 

5. Navigating Ego & Politics: How to pup people and the schools 
vision/ mission first. 

Establish, publish, implement, and revise a professional 
development calendar that offers: 

PD Team 

Sept. 2018-
June 2019 

PD Team (Primary) 

Administrators 

A) Offers a weekly shopping menu 

B) Faculty and Staff an opportunity to facilitate PD's of their 
choosing 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          38 

 

Assign Danielson Domain 4e ratings to staff members after 
collect, reviewing, analyzing, and archiving PD reflection sheets 
and logs on a monthly basis using following constraints: 

PD Team 

Sept. 2018-
June 2019 

PD Team 

Administrators 
(Primary) 

 

*Highly effective: within 1 month, attend and participate in at 
least 3 PDs; and implemented the findings of at least 1 PD into 
professional practice; and facilitated at least 1 PD.  

*Effective: within 1 month, attend and participate in at least 3 
PDs; and implemented the findings of at least 1 PD into 
professional practice . 

*Developing: within 1 month, attend and participate in 3 PD's  

*Ineffective: within 1 month, attended/ participated in 0 PD's 

 

 
 

 
3b – Parent and Family Engagement 

How  will  your  school  engage  parents/families  and  support  their  understanding  of  Effective  School  Leadership  and 
strategies  to  promote  parent  leadership  and  engagement  in  order  to  support  their  children  at  home?  Include  the 
timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. 
Parents will invited to view, coordinate and/or facilitate student work showcase.  

 

 
Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 
Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including 
human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 
PD sessions for staff, Per Session Funds for after school activities. 

 

Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 

X 

X 

Tax Levy 

X 

Title I SWP 

C4E 

 

21st Century 

Grant 

 
Part 5 – Progress Monitoring  

 

 

Title I TA 

SIG 

 

 

Title II, 
Part A 

PTA Funded 

 

 

Title III, 
Part A 

In Kind 

 

 

Title III, 

Immigrant 

Other 

Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement 
planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 
By February 2019, School leadership will demonstrate continued commitment to nurturing the professional growth of 
teachers and staff in ways that support student achievement by ensure the timely delivery of +45% of the 
Professional Development Core as specified by a calendar informed by P.S. 309’s CEP and the findings of the school’s 
Professional Development Committee .  

 
Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          39 

 

 

PD Attendance sheets, agendas, and PD reflection sheets.  

 

Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action 
plan, if applicable. 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          40 

 

Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans 

 
Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a 
welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. 
 
Part 1 – Needs Assessment   

Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and 
formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not 
limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. 
Number responses accordingly. 
 
1.  What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element?  Indicate the data trends, source and year. 
2.  What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? 

Indicate the data trends, source and year. 

 

Strengths: 

P.S. 309 has long enjoyed favorable relations with its parent/family consistency, as indicated by the school having 
achieved an 85% positive response on the 2015-16 school survey from parent participants. Progress Reports are 
shared with parents three times per year and indicate student reading levels as compared to the expected grade 
benchmarks, math assessment scores for the recently completed unit, and what students will be learning in the next 
unit. Also, suggestions, aligned to Common Core expectations of the grade, are offered for parents to help their 
children. According to the 2016-17 Quality Review, “Interviewed parents expressed they regularly access the school 
website to keep informed about what their children are learning related to Common Core Learning Standards and how 
families can help. Parents access the school calendar on the website to keep aware of events, including school 
leadership and parent teacher association meetings. Parent members of the School Leadership Team collaborated with 
the principal to develop school goals.” P.S. 309 is currently an ‘Open-Door School’ (Proficient) with regards to family 
and community engagement given the number of events hosted by the school (including parent teacher conferences), 
the schools level of cultural proficiency, reported parent perception of school leadership, and functioning of the PTA. 
This current level of attainment can be leveraged to encourage all constituents within the learning community to push 
for excellence in the area of family and community engagement by using our capabilities to further expand our 
capacity in this area. 

 

Needs: 

At P.S. 309, school leadership and parents note and agree with research findings that state “the impact of family 
engagement can be felt in all domains of school life, and most noticeable correlates with faster literacy acquisition, 
higher grades and test scores, easier transition and adoption to school, improvements in attendance, development of 
social skills, and a decrease in negative behavioral incidences.” Though P.S. 309 performs well in the area of family 
and community engagement, all constituents agree that there is room for continued growth in this area; the results of 
which will likely raise student achievement in Math, ELA, and Attendance (three of our current CEP goals), while 
decreasing the frequency and severity of behavioral of incidence that lead to loss of valuable learning time. Given the 
schools challenges with attendance (with an estimated 90% end of year average as indicated by ATS data) and low 
levels of students achievement in ELA and Math (with respective school wide proficiency on NYS assessments at 25% 
and 21% as indicated by NYS SIRS data), there is much to gain from growing our school towards becoming a 
‘Partnership School,’ where: A) all family activities are connected to student learning, B) there is clear open process 
for resolving problems, C) parent networks are valued and cultivated, D) families are actively involved with divisions 
on school improvement, E) and there is a process for continuous improvement in relationship building between staff 
and families.  

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          41 

 

 

 
Part 2 – Annual Goal 

Indicate  your  school’s  2018-19  goal  for  improving  student  outcomes  and  school  performance  that  addresses  this 
element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the 
identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and 
Time-bound.  
 

By June 2019, P.S. 309 will demonstrate continued improvement in the area of building strong family and community 
ties by increasing net student enrollment by 5% when compared to the June 2018 ATS enrollment data. 

.  

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          42 

Target 
Group(s) 
Who will be 
targeted? 

Timeline 
What is the 
start and 
end date? 

Key Personnel 
Who is responsible 
for implementing 
and overseeing the 
activity/strategy? 

Parents/ 
family 
members of 
students 

K-5 

Oct. 2018  

to 

June 2019  

Teachers, 
Educational Support 
Staff, 
Administrators/ 
Admin. designee 
(Primary), Parent 
Coordinator  

 
Part 3a – Action Plan 

Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies 
your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for 
this Framework for Great Schools element, including: 

  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional 

 

development, and/or systems and structures needed to 
impact change. 
Strategies to address the needs of students with 
disabilities, English language learners, and other high-
need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, 
SIFE, STH). 

Student Retention Initiatives:  

 

1). 100% of teachers and professional support staff will 
participate in the Implementation of the Positive Note initiative, 
where each professional will identify one child each day for 
whom they will generate a note of praise for that child to give 
his/her parent/ guardian.  

 

2) Creation of a parent advocacy and conflict resolution center 
within the Parent Coordinator Suite to be staffed at least 1hr/ wk 
(preferable during parent outreach Tuesdays) by a collaborative 
team consisting of the parent coordinator, 1 SPED teacher, 1 
Gen. Ed teacher, 1 person from the School Guidance/ discipline 
team , and 1 parent, all of whom must: 

A) Collaborative create/ adopt a protocol to guide their work. 

B) sign a confidentially/ non-disclosure agreement. 

C) participate in on-going conflict resolution training.  

 

3) Parents/ family members will complete bi-monthly modified 
surveys containing family engagement question excerpts from 
the 2017-18 school survey. 

 

4) Teachers and the School Aide In-charge of Discipline will 
award students with academic and attendance improvement 
certificates that will be presented during PTA meetings , 
Townhall meetings, and other regularly scheduled assemblies. 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          43 

 

Expansion Initiatives: 

 

All students  October 

Parent Coordinator, 

2018-June 
2019 

Guidance 
coordinator, 

1). Create enrolment committee (comprised of staff, P.S. 309 
parents, and local community members) tasked with Staff: 

 

A) Representing P.S. 309 at all local day cares and early childhood 
centers with the objective of expanding enrollment in our 
schools k3 - kindergarten grades.  

B) Out reach to local religious community institutions with the 
objective of expanding enrollment in our schools Kindergarten-
2nd grades.  

 

 

 

 

 

Parent volunteers, 

Administrator/ 
admin. designee 
(Primary) 

 

 

2). Enhance the school's course offerings by providing: 

A) Music (Violin) 

B) American Sign Language 

C) A variety of after school clubs tied to the Mathematics, ELA, 
Sciene, and/or Social Studies Curriculum.  

 

3) Tailor electives and club offerings by collaborating with the 
PTA to host a mini series of "high interest session," in which 
parents/ family members will get an opportunity to preview the 
activities of perspective clubs and/or electives, and provide 
feedback on potential changes/ modifications that will best serve 
studetns.  

 

4). provide greater name and sight recognition of our school by: 

A) advertising major school at events at local community 
institutions (banks, deli's, grocery stores, etc.). 

B) creating a wider distribution network for our school's news 
letter that includes the Bedford–Stuyvesant, Crow Heights, and 
Bushwick, and Brownsville neighborhoods. 

 
 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          44 

 
3b – Parent and Family Engagement 

If  any,  list  the  Community  Based  Organizations  or  other  partnerships  that  support  parent/family  and  community 
engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. 
By October 2018, under the direction of the Parent Coordinator and an administrative designee, this action plan 
includes provisions to help the school establish and maintain closer family and community ties by creating a 
mechanism to address parental/ family concerns, and mediate and resolve conflicts among parents and/or between 
parents and staff member(s) before a parent withdraws a student from the school. Additionally, there is a provision to 
establish an enrollment committee, comprised of staff members, along with P.S. 309 family and community members. 
These individuals will collaborate to educator the local community about P.S. 309 and to encourage perspective 
families to enroll their students. Moreover, this provision affords the school the opportunity to actively recruit 
students from both within the local community and adjoining communities by partnering with local community based 
institutions.  

 

 
Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 

Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including 
human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 
Paper surveys, electronic surveys, incentives, Parent Coordinator  

 

Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 

X 

X 

Tax Levy 

X 

Title I SWP 

C4E 

 

21st Century 

Grant 

 

 

 
Part 5 – Progress Monitoring  

Title I TA 

 

Title II, 
Part A 

SIG 

X 

PTA Funded 

 

 

Title III, 
Part A 

In Kind 

 

 

Title III, 

Immigrant 

Other 

Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement 
planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 
By February 01, 2019, P.S. 309 will demonstrate continued improvement in the area of building strong family and 
community ties by increasing net student enrollment by 25+ students when compared to the June 2017 ATS 
enrollment data.  

 
Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 
Analysis of parent sign-in/ attendance sheets from publicized school events will be used to assess progress of this 
goal. Additionally, annotated photographs and artifacts will be collected to assess fidelity to the action plan related to 
this goal.  

 
Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action 
plan, if applicable. 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          45 

 

Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS)  

(Required for All Schools) 

  

Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services 
(AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records 
need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area 
listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. 
 

Type of program or 
strategy (e.g. 
repeated readings, 
interactive writings, 
etc.) 

Method for delivery 
of service (e.g. small 
group, one-to-one, 
tutoring, etc.) 

Reading Plus 

 

Small group and 
individual 

 

When the service is 
provided (e.g. during 
the school day, 
before or after 
school, etc.) 

During school day 

 

Type of Academic 
Intervention Service 
(AIS) 

English Language 
Arts (ELA) 

Criteria for 
determining AIS 
services (For 
additional guidance, 
refer to NYSED’s 
memo.) 
*All 3th grade 
students who score 
at Levels 1 or 2 in ELA 
as their final report 
grade in June 2018 
and currently reading 
at a level ‘L’ or below 
on October 1, 2018 as 
indicated by their 
performance on 
TCRWP running 
records assessment 
will qualify for 
academic 
intervention services 
in ELA. 

 

*All 4th grade 
students who score 
at Levels 1 or 2 on 
the NYS ELA 
Assessment and 
currently reading at a 
level ‘N’ or below, as 
indicated by their 
performance on 
TCRWP running 
records assessment, 
on October 1, 2018 
will qualify for 
academic 
intervention services 
in ELA. 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          46 

 

Mathematics 

Science 

*All 5th grade 
students who score 
at Levels 1 or 2 on 
the NYS ELA 
Assessment and 
currently reading at a 
level ‘Q’ or below, as 
indicated by their 
performance on 
TCRWP running 
records assessment, 
on October 1, 
2018will qualify for 
academic 
intervention services 
in ELA. 

 
*All 3th grade 
students who score 
at Levels 1 or 2 in 
Math as their final 
report grade in June 
2018 and consistently 
achieved below a 
level 2 on end of unit 
assessments by 
‘November 15, 2018 
will qualify for 
academic 
intervention services 
in Math. 

 

*All 4th and 5th 
grade students who 
score at Levels 1 or 2 
on the NYS Math 
Assessment and 
consistently achieved 
below a level 2 on 
end of unit 
assessments by 
‘November 15, 2018 
will qualify for 
academic 
intervention services 
in Math. 

 
All grades 3-5 
students who 
achieved below a 
level 2 as their 1st 

Mathletics 

 

Small group and 
individual 

 

During school day 

 

Guided Reading 

 

Small group and 
individual 

During school day 

 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          47 

marking period grade 
in Science will qualify 
for AISservices in 
science. 

 
All grades 3-5 
students who 
achieved below a 
level 2 as their 1st 
marking period grade 
in Social Studies will 
qualify for AISservices 
in Social Studies . 

 
Teacher and parent 
recommendations 

 

Social Studies 

At-risk services (e.g. 
provided by the 
Guidance Counselor, 
School Psychologist, 
Social Worker, etc.) 

 

 

Guided Reading 

 

Small group and 
individual 

During school day 

 

 

Small group and 
individual 

 

During school day 

 

4 Rs Curriculum and 
additional resources 
used by guidance 
counselor, school 
phycologist, and 
social worker. 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          48 

 

Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH)  

 

Directions: 
-  All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. 
-  All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. 
 
Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) 
As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the 
federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and 
report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support 
your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: 
http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf   

 

Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 

1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your 
school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE 
systems and may change over the course of the year.) 

45 

 

2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. 

Supplies; Uniforms; Back packs; Attendance monitoring 

 

Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 

1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school 
(please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). 

NA 

 

2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          49 

 

NA 

 

3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary 
housing.  If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation 
Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question.  If your school did not receive an allocation 
and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. 

NA 

 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          50 

 

Directions: 

Section 8: Title I Program Information  

 

  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1. 
  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2. 
  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3. 
  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4. 
 

If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response 
can be found. 

  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. 

 
Part 1: Title I Status 

Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. 

X 

Schoolwide Program (SWP) 

 

Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools  

 

Non-Title I 

 
Part 2: All Title I Schools 

2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) 

Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support 
including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. 
At PS 309, we attract and retain highly qualified teachers by reinforcing our school’s mission and goals:  

Teachers hired are certified and licensed in their subject area.  

All new teachers hired have dual and/or triple certification.  

A hiring committee is organized to conduct interviews, assess writing samples, and observe demonstration lessons in 
order to attract highly-qualified teachers.  

Members of PS 309’s Cabinet meet regularly to review, reflect, and revise school based goals and instructional 
focuses.  

According to our BEDS data, 100% of the teachers are highly qualified. 

 

 
2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development 

Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, 
paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS).  
High quality professional development opportunities are provided throughout the year for all faculty:  

Teachers attend DOE and BFSC professional development workshops outside of the school and are scheduled to share 
this information with their colleagues.  

The PD Committee and the District, Borough Field Support Center and Central provide support throughout the school 
year by sharing new ideas and professional learning strategies.  

Teachers plan for inter-visitations by using the school-wide skills/strategy chart.  

Experienced, tenured teachers and coaches mentor all new teachers.  

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          51 

 

Literacy and Math coaches offer additional support to all teachers.  

K-5, ESL and Cluster Teacher Teams are encouraged through collaboration to examine and revise our current 
curriculum based on student work analysis.  

Grade level Common Preps are scheduled for teachers to review and amend their current Units of Study and to design 
assessments that align to their instruction.  

Additional training is scheduled for AIS, Special Education and ESL teachers.  

Data Specialists support teachers with tools and resources to monitor student progress. 

Math and Literacy coaches design teacher resources to implement and analyze student work that   is aligned to the 
Common Core Learning Standards. 

 

 
Part 3: TA Schools Only 

3a. Use of Program Resources 

Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. 
N/A 

 

 
3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program 

Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., 
providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from 
the regular classroom during regular school day). 
N/A 

 

 
 
 
 
 
Part 4: SWP Schools Only 

4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only)  

Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary 
school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early 
intervention services, etc.). 
School-wide orientation for incoming Pre-kindergarten and kindergarten students 

Sharing of readiness expectations with neighboring pre-k 

Open house visit by incoming pre-kindergarten and kindergarten students 

 

 
4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          52 

 

Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate 
multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to 
improve instruction.    
Surveys are distributed throughout the year to obtain feedback and need assessments from teachers. Collected 
feedback is addressed in the decision making process when planning for professional development opportunities and 
for determining best practices for assessment measures. 

 

 
4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools 

Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and 
Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible 
for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide 
plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the 
consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and 
purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, 
and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount 
each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the 
intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. 
Program Name 

Fund Source 
(i.e. Federal, 
State or Local) 

Funding Amount 
Indicate the amount 
contributed to 
Schoolwide pool. 
(Refer to Galaxy for 
school allocation 
amounts) 

Place an (X) in Column A below to verify 
that the school has met the intent and 
purposes of each program whose funds are 
consolidated.  Indicate in Column B, section 
references where a related program activity 
has been described in this plan. 

Title I Part A (Basic) 

Federal 

263,645.00 

 

Title II, Part A 

Federal 

165,914.00 
 

Title III, Part A 

Title III, Immigrant 

Federal 

Federal 

0  

0  

Tax Levy (FSF) 

Local 

1,485,503.00 
 

x 

 

x 

 

x 

 
x 

 

x 

 

Column A 

Verify with an (X) 

Column B 

Section Reference(s) 
Section 5: All 
subsections 

 
Section 5: All 
subsections 

 
NA 

 
NA 

 
Section 5: All 
subsections 

 

 
1Explanation/Background: 
Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and 
programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and 
advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools 
may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, 
State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This 
gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students.   
 
Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a 
single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual 
identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool 
to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          53 

 
used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from 
which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to 
combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used 
conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the 
dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds.  
 
Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages: 

  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program 

separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different 
sources when accounting for their use. 

  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the 

statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., 
semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent 
and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended 
beneficiaries are met. 

 
2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as 
follows: 

  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to 
improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes 
provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH). 

  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement 

plans that aims to  improve instruction and address the identified needs  

  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in 

grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not 
available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional 
program. 

  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, 
develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and 
achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another 
purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-
quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in 
effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the 
participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language 
instruction programs. 

  Title III Immigrant:  Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of 

English language acquisition and content area achievement. 

 
Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated: 

  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and 
programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent 
representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities 
funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with 
student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. 
IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education 
designed to meet their individual needs. 

 

  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by 

the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 

 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          54 

 

Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)  

 (Required for All Title I Schools) 

 

Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and 
representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will 
participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I 
program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson 
that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the 
parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school 
will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic 
achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family 
Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. 
 
The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current 
S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent 
Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent 
involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen 
family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy.  
 
Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample 
Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) 
as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. 
 
 

Parent and Family Engagement Policy 

Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. 
The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of 
parents and community in the school. P.S. 309, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every 
Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen 
the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is 
designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the 
education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent 
Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. 

 

providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., 
literacy, math and use of technology; 

Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students 

 

providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision 
making in support of the education of their children; 

 

fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor 
their child’s progress; 

 

providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          55 

 

 

sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in 
languages that parents can understand; 

 

providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, 
communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of 
our school community; 

 

Our school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all 
parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities.  

In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the 
school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership 
Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for 
additional input.  

 

 

Parental Involvement and School Quality 
To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, our school will: 

 

-Engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly 
to schools to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ensure that the Title I funds 
allocated for parent involvement  

 

-Support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent 
Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support 
and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills;  

 

-Maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The 
Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the 
parents of children who attend our school and will work to ensure that our school environment is welcoming and 
inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents 
each month and file a report with the central office.; 

 

-Conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability 
grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and 
technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home;  

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          56 

 

 

-Host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 2nd of each school year to advise parents of 
children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 
the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable 
sections under the ESSA; 

 

-Schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or 
evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and 
allow parents to provide suggestions; 

 

-Translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed;  

 

 

Our school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: 

Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement 

 

hosting educational family events/activities throughout the school year; 

encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher 
Association) and Title I Parent Committee; 

supporting or hosting Family Day events; 

establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; 

hosting events to support men, parents/guardians, grandparents and foster parents asserting leadership in education 
for their children  

encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; 

providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s 
progress; 

developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school 
activities and student progress;  

 

School-Parent-Student Compact 

School-Parent Compact (SPC) 

The faculty & staff, students and parents of the The George E. Wibecan Preparatory Academy community, agree that 
this compact outlines how the parents, the entire school staff, and the students will share the responsibility for 
improved student academic achievement and the means by which the school and parents will build and develop a 
partnership that will help children achieve the state’s high standards. 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          57 

 

 

School Responsibilities 

The P.S. 309 Staff will: 

1. Provide high-quality curriculum and instruction in a supportive and effective learning environment that supports 
children in meeting the State’s student academic achievement standards. 

2. Provide parents with frequent reports on their children’s academic and behavioral progress. In each classroom we 
will provide progress reports through Parent/Teacher conferences, samples of student work, updates on reading, 
writing and math assessments. We will initiate a parent contact at the first signs of a pattern of behavior that 
interferes with student learning. 

3. Set high expectations for staff, students and parents by ensuring challenging curriculum, implementing programs 
targeted at increasing student achievement and committing to recruit, retain, and train qualified staff. Also, 
highlight/prepare ways that the parent can advance the learning environment at home. 

4. Provide parents opportunities to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities, 
as defined by grade level teams. 

5. Provide parents reasonable access to staff. 

 

Parent Responsibilities 

We, as parents, will support our children’s learning in the following ways: 

1. Establish routines to support my child’s success in school: 

o appropriate bed time 

o monitor attendance 

o homework & reading 

o nutrition 

o grooming & hygiene 

2. Communicate the significance of success in school & its relationship with success in life. 

3. Provide a volunteer time to the school during the school year. 

4. Ensure that my child attends school on a regular basis and arrives at school on time. 

5. Make sure that my child’s homework is completed and returned to school on time. 

6. Stay informed about my child’s education and communicate with the school by promptly reading all notices from 
the school or the school district either received by my child or by mail and responding as appropriate. 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          58 

 

 

Student Responsibilities 

We, as students, will share the responsibility to improve our academic achievement and achieve the State’s high 
standards. Specifically we will: 

1. Attend school regularly and arrive at school on time 

2. Complete all daily homework and return it to school on time. 

3. Model what we have learned from 4R’s each and every day. 

4. Be responsible for giving my family members all information sent home from school. 

5. Consistently plan a portion of every day for a period of uninterrupted reading time. 

 

 

School Responsibilities  

I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum 

Provide high quality and rigorous instruction consistent with the Common Core Standards to prepare students for 
college and a career by: 

● Implementing curricula aligned to the Common Core Standards; 

● Offering high quality and rigorous instruction in all subjects; 

● Using academic learning time efficiently; 

● Respecting cultural, racial, and ethnic differences; 

● Providing student feedback with next steps for improvement. 

 

Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: 

I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships 

● Ensuring that the PIP and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; 

● Conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which time, the individual child’s achievement will be 
discussed; 

● Providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles, individual student assessment results, 
and other pertinent individual school information; 

● Providing parents/guardians with information related to school, parent programs, and meetings and translating 
them into the language parents can understand; 

● Arranging additional meetings at flexible times, e.g., morning, or evening; 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          59 

 

● Respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation 
services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education. 

 

Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: 

I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff 

● Ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited 
English speaking parents; 

● Notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other staff member. 

 

Provide general support to parents by: 

I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents 

● Creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment 
for parents and guardians; 

● Assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments; 

● Sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all 
members of the school community; 

● Supporting parental involvement activities. 

 

II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities: 

II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities 

● Encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss the compact with my child; 

● Monitor my child’s attendance, ensure that my child arrives to school on time, and follow the appropriate 
procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; 

● Ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and 
his/her age; 

● Check and assist my child in completing homework assignments; provide a specific time and quiet area to do 
homework; the area must be well-lit and equipped with pens, pencils, crayons, ruler, etc.; 

● READ to my child and have a discussion with my child about the text ( for 20- 30 minutes); 

● LIMIT the amount of time my child watches television or play video games on school days; 

● Volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; 

● COMMUNICATE with my child’s teacher by responding to all notices received from the school or district; 

● PARTICIPATE in or trainings offered by the school, district, central or State Education Department to learn more 
about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; 

● PARTICIPATE in the Parent Association or serve to the extent possible on the School leadership Team; 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          60 

 

● SHARE responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; 

● Dress my child in the required uniform; 

● Encourage a positive attitude toward school. 

 

 

III. Student Responsibilities 

III. Student Responsibilities: 

● Attend school regularly and arrive on time; 

● Complete homework and submit assignments on time; 

● Follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; 

● Show respect for myself and others; 

● Dress for success by wearing my uniform; 

● Try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; 

● Show my parents/guardian my blue Home/School Communication folder on a daily basis; 

● Always do my best to learn. 

 

 
 
 
 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          61 

 

DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT 

GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY 

SUBMISSION FORM 

2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR 

 

DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information 

necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English 

language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a 

part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the 

services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should 

be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily 

available on file in the school.  When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces.  For 

additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. 

Part I: School ELL Profile 

 

 

 
 

A. School Information 

District  16 
School Name   George E. Wibecan Preparatory Academy 

Borough  Brooklyn 

School Number   309 

 
B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant 

principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. 
 

Principal   Tanya Bryant 
Coach  type here 
ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher  
 Shirley MacLellan-Bennicke 
Teacher/Subject Area Lenox Small 
Teacher/Subject Area type here 
Related-Service Provider Michele Leibowitz 
Superintendent  

 

Assistant Principal  Katrina Liebst 
Coach type here 
School Counselor  
S. Kornhauser 
Parent  Jerome Williams 
Parent Coordinator TBA 
Field Support Center Staff Member type here    
Other (Name and Title) type here 

C. Teacher Qualifications  
Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section.  Press TAB after each number entered to calculate 
sums and percentages.  
     
Number of certified 
ENL teachers currently teaching in the 
ENL program 

Number of teachers who hold both content 
area/common branch and TESOL certification 

0 

1 

0 

Number of certified 
bilingual teachers not currently 
teaching in a bilingual program  
Number of certified foreign 
language/world language teachers 
providing home language arts 
(HLA) to students in bilingual 
programs [applicable to grades 7–
12] 
Number of teachers currently 
teaching a self-contained ENL class 
who hold both a common branch 
license and TESOL certification 
[applicable to grades K–6] 

0 

0 

Number of teachers who hold both a 
bilingual extension and TESOL 
certification 

Number of special education teachers 
with bilingual extensions 

0 

0 

Number of certified 
bilingual teachers currently 
teaching in a bilingual program 

Number of certified ENL teachers 
not currently  teaching in the ENL 
program  

 

0 

0 

D. Student Demographics  
Total number of students in 
school (excluding pre-K) 

182 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          62 

Total number of ELLs 

21 

ELLs as share of total student population 
(%) 

11.54% 

 
 
 
 
Part II: ELL Demographics 
 
 
 
 
 
A. ELL Programs 

This school serves the following grades (includes 
ELLs and non-ELLs) 
Check all that apply 

 
 
This school offers (check all that apply): 

K

    1

    2

     3

     4

     5

 

6

   7

     8

    9

     10

     11

    12

 

Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) 

Yes

             No

Dual language program (DL) 

Freestanding ENL 

Yes

             No

Yes

             No

 

 

 

If yes, indicate language(s):            

If yes, indicate language(s):            

 

 
Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a 
separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. 
 

Bilingual Program Breakdown 

School 
Year 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Lang. 

Opened 
(e.g., 2013-14) 

K 

1 

  0   
0 
0 
0     
0 
0 
0 

Program 
TBE 
TBE 
TBE 
DL 
DL 
DL 
Total 
 
 
 
Part III: Assessment Analysis 
 
 

0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 

4 

0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 

3 

0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 

2 

0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 

5 

0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 

6 

7 

8 

9 

10 

11 

12 

         

         

         

         

         

         

         

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

       

       

       

       

       

       

       

 
 
0 

 
 
0 

 
 
0 

 
 
0 

 
 
0 

 
 
0 

 
 
0 

Tot # 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 

After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 

1.  What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, 

teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? 
The school uses the TCRWP assessment system to asssess the early literacy skills of the ELL students.  The assessment provides 
materials and procedures for observing and assessing the reading levels and behaviors of students in Grades K-5.  The standard 
is set by the benchmark book passages a student reads aloud and talks about during the assessment conference.  The 
assessment levels represent twenty-six points on a gradient of reading difficulty. Each point on the gradient, from the easiest 
at level AA to the most challenging at level Z, represents an increase in difficulty over the previous level.  The benchmark book 
passages (fiction and nonfiction) are used to identify the student's reading level.  Independent reading and instructional 
reading are determined by the benchmark results.  The results also tell about the text level that would be too demanding.  As 
of June 21, 2017, the data shows eight students in Grade 4, one at reading level P, an increase from level O, one at reading 
level Q, an increase from level P, one at level L, an increase from level K, one at level O, an increase from letter N, two at level 
S, an increase from level R, and two at level AA; six students in Grade 3, one at reading level P, an increase from level O, one at 
reading level N, an increase from level M, one at reading level L, an increase from level K, one at reading level D, an increase 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          63 

 

from level C, one at reading level C, an increase from level B, and one at reading level AA; three students in Grade 2, one at 
reading level D, an increase from level C, one at reading level K, an increase from level J, and one at level C, an increase from 
level B; two students in grade 1, both at reading level AA; two students in Grade K, one at reading level E, an increase from 
level D, and one at level AA.  The school goal is to move the students to the next reading level until they are at grade level. The 
results of the ELL Periodic Assessment (Fall 2016/Winter 2017) are used to drive instruction in students' weak areas.  This data 
informs our instructional plan by giving us the necessary data needed to adjust curriculum in support of ELL students.  This 
allows us to target instruction for language support in the English language across grades K-5.  The data provides us with a 
clearer view of students' needs.  For instance, students reading far below reading level across all grades K-5 require additional 
support in mastering fluency in the English language.  
 

2.  What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 

Reading assessments are administered four times a year in the fall/winter and twice in the spring. 
 

3.  What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL 

Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? 
An increase in students' raw scores in the speaking, listening, reading, and writing modalities and the number of ELLs who 
score out of the NYSESLAT to become English Proficient (Commanding) within a certain number of years indicate the success 
of the program. The EPs are generally levels three and four on the ELA and Math assessments after existing the ENL Program.  
 

4.  What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered?  

After looking at the ELA, Math, NYSESLAT, NYSITELL, and Periodic Assessment data, we have designed the After School 
program (budget permitting) for our ELL students. The purpose of the program is to help our ELL students to gain more 
content area vocabulary skills and comprehension skills. This will help the ELL students achieve success on all the content area 
exams - Math, Science, ELA, and NYSESLAT. 
 

5.  How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-
5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.]  
To establish an on-going relationship between data and instruction in meeting the needs of all students-including ELLs at 
P.S.  309, we use Response to Intervention, RTI, as a model to target data-driven instruction to support academic achievement 
of all ELLs.  Patterns in the data shape priorities for the core of instruction, (Tier 1 -  literacy block). Students who are struggling 
receive a "double dose" targeted to their specific needs, (Tier 2 -  extra exposure to instruction focused on the student's 
needs).  Students who struggle despite intervention receive increasingly specialized services (Tier 3 -  one-on-one tutoring/ 
individualized intensive services).  Progress monitoring data, reading fluency and comprehension assessments from the 
TCRWP are used to make educational decisions about changes in goals, instruction, and/or services; as well as whether to 
consider a referral for special education services.  The expected rate of an ELL's language development and background are 
taken into account.  Are the parents fluent in the native language/English language?  Do the parents/guardians need 
translators to help the child do homework?  Do peers of the same native language help the student understand the new 
language in the classroom?  How much time spent in native country? The student's progress is compared with levels 
demonstrated by students with comparable backgrounds given the same or comparable intervention.    
 

6.  What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? 

([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS].  
Currently, the data patterns across proficiency levels and grades on the NYSITELL reveal two students in Grade K at the 
entering and transitioning levels; two students in Grade 1, both at the entering level; one student in grade three at the 
entering level, and two students in grade four at the entering level; on the NYSESLAT (2016) reveal three students in Grade 2, 
one at the entering level, one at the transitioning level, and one at the expanding level; five students in Grade 3, two at the 
expanding level, one at the transitioning level, one at the emerging level, and one at the entering level; seven students in 
Grade 4, two at the transitioning level, and five at the expanding level; one student in grade five at the expanding level.  
 

7.  What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          64 

 

 

The school uses information on the student's educational history and cultural background (ATS Reports/HLIS/Reading 
Assessments/ELA/NYSESLAT/NYSITELL). ELA curriculum is adjusted to accommodate ELLs in the classroom based on NYS 
results, Reading Assessment results and information and conversation with the ENL teacher based on observations. Native 
language supports are used to support comprehension. ELLs are permitted to use their native language with their peers to 
express understanding or ask for clarification.  School personnel who can provide support to ELL students in their native 
languages during the school day are utilized to provide clarification for those who may be struggling with content and concepts 
in their subject-area classes.  Teachers group students of the same language for certain activities so they can assist each other 
and respond in the native language. These strategies can extend to before and after school programs as well as summer 
school. 

 
 
 
Part IV: ELL Programming 
 

Programming and Scheduling Information 

1.  How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented 
as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students 
regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in 
one class]).  

a.  Freestanding ENL program. 

PS  309 uses TC workshop model for all students including ELLs. Using small, Stand-Alone ENL, ENL/ELA, Integrated 
ENL (Co-Teaching)/Core Content Area (ELA, Math, Science, and Social Studies), Integrated ENL in ELA/Core Content 
Area  push-in/pull-out group sessions, one of two students - heterogeneous, Grade K (push in/pull-out); one of two 
students - homogeneous, Grade 1 (pull-out); one of three students - heterogeneous, Grade 2 (push-in/pull-out); one 
of six students - heterogeneous, Grade 3 (push-in/pull-out); one of eight students - heterogeneous, Grade 4 (push-
in/pull-out), students read level appropriate books, are involved in accountable talk, reflect upon and write about 
what they have read and confer with their teacher daily.  Mathematics is also taught using the workshop model (Go 
Math).  Students are taught a skill and then have the opportunity to apply what they have learned in problem solving 
activities with their peers. Students share what they have learned with one another.  Using the workshop model 
allows the opportunity to practice, apply, and extend student skills.  The ENL teacher supports the instruction of ELL 
students in grades 3-5 through the Literacy/Math lessons, and or Content Area planned by the classroom teacher 
during the push-in periods (see above). Currently, there are no Grade 5 students.  Upcoming lessons and student work 
are discussed with classroom teachers during informal conversations throughout the school day.  The Santillana 
Intensive English activity materials as well as supplemental reading materials are also used to reinforce the concepts 
and vocabulary already practiced in the classroom.  Technology materials used to support instruction are Award 
Reading, Reading Plus, MyOn, Think Central, and Mathletics.  All instruction is aligned to the common core standards 
and CR Part 154.2.  

b.  TBE program.  If applicable.   

N/A   

c.  DL program.  If applicable.    

N/A   

 

2.  How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each 

program model? 

a.  How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 

below)? 

                              The organization of the staff ensures that the mandated number of instructional minutes for all ELLs at 
PS  309 is provided according to proficiency levels in the ENL program.  Grade K, entering levels, have two units of study per 
week (360 minutes, 180 standalone ENL/180  ENL/ELA), and transitioning level (180 minutes, 90 integrated ENL/ELA and 90 
standalone ENL or other content area); Grade 1, entering levels, have two units of study per week (360 minutes, 180 minutes 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          65 

 

of Standalone in ENL, one unit of study in ENL/ELA (180 minutes); Grade 2, entering (360 minutes,180 standalone ENL/ 180 
minutes ENL/ELA), transitioning, (180 minutes, 90 integrated ENL/ELA and 90 standalone ENL, and expanding (180 minutes, 
integrated ENL/ELA or other content area); Grade 3, expanding (180 minutes integrated ENL/ELA or other content 
area),  transitioning, (180 minutes, 90 integrated ENL/ELA  and 90 standalone ENL  or integrated ENL/content area), emerging, 
360 minutes (90 ENL standalone, 180 integrated ENL/ELA, and 90 standalone or integrated ENL, and expanding, 180 minutes 
(180 integrated ENL/ELA or other content area; Grade 4,  entering (360 minutes, 180 ENL standalone/180 integrated 
ENL/ELA),  transitioning, 180 minutes (90 integrated ENL/ELA and 90 standalone or integrated ENL with ELA or any other 
content area, and expanding, (180 minutes integrated ENL/ELA or other content area).  
 

3.  Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and 

methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core 
Learning Standards.  
                ENL, ELA, and NLA  (NLA - strategic homogeneous linguistic grouping, bilingual dictionaries, materials in the native 
language, explanations by staff who speak the language) - instruction includes literature and content-based instruction that is 
aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards.  Teachers' College Reading and Writing Workshops are used in the ENL 
program as well as Go Math.  Some methods used are sheltered English and scaffolding strategies - modeling, bridging, 
contextualization, schema building, text representation and metacognition - these scaffolding activities promote the use of 
language in meaningful ways- and others that come up over the course of the year.  Differentiated instruction for ELL 
subgroups/ELL-SWDs included (entering, less than three years (newcomers) consists of semantic webs - a way to collect and 
organize information, for example, what we already know about a subject; say it again - a listening activity that provides 
practice in pronunciation, stress, and intonation; picture sequencing - a set of pictures that tell a simple story; jumbled 
sentences - the child dictates a sentence that relates to him/herself or to a book that has been read, teacher writes it on a 
sentence strip and cuts it into words, the child sorts the words back into the correct order; picture and sentence matching- 
could be based on a book that is being read in class, etc.  Fundations is used in the lower classes. 
  
After a review of Math data, this indicates while ELLs/ELL-SWDs show growth in Math, we want to continue to develop their 
strengths during the After School Program.  The findings of a comprehensive needs assessment resulted in the identification of 
several priorities in order to improve the quality of student performance.  Implementation of the strategies will address a large 
number of ELL/ELL-SWDs students lacking in the basic skills in both reading and mathematics; improve instruction within the 
speaking, listening, reading, and writing modalities; increase their opportunities for inclusion into the mainstream education 
program with proficiency.  See below for more information.  
 

4.  How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? 

   At PS 309 the Spanish LAB is used to assess Spanish speaking ELLs.   
 

5.  How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? 

SIFE   

a. 
b.  Newcomer  
c.  Developing   
d. 
e. 

Long Term 
Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status  

As previously mentioned, differentiated instruction for ELL subgroups/ELL-SWDs include (beginners/entering , less than three 
years (newcomers) consists of semantic webs - a way to collect and organize information, for example, what we already know 
about a subject; say it again - a listening activity that provides practice in pronunciation, stress, and intonation; picture 
sequencing - a set of pictures that tell a simple story; jumbled sentences - the child dictates a sentence that relates to 
him/herself or to a book that has been read, teacher writes it on a sentence strip and cuts it into words, the child sorts the 
words back into the correct word order; picture and sentence matching- could be based on a book that is being read in class, 
etc.  Students with Interrupted Formal Education (SIFE) as well as long term ELLs/ELL-SWDs (completed 6 years+) receive 
extended instructional time in small groups through after school classes or one-to-one tutoring, Saturday programs, and/or 
summer programs (budget permitting).  Instructional plan includes differentiation according to the needs and strengths of the 
student based on the student performance data on multiple assessments. ELLs are divided into subgroups by number: 21 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          66 

 

newcomers (ELLs receiving service 0-3 years) with five in Special Education. There are no long term ELLs (completed 6 
years).  In the ELL subgroup (0-3 years) there are 21 ELLs in all, zero SIFE, and five in Special Education.. Two ELLs are in Grade K 
at the entering and transitioning levels; Two ELLs are in Grade 1 at the entering  level; three ELLs are in Grade 2, one at the 
entering level, one at the transitioning level, and one at the expanding level; six ELLs are in Grade 3, two at the expanding 
level, one at the transitioning level , one at the emerging level, and two at the entering level ; eight ELLs in Grade 4, two at the 
entering level, one at the transitioning level, and  two at the expanding level  with Spanish as the dominant language among 
the vast majority. Of the 21 ELLs, four need additional support in all the modalities.  Nine ELLs at the entering and emerging 
levels have 360 minutes of ENL and ENL/ELA instruction per week; Four ELLs at the transitioning level has 180 minutes of ENL 
and ENL/ELA instruction per week; eight ELLs at the expanding level have 180 minutes of ENL/ELA instruction per 
week.. Performance data in Math (2016) indicate seven students in Grade 3 at level one, one at level three, and one at level 
four; one student at level one in Grade four..  Performance data in ELA (2016) indicate six students in Grade 3 at level one, one 
at level two, one at level three, and one at level four; one student in Grade four  at level one. Performance data in Science 
(2016) indicate one student in Grade 4  at level three. ELLs who reach the commanding level on the NYSESLAT are transitional 
students for two years. They are given dictionaries, glossaries, ENL test accomodations - time and a half, and are pulled-out in 
small groups for testing. The ENL teacher provides staff support to assist ELLs who have reached the commanding level on the 
NYSESLAT, as they transition from one grade level to another by providing bilingual glossaries, cognates (Spanish), signal words 
and phrases, suggested list of mathematical language, social studies academic language, and supporting ENL students in 
learning the language of mathematics.  Supplemental programs for ELLs are AIS, After School and Early Bird (budget 
permitting).  To help ELLs' performance on standardized tests,  AIS teachers do pull-out work (budget permitting). The IEP 
teacher also works with at-risk students in small groups (pull-out).  Cluster teachers push-in for small group push-in support at 
least three times a week in Grades 3-5 during reading workshop.  These preventive programs target level 1 aand level 2 
students most in need. ELL students less than three years receive differentiated instruction in language development, phonics, 
vocabulary  development, and technology (see above).  Students in years 4-6 use academic language within the 
curriculum.  The curriculum focuses on literacy through the content area.  Students are exposed to the Award Reading 
Language Development program technology. Students are exposed to the four language modalities of listening, speaking, 
reading and writing. The Writer's Writing Process is a major component.  Students use writing strategies to complete research 
projects and prepare reading summaries. The school provides Reading Plus, Award Reading, Think Central, Myon, Matheletics 
and additional academic interventions, as well as After School.  Instructional strategies for ELLs less than three years 
(newcomers) are:  count the number of syllables in a word, blend spoken sounds to form words, identify and produce letter-
sound correspondences, decode grade-level words, sight-read automatically grade-level words, answer simple question words, 
to name a few.  For ELLs in years 4-6  the school provides the development of individualized intervention plans (for those with 
disabilities) also reading and writing workshop models that include a mini-lesson in each, independent work/conferring, word 
work, language development; mathematics workshop model that includes a mini lesson, computation practice, independent 
and/or small group work, sharing; content area instruction (Science).  The school also provides the usage of software, peer 
tutoring for newcomers, as well as orientation and summer school opportunities for newly enrolled ELL students.  For 
alternate placement in Special Education, the school provides paraprofessionals, peer tutoring, After School, and Reading Plus. 
For students reaching proficiency, the school offers priority in the early morning in the Reading Plus program, individualized 
tutoring plans, and peer tutoring. For students who are long term ELLs, they will meet two days per week during the Early Bird 
program and After School (budget permitting).  ELLs are permitted to use their native language with their peers to express 
understanding or ask for clarification.  Books in the different native languages are available to support instruction as well as for 
students to take home.  School personnel who can provide support to ELL students in their native languages during the school 
day are utilized to provide clarification for those who may be struggling with content and concepts in their subject-area 
classes.  Teachers group students of the same language for certain activities so that they can assist each other and respond in 
the native language.  These strategies can extend to before and after school programs as well as summer school. For newly 
enrolled ELL students before the beginning of the school year, there is the possibility of summer school and an orientation 
depending on who is in the building at that time.    
 

6.  What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic 

content areas and accelerate English language development?  
Starfall, texts are based on students' reading level in the lower grades; Reading Plus, texts are based on the students' current 
reading levels in grades 3-5;  Award Reading technology, based on the lower grades at the entering and emerging levels; 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          67 

 

groups of eight students or less; LLI, Leveled Literacy Intervention, books are focused on students' current reading level; 
Fundations, phonics and language instruction in the lower grades; Paraprofessionals, one on one instruction, all of which 
provides access to academic content areas and accelerates  English language acquisition. 
 

7.  How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and 

attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? 
Teachers at P.S.  309 modify and differentiate instruction to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain  English 
proficiency within the least restrictive environment.  
 

8.  Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups 

targeted).  List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which 
they are offered. 
English language development for all subgroups is strengthened through participation in English-taught enrichment classes 
such as art, music, computer lab, and physical education.  Targeted intervention programs for ELLs in Math, and other content 
areas-Science/Social Studies (test taking grades 3-5) are Early Bird, After School and /or Saturday School (budget permitting) to 
provide academic subject area instruction in English  using ENL methodology and instructional strategies, assist students to 
achieve the state-designated level of proficiency for their grade, and help ELLs exceed or meet New York State and City 
standards.  Books in the native language (Spanish at present), peers  who speak the same language, and teachers who 
understand and speak the language help the students' comprehension in the targeted intervention programs. 
 

9.  Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year?    

All instruction is aligned to the common core standards; all ENL classes, including Integrated and Stand-alone offer home 
language support.    
 

10.  If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? 

We do not anticipate any at this time.    
 

11.  How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs?  Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in 

your building. 
As stated, supplemental programs for ELLs are AIS, Reading Plus, After School, and Saturday School .  To help ELLs performance 
on syandardized tests, one AIS teacher does push-in and pull-out.  Cluster teachers do push-in. This preventive program targets 
level one and level two students most in need, early childhood and upper grades. Our After School Program,  takes place on 
Friday, from 3:01 P.M.-4:01 P.M., focuses on Literacy and Math, and is serviced by licensed teachers.  The program has been 
designed in the following manner:  ELA class for entering and emerging students, grades 3-5 taking the ELA assessment and 
Math class for entering and emerging students, grades 3-5 taking the Math assessment in the Spring.  ELLs are afforded equal 
access to all school programs, curricular and extracurricular.  Letters are sent home to parents to inform parents of 
supplemental programs as well as  trips to obtain the parent's signature for their child to participate.  ELLs participate in all 
activities as do General Ed. students.  Grades K-5, including ELLs participate  in Playworks, a physical activity that is safe and 
meaningful. Playworks core values consist of healthy play, inclusion, respect, and healthy community (budget permitting).   
 

12.  What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language 

materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. 
English language development for all subgroups is strengthened through participation in English-taught enrichment classes 
such as art, music, computer lab, and physical education.  Targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, Math and other 
content areas (test taking grades 3-5) are Reading Plus, After School and/or Saturday School to provide academic subject area 
instruction in English using ENL methodology and instructional strategies, assist students to achieve the state-designated level 
of proficiency for their grade, and help ELLs exceed or meet New York State and City standards.  A reading technology 
program, Award Reading-at entering/emerging levels for the lower grades and Reading Plus-students reading text at their 
current reading level for the upper grades as well as the LLI (Level Literacy Intervention) Program, and Fundations are used 
with the upper/lower grade students. Students in need of intervention services including ELLs benefit.  Native language 
materials used are books in the native language, as well as dictionaries, cognates, and glosseries.    

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          68 

 

 

13.  How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? 

In the ENL model, ELLs are permitted to use their native language with their peers to express understanding or ask for 
clarification. Books in the different native languages are available to support instruction as well as for students to take 
home.  School personnel who can provide support to ELL students in their native languages during the school day are utilized 
to provide clarification for those who may be struggling with content and concepts in their subject-area classes.  Teachers 
group students of the same language for certain activities so that they can assist each other and respond in the native 
language.  These strategies can extend to after and before school programs as well as summer school.   
 

14.  Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels.  

As stated above, supplemental programs for ELLs are AIS, Early Bird, and After School.  To help ELLs, ELL-SWDs performance on 
standardized tests, the AIS teacher does pull-out or puh-in.  Cluster teachers do push-in. This preventive program targets level 
one and level two students most in need, early childhood and upper grades. The After School program  takes place on Friday, 
from3:01 P.M. to 4:01 P.M., focuses on Literacy and Math, and is serviced by licensed teachers.  The program has been 
designed in the following manner: ELA class for entering and emerging students, grades 3-5 taking the ELA assessment and 
Math class for entering and emerging students, grades 3-5 taking the Math assessment in the Spring  These services, in 
addition to regular instructional and other programs ( Math, ELA, Science, Social Studies, Physical Education, Music, 
Technology, Speech, Playworks, etc.) are provided for ELLs (which correspond to ELLs/ELL-SWDs' ages and grade levels while 
being appropriate to their cognitive needs), Special Ed., and General Ed. students.    
 

15.  If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the 

ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met?   
English language development for all subgroups is strengthened through participation in English-taught enrichment classes 
such as art, music, computer lab, and physical education.  Targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, Math and other 
content areas (test taking grades 3-5) are Reading Plus, After School and/or Saturday School to provide academic subject area 
instruction in English using ENL methodology and instructional strategies, assist students to achieve the state-designated level 
of proficiency for their grade, and help ELLs exceed or meet New York State and City standards.  A reading technology 
program, Award Reading-at entering/emerging levels for the lower grades and Reading Plus-students reading text at their 
current reading level for the upper grades as well as the LLI (Level Literacy Intervention) Program, and Fundations are used 
with the upper/lower grade students. Students in need of intervention services including ELLs benefit.  Native language 
materials used are books in the native language, as well as dictionaries, cognates, and glosseries.    
 

16.  Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for 

new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, 
parent coordinator).  
Activities in our school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year as well as  throughout the school 
year consist of the possibility of summer school and Parent Orientation (Principal/Parent Coordinator and/or school counselor 
depending on who is in the building at the time). The NYSITELL, Level 1 test may be administered during the month of June 
only to those new entrants who will not begin kindergarten until September. The test must be administered by a trained 
licensed pedagogue.  
 

17.  What language electives are offered to ELLs?  

Dual language - 50% home language/50% English; Transitional - begins with the home language and ends with the English 
language 100%; ENL - English with 25% support in the home language (see above).    
 

18.  For schools with dual language programs: 

a.  What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day 

(percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. 
In which language(s) is each core content area taught? 

b. 
c.  How is each language separated for instruction? 
d. 

Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same 
time (simultaneous)? 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          69 

Omit.   
 

 

 

Professional Development and Support for School Staff 

1.  Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic 

staff.)  What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs 
as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? 
 The ENL specialist meets with bands of lower and upper grade teachers to share with them strategies for supporting the ELL 
students in their classrooms.  Teachers who attend off site professional development workshops are responsible for turn-
keying information learned for the benefit of their colleagues at faculty conferences here at school.  The ENL Teacher/ENL 
coordinator, S. MacLellan-Bennicke will engage in a study, the Kate Kinsella strategies for supporting ELLs, with the guidance of 
the Assistant Principal, K. Liebst and Principal, N. Perry.  Additionally the ENL teacher will receive professional development 
from the Brooklyn  North Field Support  Center.  Professional development will occur for all teachers  at P.S.  309 every 
Monday from 2:20 to 3:40P.M.  
 Professional development workshops at our school will be conducted throughout the course of the academic year by the 
Literacy Expert and Math Expert.  Teachers will develop instructional strategies in teacher teams to use when working with 
English Language Learners.  Topics may include:  Identification of ELLs, Increasing Parental Involvement of the ELL student, 
Scaffolding, and Language Acquisition.  A minimum of 15 hours of ELL training for all staff is required, and is maintained by an 
attendance sheet (for teachers who train at the school) and kept on record in the teachers' files in the school.  Topics may 
include differentiation, student-directed activities, such as modeling, bridging, contextualization, schema building, text 
representation, metacognition - these scaffolding activities promote the use of language in meaningful ways - and others that 
come up over the course of the year. 
 

2.  Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all 
teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include 
how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance).  Refer to ELL Policy and Reference 
Guide, Professional Development section. 
Guidance Counselor meets with ENL Teacher during professional development sessions held on Mondays from 2:20-
3:40P.M.  to discuss supports needed for ELLs in order to guide them as they transition from elementary to middle school.    
  The intensive professional development for teachers will increase their  level of understanding of the implementation of 
rigorous strategies to meet the needs of the growing ELL population.  Professional staff development gives them the first-hand 
knowledge of ENL methodology and will continue to be conducted for new teachers to assist them in instructing ELL students 
in the classroom.  The entire staff receives staff development that incorporates scaffolds that are beneficial to use when 
instructing ELL students.  Professional development focuses on second language acquisition, NYS standards for ENL, and ENL 
strategies for classroom teachers, as mentioned above.  A minimum of 15% of the required professional development hours 
for all teachers prescribed by CR Part 80 must be dedicated to language acquisition, including a focus on best practices for co-
teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for ELLs.  For all bilingual and English as a New Language 
teachers, a minimum of 50% of the required professional development hours must be dedicated to language acquisition in 
alignment with core content area instruction, including a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating 
language and content instruction for ELLs. Records (attendance, agendas) of the ENL teacher's professional development 
activities are kept in the ENL Binder in the ENL classroom.  All others are written in a book  kept in the office. 
 
 

 

Parental Involvement 

1.  How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language 
development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          70 

 

 

 

Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent 
orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences?  
The school provides annual individual meetings with parents/guardians of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language 
development progress, language proficiency assessments results, and language development needs in all content areas. A 
telephone call home/a letter sent home with the student to invite the parent/guardian to the meeting on Tuesday afternoon 
(school days) from 2:30 P.M.-3:30 P.M. Interpretation and translation services in the home language are provided if necessary. 
The additional meeting informs the parent/guardian about the child's language development in all content areas in English and 
in the child's home language in the case of students enrolled in a bilingual education program. A sign in sheet is provided and 
stored in the ENL teacher's classroom binder.   

2.  Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. 
Parent/Community involvement activities include Bi-Weekly Parent/Workshops, parents of ELLs included.  Some sample topics 
are Literacy/Math standards, asthma,high blood pressure, preparing for state assessments, support group for parents with 
children who have IEPs, child abuse prevention, helping your child at home, literacy instruction (health and academic), guest 
presentations from the 81  st   Precinct, and presenters from city/private agencies. The Parent Coordinator's role is to support 
the parents of the ELL students in understanding the policies of the school and the services provided using translation services 
if needed throughout the year according to the parents needs. 
    
 

Additional Information 

Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for 
ELLs.  You may attach/submit charts.   This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted.   
Paste response here:    
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          71 

Part V: ELL Identification Attestation 

Principal Certification 

2. 

3. 

4. 

5. 
6. 

7. 

8. 

9. 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 

In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL 
Policy and Reference Guide, I, Tanya Bryant, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to 
and staff are trained on the following: 
 
1. 

The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for 
students entering with IEPs). 
Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined 
a. 

If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status 
relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level.  

The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue.   
a.  The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services 
are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality 
translation service.   

Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined.   
a. 

If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility 
to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. 

Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible.   
Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language.  
a.  Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. 
If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish 
LAB.  
Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources 
available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-
education-sife.  
If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting.  
a.  Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent 

video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask 
questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided 
throughout the meeting. 

10.  ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected.  

a. 

b. 

If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program 
in accordance with DOE transfer policies. 
If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent 
choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice.   

11.  Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process).  
12.  If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose 

ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 
 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          72 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 

Part VI: LAP Assurances 

School Name:   The George E. Wibecan                                                                              School DBN: 16K309 
Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate.  Names listed in Part A, should align with this 
section.  

Name (PRINT) 

T. Bryant 

K. Liebst 

           

Title 

Principal 

Assistant Principal 

Parent Coordinator 

S. MacLellan-Bennicke 

ENL/Bilingual Teacher 

J. Williams 

L. Small 

           

           

           

Parent 

Teacher/Subject Area 

Teacher/Subject Area 

Coach 

Coach 

            S. Kornhauser   

School Counselor 

           

           

Superintendent 
 
Field Support Center Staff 
Member 
               

M. Leibowitz 

Other Resource Rm/SETSS 

           

           

Other            

Other            

 

Signature 

Date (mm/dd/yy) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

06/27/17 

06/27/17 

           

06/27/17 

06/27/17 

06/27/17 

00/00/00 

00/00/00 

00/00/00 

06/27/17 

00/00/00 

00/00/00 

06/27/17 

00/00/00 

00/00/00 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          73 

 

 
 

2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS 

Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools 

 

DBN: 

16k309  
 

School 
Name: 

The George E. Wibecan Preparatory 
A  
 

Superintendent: 

RaheshaAmon 
 

 
The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. 
If there is more than one LAC, list all. 
 

First Name  

Last Name  

Title  

Has the LAC attended a 

2018-19 training 

The LAC was involved in 
the development of this 

conducted by the Field 

plan? Yes/No  

Language Access 

Coordinator? Yes/No  

(*Primary) Shirley  MacLellan-Bennicke  

ENL 
Teacher/Coordinator 

Yes 

Yes 

   

 
* The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs 
on translation,  
interpretation, compliance and budget.  
 

School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful 
opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's 
Regulation A-663).  
 
By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and 
interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). 
 
Part A:  Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 
 
1.  Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written 

and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from: 

  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS) 
  Automate The System (ATS) reports 
  Student Emergency Contact cards 
  Surveys conducted by your school. 

 

Based on the Home Language Report data, there are five major languages: Spanish, Arabic, Bengali, Fulani, and 
Tibetan. Translation services are needed for written and oral communication with school families. This includes 
translation of parent/teacher conversations, newsletters, and at workshops. ATS Reports and Student Emergency 
Contact cards can also help to determine the translation and oral interpretation needs of parents in our school. 
These services are available to all parents who require them, not just to parents of ELLs.  
 

 
 
2.  List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, 

which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language 
Report (RCPL) ATS report. 
 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          74 

 

Language  

Written Preferred  

Percent Written  

Oral Preferred  

Percent Oral  

Parents preferred 
languages for both written 
and oral communication in 
our school are Spanish, 
Arabic, Bengali, and 
English.  

Spanish 

Arabic 

Bengali 

English 

   

 

Spanish 

Arabic 

Bengali 

English 

TBA 

TBA 

TBA 

TBA 

11.54% 

Spanish 

11.54% 

Arabic 

Bengali 

English 

TBA 

TAB 

TBA 

TBA 

TBA 

TBA 

TBA 

TBA 

TBA 

TBA 

TBA 

TBA 

3.  From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at 

least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, 
French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. 
 

N/A 

 

 
 
Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 
 
1.  List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be 

 

TBA 

distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents.  
 

Document Name  

Month/Date Distributed to  

TBA 

Documents that require translation that our school 
typically disseminates every year are the New York 
state testing dates-in the Spring, after school program 
information- at the beginning of the year or shortly 
after, newsletters, calendars-when required, 
parent/teacher conference announcements-four 
times a year (five times a year for parents of ELLs), 
and all letters regarding the ENL program - the Home 
Language Identification Survey, entitlement, parent 
survey and selection forms, placement, continued 
entitlement, non-entitlement , and continued 
entitlement /transition (former ELLs) letters. The ELL 
letters are distributed to families throughout the year 
as needed - the HLISs at the time of enrollment; the 
entitlement/parent survey/selection/placement/non-
entitlement after the NYSITELL is administered and 
scored; the continued entitlement/non-
entitlement/transition after the NYSESLAT is scored, 
usually the beginning of the school year. 

 

TBA 

TBA 

TBA 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          75 

 
TBA 

   

 

TBA 

TBA 

2.  List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as 

parent-teacher  
conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings.  
   

How does your 
school plan to 

provide 

interpretation 

service(s)?  

TBA 

Meeting Name  

Month/Frequency of Meetings  

 

TAB 

Formal face-to-face meetings that our school 
will typically have with parents throughout the 
school year are Parent Orientation - when the 
student does not score out of the NYSITELL, the 
parent/guardian must come to the school to 
view a video that explains the programs 
offered to ELLs and fill out a selection form, 
and parent-teacher conferences - four times a 
year. Informal interactions take place on 
Tuesdays (2:20 p.m. - 3:35 p.m.) when teachers 
make telephone calls home to talk about what 
the parent/guardian can do to help their child. 
Also the attendance teacher and guidance 
counselor make ongoing calls home throughout 
the year. The ENL teacher encourages parents 
to come to the school on Tuesday afternoons 
after school for ENL lessons. The information is 
distributed by way of the school calendar. 

 

TBA 

TBA 

   

 

TBA 

TBA 

TBA 

TBA 

3.  Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of 

a school emergency.  
 

In the event of a school emergency, trained staff place telephone calls to parents /guardians at home or at work using 
the over-the-phone interpretation services. 

 
 

 
 
Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure

 
Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and 
what resources are available to meet compliance.  
 
2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          76 

 

 

Language Access Coordinators help support staff in monitoring parent language needs, allocating funding to 
provide language assistance, obtaining language support and informing parents of the availability of language 
assistance services. 

 

 
 
Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services 
 
Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive 
information. Include any: 

  Translated signage 
  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents 
  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) 

 

The translation information signs are posted in the lobby of our school, at the security desk, and main office. Budget 
funds have been allocated to support translation services in our school. 
 

 
 
Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services 
Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the 
language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services?   
 

Our school will gather feedback from parents on the quality and availability of services by oral response, and /or a 
parent survey. 
 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          77 

