 
 

 

 

 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 

2018-19 

SCHOOL COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN 

(SCEP) 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 

DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 

19K510 

School Name: 

WORLD ACADEMY FOR TOTAL COMMUNITY HEALTH HIGH SCHOOL 

Principal: 

CLAUDETTE CHRISTIE 

 
 

2018-19 SCEP-SIG                                                                                                                                                                                                            1 
 

 

School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Outline  

 

 
 
Section 1: School Information Page 
 
 
Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page 
 
 
Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) 
 
 
Section 4: SCEP Overview 
 
 
Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  

  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction 
  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment 
  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers 
  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership 
  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties  

 
 
Section 6: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) 
 
 
Section 7: Academic Intervention Services (AIS)  
 
 
Section 8: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) 
 
 
Section 9: Title I Program Information  
 
 
Section 10: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 
 
 
 

 

2018-19 SCEP-SIG                                                                                                                                                                                                       2 

 

 
School Name: 

BEDS Code: 

Grades Served: 

School Address:  

 
331900011510 

 
9-12 

 
400 Pennsylvania Avenue 

 
718-688-7980 

Section 1: School Information Page 

 

School Information 

 

World Academy for Total Community 
Health (WATCH) 

School Number (DBN): 

 

19K510 

Phone Number: 

 

718-922-0709 

Fax: 

 

Dana Doucet 

ddoucet@schools.nyc.gov 

School Contact Person:  

 

Principal: 

UFT Chapter Leader: 

Parents’ Association President: 

SLT Chairperson: 

Title I Parent Representative (or 
Parent Advisory Council 
Chairperson): 

Student Representative(s): 

 

CBO Representative: 
 

Email Address: 

 

Claudette Christie 

 
Gregory Blackman 

 
Shernette Williams Sawyer 

 
Sandra Bigaud 

 

Jenny Jafar 

 
Priscille Hilaire 

 
LoRuchama Hilaire 

 
Rosemary Polanco 

 

 

District Information 

 

Geographical District: 

19 

 

Donald Conyers 

Superintendent: 
335 Adams Street Brooklyn New York 

 

Superintendent’s Office Address: 

 
RCintron@schools.nyc.gov 

Superintendent’s Email Address: 

 

(718) 923-5124 

Phone Number: 

 

718-923-5145 

Fax: 

 

 
 

Field Support Center (FSC)  

 

2018-19 SCEP-SIG                                                                                                                                                                                                       3 

 

 

Affinity 

 

FSC: 
Executive Director’s Office 
Address: 

Alexandra Anormaliza 

Executive 
Director: 
131 Livingston Street, Brooklyn, New York 11201 

 

 
Aanorma@schools.nyc.gov 

Executive Director’s Email Address: 
718 935-3294 

 

Phone Number: 

 

718-935-5941 

Fax: 

 

2018-19 SCEP-SIG                                                                                                                                                                                                       4 

 

Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page  

 

All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this School 
Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to 
support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention 
Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal 
number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with 
Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. 
 
Directions: 

 

1.  List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 
2.  Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization 
(CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an 
asterisk*. 

3.  SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member 

does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, 
which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT 
member indicates participation in the development of the SCEP, not approval.   

4.  The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file 

in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. 

Position and Constituent Group 

Represented 

Signature 
(Blue Ink) 

Rosemary Polanco 

CBO Representative, if applicable 

 
Lizzy Ubgor 

 
ShernettSawyer 

 
IsabellaBorketey 

 

 
Member/ Parent 

 
Member/ Parent 

 
Member/AP 

 

2018-19 SCEP-SIG                                                                                                                                                                                                       5 

 

Name 

Claudette Christie 

 
Gregory Blacman 

 
Shernette Williams Sawyer 

 
Adeyah Owens 

 
Jenny Jafar 

 

Priscille Hilaire 

 

LoRuchama Hilaire 

 

*Principal or Designee 

*UFT Chapter Leader or Designee 

*PA/PTA President or Designated Co-
President 

DC 37 Representative (staff), if 
applicable 

Title I Parent Representative or 
Parent Advisory Council Chairperson  

Student Representative  
(optional for elementary and middle 
schools; a minimum of two members 
required for high schools) 

Student Representative  
(optional for elementary and middle 
schools; a minimum of two members 
required for high schools) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Name 

Position and Constituent Group 

Represented 

Signature 
(Blue Ink) 

Sandra Bigaud 

Member/ Teacher 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Member/  

 
Member/ 

 
Member/  

 
Member/  

 
Member/  

 
Member/  

 
Member/  

 
Member/  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

2018-19 SCEP-SIG                                                                                                                                                                                                       6 

 

Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan  

The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) is a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support 
schools in engaging their staff, parents, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, 
setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring 
progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community.  

The process of developing and implementing the SCEP is aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. This section will 
provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding SCEP development aligned with the school’s state 
accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong 
Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. 

Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools 

The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect 
the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms 
where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity 
and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and 
classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more 
attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and 
Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our 
families and students. 

Strong Schools, Strong Communities  

The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, 
educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school 
prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult.  

The Department has established programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers 
and students supports to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools 
centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school 
leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. 
Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to 
Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students.  

The Framework for Great Schools and SCEP Development 

The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and 
external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase 
learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently 
ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The School Comprehensive Educational 
Plan (SCEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint for continuous 
improvement that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis 
of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies 
that improve outcomes for students. 
 

Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to increase 
student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework 
for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members 
concrete ways to improve. 

In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in 
consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to 
participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a 

2018-19 SCEP-SIG                                                                                                                                                                                                       7 

 
comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five (5) goals and action plans that align with 
the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all 
the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements 
work together to support student achievement. 

The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools  

Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards 
are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical 
thinking skills. 
Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, 
and challenged by their teachers and peers. 
Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. 
They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous 
improvement. 
Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, 
developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. 
Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by 
welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. 
Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school 
and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value 
each other. 

 
Accountability Tools and the Framework for Great Schools 

In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in 
improvement planning that is informed by the New York State Education Department’s (NYSED) Diagnostic Tool for 
School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) Tenets,  the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Rubric, School Quality Guide and other 
quantitative and qualitative data tools. 
 
NYSED’s Six DTSDE Tenets 

To strengthen the existing system, the NYSED has developed a tool that captures the best practices from each of the 
current tools called the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness. This new tool encompasses multiple 
instruments such as interviews, classroom observations and surveys. The protocol will begin with a clear and cogent 
statement of the optimal conditions of an effective school and the instruments comprising the protocol will measure 
how close or far away a particular school is to the optimal conditions identified. Once reviewed, the school and district 
will create a strategic plan to address the areas in need of improvement. All current Priority and Focus Schools and Focus 
Districts must use the tool; districts that are required to submit District Comprehensive Improvement Plans and 
Comprehensive Educational Plans also will use the tool.  
 
The DTSDE protocol includes a rubric, which identifies clear and coherent expectations of the optimal conditions of an 
effective school and school district across the following six tenets: 

  Tenet 1: District Leadership and Capacity 
  Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions 
  Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support 
  Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions 
  Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health, and 
  Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement 
 
NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) 

The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by 
coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality 

2018-19 SCEP-SIG                                                                                                                                                                                                       8 

 
Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 
2017-18 Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below:  
Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) 

I. 
II.  School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4)  
III.  Structures for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and 
Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) 

 
School Quality Guide  

The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to 
set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to 
accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also 
available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s 
practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. 
For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. 
The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of 
similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set 
based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. 

 
Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 

a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; 
a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) 

Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, 
professional development, and parent and family engagement. 
 
To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in 
improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will 
serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the 
administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish: 
 
 
 
It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School 
Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the 
joint development of the SCEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 
1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% 
budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent 
and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the SCEP. For additional guidance 
on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. 
 

Next Steps for SCEP Development 

School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  

  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the 

requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655. 

  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability 

status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year. 

  Step 3: New this year, instead of self-rating, in Part 1A of the Section 5: Needs Assessment indicate the 

Statement of Practice (SOP) from the DTSDE Tenets that will be addressed in the action plan. Schools that 
received an Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) School Review should use the recommendations from the 
review to select their SOPs. Schools that did not undergo an IIT review should select SOPs informed by the 

2018-19 SCEP-SIG                                                                                                                                                                                                       9 

 

major findings/recommendations from your most recent Quality Review (QR) or Central-led Review (CLR), and 
other qualitative and quantitative data. 

  Step 4: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed 
by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART 
– Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you 
monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school 
community know when you’ve reached your goal. 

  Step 5: Build consensus around activities, strategies and programs to address students’ needs in each action 
plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement. 

  Step 6: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I 

schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). 

  Step 7: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall 

cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action 
plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. 

 
Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful 
implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to 
accomplishing desired results. 

2018-19 SCEP-SIG                                                                                                                                                                                                       10 

 

Section 4: SCEP Overview 

 

1.  What is your school’s mission statement? 

The mission of WATCH is: To prepare our students to make healthy choices, lead healthy lives, and advocate for the 
total health of their families, their communities, their nation and ultimately, their world; to expose our students to all 
aspects of the health care field and variety of career options the industry offers; to create a socially supportive 
learning environment; and to offer our students a rigorous curriculum that prepares them for college and post -high 
school industry options.  

 

 

2.  Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, 

including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented.  

World Academy for Total Community Health is a high school with 246 students from grade 9 through grade 12. The 
school's population comprises of 74% Black, 19% Hispanic, 1% White, and 4% Asian students. The student body 
includes 10% English Language Learners and 18% Special Education students. Boys account for 46% of the students 
enrolled and girls account for 53%. The average attendance rate for the school year 2017-18 was 80%. The majority of 
students beginning at WATCH in the 9th grade come to the school with reading and math skills well below grade level. 
Many of these students fall into the lowest third category city-wide. Adding to this challenge is a lack of parental 
involvement despite our varied outreach programs. The school's mission is to educate all students and prepare all 
students for college and career. As a health-themed school, and a newly State Approved Nursing Assistant (NA) Career 
and Technical School (CTE) WATCH is also committed to teaching the seven aspects of health and well-being so that 
students are well-rounded intellectually, emotionally, and physically. 

For the 2018-19 school year, WATCH will complete its fifth and final year of the School Implementation Grant (SIG) 
Program and as such, have over the last four years implemented many structures to support our very diverse 
population. For example, WATCH has an Extended Learning Time Program that targets at least 100 of our at-risk 
students to address credit gaps. Our ultimate goal is to close the credit gap leading to on-time graduation, career and 
college prep, mental and emotional wellness, and other services. WATCH is partnered with Brownsville Multi-Service 
Family Health Center (BMS), Sloan Memorial Kettering, Berkeley College, Kings County Hospital, Lindenwood Nursing 
Home, and Medgar Evers Pipeline Program, and is currently pursuing a partnership with Brookdale Hospital in order 
to address mental health awareness as well as to provide our students with access to college programs, health care 
specialists, internship opportunities, and other support services. For the 2017-18 school year our expanded 
partnership with Berkeley College allowed us to offer on-site college courses, leading to early accumulation of college 
credits and pre- college experiences. Berkeley also serves as our post secondary conduit to our newly approved 
Certified Nursing Assistant (NA) Program. WATCH is also an approved testing site for anyone who desires to become 
certified Nursing Assistants and is an approved DOE and State Endorsement CTE School. 

 

3.  Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. 

SWDs, ELLs and Over-age/Under-Credited students:  

These populations are in need of differentiated supported services. SWDs need to be supported in ICT settings. Also, 
they need additional time for completing exams in accordance to their IEP, as well as various academic intervention 
services during and after school. ELL's specifically need direct instruction by a licensed ENL teacher, as well as other 
supports that may be included in their individualized educational plan. Freestanding ENL Programs are offered in a 
self-contained environment as well as an Integrated Classroom setting (ICT). The ENL teacher has a separate room and 
meets with pull-out ELL students. ELL students who are also identified as special needs students receive Co-Integrated 
Teaching services for core-subjects. Beginner students receive additional literacy instruction in a pull-out class. ELLs 
are also offered additional support two days per week (one hour each) during Extended Learning (ELT) Program. Over-
age/Under credited students need academic interventions by means of extended learning time, small class sizes, as 
well as guidance counseling. In addition, we have invested a significant amount of resources to address students' 
writing and reading challenges. We have implemented writing portfolios as assessment tools and have implemented a 

2018-19 SCEP-SIG                                                                                                                                                                                                       11 

 

weekly Drop Everything and Read (DEAR) program in order to achieve one of our school-wide instructional goals of 
increasing writing competency in all content areas. 

 

4. 

Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over 
the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. 

Effective School Leadership, Collaborative Teacher Practice, and this year (for the first time) Strong Family Ties are 
areas of the Framework for Great Schools in which our school has made significant progress. The principal with a 
highly effective rating, continues to provide the school with stable leadership, continues to shift the culture of the 
school towards a more positive and inclusive direction, and has vested significant resources in teacher professional 
development around curriculum and alignment to unit and lesson plans. As a result, teachers are working more 
frequently in collaborative content with common planning meetings five days a week and grade inquiry teams 
facilitated by outside PD professionals, on-site coaches, as well as the school's instructional leaders in order to 
improve instructional outcomes in the classrooms. We will continue working on improvements in these key areas of 
focus as well as continue the work of building Strong Family-Community Ties. This year, 91% of parents have trust in 
the principal according to the school wide survey.. Moving forward, our two main goals are :  

a. To systematically target parent engagement, and develop effective ways in which we can successfully bridge the 
gap between parents, students, and the entire school community. b. To continue to improve students’ performance 
through teacher professional development, coaching, credit-accumulation and on-time graduation among all 
populations within the school community. 

 

 

 

 

2018-19 SCEP-SIG                                                                                                                                                                                                       12 

 

 

School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 19K510 

School Configuration (2018-19) 

Grade Configuration 

09,10,11,12 

Total Enrollment (2017-
18) 
English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 

262 

SIG Recipient (Y/N) 

Transitional Bilingual 

N/A 

Dual Language 

N/A 

Self-Contained English as a Second 
Language 

Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) 

# Special Classes (ELA) 
# Special Classes (Math) 

# Visual Arts 
# Foreign Language 

% Title I Population 
% Free Lunch 
% Limited English Proficient 

2 
3 

 
8 

% American Indian or Alaska Native 
% Hispanic or Latino 
% White 

# SETSS (ELA) 
# SETSS (Math) 
Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) 
# Music 
# Drama 
# CTE 
# Dance 

8 
3 

# Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) 
# Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) 

5 
 

School Composition (2017-18) 

92.0%  % Attendance Rate 
88.5%  % Reduced Lunch 
11.8%  % Students with Disabilities 

Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) 

% Black or African American 

1.9% 
19.8%  % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 
0.8% 

% Multi-Racial 

Personnel (2015-16) 

Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) 
% of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate 
% Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 

4.99 
0% 
12% 

# of Assistant Principals (2016-17) 
% Teaching Out of Certification 
Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) 

Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) 

ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 

Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 

N/A 

N/A 

Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 
Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-
17) 

Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) 

ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 
Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 
4 Year Graduation Rate 

Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 

63% 
45% 
60.6% 

3.0% 

Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 
US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 
6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) 
% ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures 
(2015-16) 

Reward 
In Good Standing 
Focus District 

Priority School 

Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) 

No 
No 
Yes 

Recognition 
Local Assistance Plan 
Focus School Identified by a Focus District 

No 

Focus Subgroups 

ED 

Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) 

Elementary/Middle School 

Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) 

American Indian or Alaska Native 
Hispanic or Latino 
White 
Students with Disabilities 
Economically Disadvantaged 

American Indian or Alaska Native 
Hispanic or Latino 
White 
Students with Disabilities 
Economically Disadvantaged 

American Indian or Alaska Native 
Hispanic or Latino 
White 
Students with Disabilities 
Economically Disadvantaged 

American Indian or Alaska Native 
Hispanic or Latino 
White 
Students with Disabilities 
Economically Disadvantaged 

American Indian or Alaska Native 
Hispanic or Latino 
White 
Students with Disabilities 
Economically Disadvantaged 

American Indian or Alaska Native 
Hispanic or Latino 
White 
Students with Disabilities 
Economically Disadvantaged 

N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 

Black or African American 
Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander 
Multi-Racial 
Limited English Proficient 
ALL STUDENTS 

Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) 
Black or African American 
Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander 
Multi-Racial 
Limited English Proficient 
ALL STUDENTS 

N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 

Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) 

N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
High School 

Black or African American 
Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander 
Multi-Racial 
Limited English Proficient 
ALL STUDENTS 

Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) 

N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
YSH 

Black or African American 
Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander 
Multi-Racial 
Limited English Proficient 
ALL STUDENTS 

Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) 
Black or African American 
Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander 
Multi-Racial 
Limited English Proficient 
ALL STUDENTS 

N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
NO 

Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) 
Black or African American 
Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander 
Multi-Racial 
Limited English Proficient 
ALL STUDENTS 

N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
YES 

Yes 

N/A 

120 
112 

 
8 

80.1% 
3.4% 
19.5% 

72.9% 
4.2% 
2.3% 

4 
47% 
4.4 

N/A 

N/A 

61% 
57% 
81.9% 

10% 

N/A 
No 
Yes 

N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 

N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 

N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 

NO 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
NO 

NO 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
NO 

YES 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
YES 

2018-19 SCEP-SIG                                                                                                                                                                                                       13 

 
 

 

2018-19 SCEP-SIG                                                                                                                                                                                                       14 

 

Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  

 

Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, 
and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious 
intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support) 
 
Part 1 – Needs Assessment   

Part 1a.  Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice 
Tenet 3 Statement of Practice 
Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one.  Place an “X” in the 
appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 
3.2 

The school leader ensures and supports the quality implementation of a systematic plan of 
rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning 
Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of students. 
Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction 
(DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and 
address student achievement needs. 
The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner 
within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the 
arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. 
Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative 
assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student 
reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. 

3.3 

3.4 

3.5 

SOP(s) 

Addressed 

X 

x 

X 

X 

 

 

 

 

Part 1b.  Needs/Areas of Focus: 
Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the 
most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources 
should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, 
NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School 
Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 
 

1.  What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element?  Indicate the data trends, source and 

year. 

2.  What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? 

Indicate the data trends, source and year. 

3.2: The school’s strength is improving the level of writing in the English classroom as shown in our data sets from the 
English Regents exams. Students made significant gains on the June 2017 English Regents exam; as indicated in the REDS 
report, 81% of the students that took the English Regents exam in June 2017 passed with a 65 or above. Although the 
2018 REDS English Report indicated that 69% of the students who took the English Regents exam passed, a 12% 
decrease when compared to 2017 Report, based on the REDS, the students who passed the exam this year, scored 
significantly higher as a result of their performance on the writing portion of the exam than those students who took 
and passed the exam in 2017. Additionally, a review of the 2018 US History data shows an increase of the US Regents to 
59% as compared to 2017 - 30%. In math, the school has shown improvement in Geometry. Students made significant 
gains on the June 2018 Geometry regents. The pass rate increased from 4% in 2017 to 43% in 2018. 

Based on the English Regents exam data, ENL students pass rate increased from 20% in 2017 to 33% in 2018. SWD 
population's pass rate increased from 17% in 2017 to 50% in 2018. In addition, 20% of our target group achieved a 
College Readiness score in English, and 14% in Math. Therefore, our priority continues to be addressing the needs of all 
our subgroups including ENL's and SWDs. Results from the school's most recent Quality Review classroom observations 
have indicated a significant need for our teachers to deepen their practice in order to improve in effectively 
implementing key writing strategies across content areas to support the diverse learning groups that make up our 
student population, and we continue to address this instructional area through ongoing related PD's.  

2018-19 SCEP-SIG                                                                                                                                                                                                       15 

 

The school will continue to partner with Pearson and New Vision for Public Schools in order to support teachers with 
varying opportunities that will support instructional strategies with the implementation of our writing curricula. The 
school will also continue to deepen the work that was done with Curricula 21 to ensure the alignment of curricula to the 
Common Core Learning Standards.  

The faculty will continue to engage in a series of professional development with Affinity Field Support Center around 
embedding differentiated writing strategies in our units and plans that are aligned to the Common Core Standards. The 
school plans to continue our work with New Visions, Pearson Corporation, and Dr. Linda Patterson in order to deepen 
pedagogues understanding of best practice around writing instruction and related differentiated assessment strategies 
that will support all students in transitioning writing skills across the content. 

This year, the school invested a significant amount of resources such as maintaining vendor coaches, and engaging in 
off-site differentiated professional training in order to enhance and sustain our professional learning communities 
across all content areas. The PLCs structures facilitate collaborative work for members to immerse in vertical alignment 
of state standards, as well as to incorporate AP for All standards to improve our curriculum. The school community also 
utilizes the AP for All Office as well the Office of the Superintendent in garnering professional development support in 
data-driven instruction, and influencing curriculum modifications. 

We will continue to strengthen students reading comprehension through the implementation of the program, Drop 
Everything And Read (D.E.A.R.) once a week in every classroom. 

These supports along with the SIG funded Math and English Language Arts Coaches will continue to build coaching 
capacity in order to facilitate effective best practices.  

3.3: The school’s strength in this area has been to implement the practice of using a school-wide professional 
development calendar to schedule whole and small group sessions with content supervisors and coaches in order to 
plan and refine curricula and academic tasks. For instance, the professional development calendar notes that every 
Tuesday during the first half of extended time will be dedicated to professional learning communities that use a protocol 
for looking at student work in writing across the content areas in order to highlight problem areas for students and track 
students' progress. 

Area of Focus: As indicated in the 2017-2018 DSTDE Self-Reflection Report, an area for improvement is addressing the 
individual needs of our students; implementing lessons that engage students in rigorous tasks as well as lessons that 
consistently include multiple entry points and strategies that lead to high quality student work.  

For the 2018-19 school year, the school will continue to focus on using small group forums in daily common planning 
sessions to drive rigorous instruction and inclusive practice. We will extend our inclusive practice through more frequent 
peer inter-visitations, data analysis, as we review students' writing samples to determine patterns and trends that will 
lend themselves to adjustment of curricula and instruction. We will also engage in evaluations, snap-shot observations, 
modeling, coaching, daily common planning time and team reviews using standard protocols.  

3.4: School’s Strengths: The teachers plan and structure lessons around tiered tasks ensuring that these tiered activities 
are integrated into unit and lesson plans. For instance, in a Global History lesson plan, the teacher’s plans reflected 
different academic tasks to be completed via group work. In an English Language Arts lesson plan, the teacher used 
different texts and graphic organizers for specific groups of students including English Language Learners and Students 
with Disabilities. Similarly, students will use a variety of web-based resources (including iLit, MyOn, Castle Learning, and 
Duolingo) that, in addition to being individually differentiated per student, allow teachers to monitor and measure 
progress in real-time. The ENL teacher meets regularly with content-area teachers for the ELL students. These check-ins 
involve common planning, as well as reviewing student performance on class tests and other class assignments (e.g. 
essays, labs). This information is used to drive future instructional planning. 

Area of Focus: As indicated in the 2017-2018 DTSDE Self-Reflection Report, an area for development is to improve 
teacher pedagogy from a coherent set of beliefs about how students learn best that is informed by the instructional 

2018-19 SCEP-SIG                                                                                                                                                                                                       16 

 

shifts and Danielson Framework for Teaching, aligned to the curricula, engaging, and meets the needs of all learners so 
that all students produce meaningful work products. School teams will continue to engage in cross-content planning 
that will help teachers to effectively address the diverse learning needs of our bottom third, ENLs, and SWDs population 
with the end goal of closing the achievement gaps and eliminating many of the instructional challenges amongst our at-
risk population.  

For the 2018-19 school year, the school will continue to adjust programming and teachers' professional periods so that 
content area teachers are afforded the opportunity to engage in daily common planning sessions where meaningful 
discourse occurs around writing trends, curricula adjustments, writing assessment, and refinement of key instructional 
supports using standard protocols.  

3.5: School’s Strengths: Teachers are supported through partnerships in planning, refinement, and implementing data-
driven instruction through School Implementation Grant (SIG) funding. Teachers continue to deepen units and lessons 
with effective differentiated writing strategies and meaningful Core aligned assessments. Teachers continue to engage 
in collaborative discourse around students' work. 

This year our SIG funded Math and Literacy Coaches will also continue to engage in professional development activities 
in order to maximize their abilities to support colleagues, especially newer ones in terms of implementing effective 
professional learning and instructional strategies acquired through participation at Harvard's Data Wise Workshop. As 
such, we will continue to take necessary steps to improve curriculum that includes: continued professional development 
that focuses on curriculum alignment, using Data Wise and Meeting Wise strategies and protocols to strengthen our 
PLCs and sustain our focus. We will continue to deepen our work around modification of strategies necessary to 
facilitate cross curricular planning and updating of curriculum. In addition, we will continue to work with consultants and 
other support agencies in order to build teacher capacity so that they become effective at aligning curriculum and 
implementing curriculum standards in their instructional practice.  

Area of Focus: As indicated in the 2017-2018 DTSDE Self-Reflection Report, an area for development is to align 
assessments to curricula, use on-going assessment and grading practices, and analyze information on student learning 
outcomes to adjust instructional decisions at the team and classroom levels. 

Therefore, instructional leaders and coaches will strengthen the work around Professional Learning Communities in 
order to continue moving students on a trajectory of improved learning. Some things the school has begun doing 
differently to improve instruction is providing teachers with more frequent differentiated off-site professional learning 
opportunities, increased inter-visitations (within the school as well as in other campus schools) to observe best 
practices, district-wide school visits, utilization of the superintendents’ instructional support staff, increased 
collaborative practice, and increased trainings/learning opportunities for instructional leaders and coaches.  

 

 
Part 2 – Annual Goal 

Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this 
element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified 
priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-
bound.  
1. By June 2019, students will improve the quality of their writing in 3 Regents Contents- ELA, Global, and United States 
History resulting in a 3% pass rate increase in Regents scores in these contents.  

 

 
 

2018-19 SCEP-SIG                                                                                                                                                                                                       17 

Key Personnel 
Who is responsible 
for implementing 
and overseeing the 
activity/strategy? 
(include school, 
educational 
consultants and/or 
CBO staff) 

The work will be 
monitored by 
administrative staff, 
Dr. Patterson, 
Affinity Instructional 
Coaches, as well as 
the school’s SIG 
funded Literacy and 
Math Coaches to 
boost classroom 
instructional 
practices.  

 
Part 3a – Action Plan 

Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies 
your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this 
Framework for Great Schools element, including: 

Target 
Group(s) 
Who will be 
targeted? 

Timeline 
What is the 
start and 
end date? 

  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional 

 

development, and/or systems and structures needed to 
impact change. 
Strategies to address the needs of students with 
disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need 
student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, 
STH). 

Dr. Patterson along with our New Visions Literacy Coach will 
continue to deepen the work that was started by Dr. Heidi Jacobs 
around curriculum and alignment to units and lessons. 

 

Pearson will continue to support the math and science teachers by 
focusing on the use of content reading to drive writing tasks, 
rigorous classroom discourse, and effective modeling strategies. In 
addition, students are engaged in a weekly Drop Everything and 
Read (DEAR) program in all classrooms to improve reading 
comprehension and increase writing competency in all content 
areas. In order to continue to deepen, differentiate, and improve 
the writing curricula, SIG Funds supplemented with Priority Focus 
and Title 1 allocations will be used to support teachers through the 
use of researched-based instructional writing strategies that are 
aligned to Common Core Standards and embedded in the Common 
Core Shifts. Writing Curriculum Maps and Units will be refined to 
align to the New Visions curriculum. 

 

Teachers will continue to engage in weekly differentiated and whole 
group professional development training opportunities based on 
needs assessments. Trainings will focus on implementation of 
strategies to support teachers in setting up/implementing a 
Balanced Literacy Writing Workshop that will lend support to 
students' writing outcomes. Training will also allow teachers to use 
students' writing samples as a conversational starting point during 
their daily common planning sessions. In addition, teachers of all 
content areas have implemented writing portfolios as an 
assessment tool to measure students' writing. 

 

We will continue to strengthen the work around peer-to-peer inter-
visitations as this practice serves as a bedrock for collaborative 
discourse, action plans, and next steps for change. We will continue 
to strengthen the work around interdisciplinary practice within our 

Humanities 
and 
Curriculum 
Development 
Grades: 9-12; 
Pearson 
Math, 
Science and 
curriculum 
development 
9-12. 

September 
2018 
through  

June 2019 

 

 

September 
2018 
through  

June 2019 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

September 
2018 
through  

June 2019 

 
 

2018-19 SCEP-SIG                                                                                                                                                                                                       18 

SIG funded 
Instructional coaches 
and Administrative 
staff through 
observations and 
feedback using 
Danielson Rubric will 
ensure that units are 
effectively 
implemented to 
meet the needs of 
diverse student 
groups. 

 

PLCs so that we can begin to assess its impact on teaching and 
learning. We will continue to enhance the work around our writing 
and vocabulary focus as multiple data sources, including the 
regents’ exams, indicate that there is a need for greater focus on 
improving students’ writing. 

Writing Maps and units will be aligned to differentiated strategies 
for Students with Disabilities (SWDs) English as a New Language 
Learners (ENLs), Bottom Third Population, and our Advanced 
Student Population.  

 

Units will be rooted in Common Core Learning Standards for Literacy 
grades 9-12, and will include small group formats (guided, 
independent, and interactive) based on students’ strengths, needs, 
and/or interests.  

 

Units will also facilitate opportunities for rigorous evidence-based 
discussions, peer/shared activities, individualized conferences and 
aligned assessments. Units will be reviewed at the end of each term 
and modifications implemented based on students’ performance 
and needs.  

 

SWDs and ENLs will also be afforded additional support through 
strategy implementation via varying forms of ICT models. Multiple 
modalities within instruction such as audio books, flashcards, tactile 
manipulative, and sentence starters are used to enhance instruction 
and prepare students for the rigors of the Common Core. Students 
receiving ENL services use Language! and EDGE. Language! is a 
comprehensive literacy program by Sopris West. The program 
focuses on phonemic awareness, morphology, reading 
comprehension, spelling, grammar, and writing skills. Pearson's iLit 
is also used to support fluency building. In addition, computers are 
available in the ENL classroom for students' use. Laptop carts and 
Smart boards are available for classroom use. Students often use 
computers and iPads to help translate words or phrases directly. 

 

The ENL teacher will work collaboratively with the teachers in each 
discipline using an accommodation log to keep track of individual 
student's instructional needs, learning styles, areas requiring 
remediation, as well as academic successes. ENL teacher will also 
work to assess student ability in the four modalities through general 
literacy coaching, sight reading/read-aloud assessment, regular 
literacy journals, and constant analysis of classwork. 
 
Students will also have access to programs such as iLit on their own 

All Student 
Groups: ELLs, 
SWDs, 
Bottom 
Third, & 
Advance 
Students. 

September 
2018 
through 
June 2019 

 

September 
2018 
through  

June 2019 

 
 

September 
2018 
through  

June 2019 

 
 
 

September 
2018 
through  

June 2019 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

September 
2018 
through  

2018-19 SCEP-SIG                                                                                                                                                                                                       19 

 

devices at home, and are frequently assigned homework to be 
completed within this program. This is in addition to lingual focus 
that includes both Cognitive Academic Language Proficiency (CALP) 
and Basic Interpersonal Communication Skills (BICS), general literacy 
coaching, and lessons in the acquisition of academic skills more 
broadly (such as note-taking and organization). All of this ensures 
that content is delivered effectively, leading to successfully meeting 
our school goals of creating proficient writers, achieving higher 
credit accumulation, and increased graduation rate for all students. . 
 

Administrative staff members in collaboration with the Parent 
Coordinator, Partner Outreach Support Staff, SIG funded 
Instructional Coaches, and the School’s Professional Development 
Team will plan and facilitate at least six (6) parent workshops that 
will focus on the school's instructional plan, goals and actions for 
increased writing performance as well as instructional expectations 
to support learning outcomes. 

School-wide 
Community: 
Students, 
parents, 
teachers  

 

Pedagogues will utilize the contractual parent-engagement time-
frame to engage in weekly outreach to parents regarding students’ 
progress and instructional challenges. Parents will be provided with 
six (6) week cycles of progress reports and next steps actions for 
their children.  

June 2019 

 
 
 
 
 
 

September 
2018 
through  

June 2019 

September 
2018 
through 
June 2019 

 

 

 

 

September 
2018 
through  

June 2019 

 

Administrative Staff, 
Parent Coordinator, 
Partner’s Outreach 
Liaison, Professional 
Development Team, 
and SIG 
fundedInstructional 
Coaches  

  
 
3b – Parent and Family Engagement 

How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York 
State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible 
for implementation and oversight. 
WATCH will plan and facilitate at least six ( 6) parent workshops that will focus on the school's instructional plan, goals 
and actions for increased writing performance as well as instructional expectations to support learning outcomes. 
Pedagogues will utilize the contractual parent-engagement time-frame to engage in weekly outreach to parents 
regarding students’ progress and instructional challenges. Pedagogues will make individual phone calls, emails and 
text messages; group phone calls with grade teams; invite parents to visit the teacher teams; as well as letters mailed 
home. Parents will be provided with six (6) week cycles of progress reports and next steps actions for their children. 

The timeline will be September 2018 through June 2019.  

2018-19 SCEP-SIG                                                                                                                                                                                                       20 

 

Key personnel responsible: Administrative staff members in collaboration with the Parent Coordinator, Partner 
Outreach Support Staff, Instructional Coaches, teachers, and the School’s Professional Development Team  

 

 
Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 

Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including 
human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 
Affinity Field Support Center, New Visions and Pearson Corporation will work collaboratively with school’s 
instructional team on a monthly basis in order to support school’s instructional team with researched-based 
strategies for effective implementation. Schools instructional teams led by SIG Funded Coaches will engage in weekly 
professional development activities with content area teachers (individualized, small groups, and whole groups). 
Parent Coordinator and Partner Outreach Liaison will conduct weekly parent outreach and implement dates and 
times for parent workshops. Curriculum Maps, monthly units, and Pearson related Common Core texts along with 
other supplemental instructional resources (paper and electronic) will be utilized to support and enhance the work. 
Funding sources include Title I and School Improvement Grant (SIG).  

 
Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 

X 

Tax Levy 

X 

Title I 
SWP 

 

Title I 
1003(a) 

 

Title III 

 

 

Title I TA 

 

PTA 

Funded 

X 

P/F Set-
aside 

SIG 
Grant 

 

 

21st Century 

School 

Achievement 

Funding 

 

 

C4E 

Other 

 
Part 5 – Progress Monitoring  

Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement 
planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 
By February 2019, students will show a 1% increase in the writing components of the 2019 ELA, US, and Global 
January Regents exams as compared to our 2017-18 June Regents exams - ELA 43%, Global 42%, and US 17% through 

1. 

Implementation of writing assessment portfolios that has placed a greater emphasis on extended writing 
within the Humanities Department.  

2.  Our weekly Drop Everything and Read (DEAR) period that allows students to immerse in sustained silent 

reading, journaling, and discourse. 

3.  Skill of the Month as created by PLC members that supports instruction across curriculum through 

reinforcement in discussions as well as in writing. . 

 
Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 
1. Weekly Evaluation and Review of Practice: Feedback and recommendations will be based on observable students' 
data, i.e samples of students' writing. 

2. Assessments of snap shots and observation reports 

3. Coach's Reports 

4. Students' classroom performance and written work 

5. Peer Assessment Reports 

6. Results of students' writing tests and quizzes: Exam performance 

 
Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action 
plan, if applicable. 

2018-19 SCEP-SIG                                                                                                                                                                                                       21 

 

 

2018-19 SCEP-SIG                                                                                                                                                                                                       22 

 

Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans 

 
Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and 
school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 
5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health) 

Part 1 – Needs Assessment   

Part 1a.  Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice 
Tenet 5 Statement of Practice 
Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one.  Place an “X” in the 
appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 
5.2  The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and 

sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. 

5.3  The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional 

developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning 
experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students.  

5.4  All school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance 

of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and 
fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health 
supports tied to the school’s vision. 

5.5  The school leader and student support staff work together with teachers to establish structures 

to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental health 
needs.  

x 

X 

x 

X 

SOP(s) 

Addressed 

 

 

 

 

Part 1b.  Needs/Areas of Focus: 
Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the 
most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources 
should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, 
NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School 
Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 
 

1.  What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element?  Indicate the data trends, source and 

year. 

2.  What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? 

Indicate the data trends, source and year. 

3.  What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? 

5.2 The school's strength in this area has been to use a school-wide PBIS program that has impacted our school in 
positive ways evidenced by decreased incident reports. (Enter incident report data here.) 

 

Another strength is the implementation of advisory classes into the students' weekly schedule supported by Cyprus Hills 
College Counselors and New Visions College Counselors.  

 

5.3 Our priority need is to increase teacher - student relationship. In 2017 - 2018 student survey response indicated that 
70% of students had personal attention and support from teachers . Our school will continue to improve teacher-
student relationships by 5% as indicated in the student survey response for 2018-2019 academic year. Our SBST works in 
conjunction with our instructional team to ensure that engaging lessons and experiences are part of our daily instruction 
in our school. At WATCH, we pay specific attention to the whole school environment, to ensure that we provide a 
nurturing climate with comprehensive supports to meet the social and emotional needs of our students. This work is 
supported by the Academic and Personal Behaviors Institute that provided professional development to teachers and 
2018-19 SCEP-SIG                                                                                                                                                                                                       23 

 

guidance counselors in order to implement and promote positive mindset strategies. Such implementation will impact 
classroom engagement by 5% or more between September 2018 and February 2019. 

 

5.4: Our guidance counselors, deans, teachers, administrative, and other support staff have been trained in Restorative 
Circles that have aided in facilitating and enhancing students' discussions, listening and reflecting skills. (BMS), one of 
our partners also facilitates an ongoing Girl Empowerment Group that supports our young ladies in the use of 
appropriate expressions and building reflective listening skills. Classroom climate is expected to make gains by 5% or 
more. WATCH has also implemented a Young Men's Leadership Group facilitated by two male staff members. In these 
forums , our young men are allowed opportunities to express themselves in a non-threatening environment creating 
trust and respect. 

 

5.5: The school has implemented programs to support students social and emotional development health needs. 
Programs such as Peer Mediation, Dance, and Yoga have nurtured students in their social and emotional growth. During 
the 2017-18 school year, the school also offered multiple sessions of mental health workshops for both parents and 
students in order to support families with coping skills and other necessary tools to allow students to be successful in 
school. 

 

 
Part 2 – Annual Goal 

Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this 
element of the Framework for Great Schools –Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified 
priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-
bound.  
By June 2019, WATCH will increase the attendance rate by 2% compared to the 2018 school-wide annual attendance 
report rate of 80% through the implementation of staff development workshops on supporting students social and 
emotional needs, school counseling,and school trips that will engage students' participation in order to target the 
bottom one-third students with chronic and sporadic attendance problems.  

 

 

2018-19 SCEP-SIG                                                                                                                                                                                                       24 

 
Part 3a – Action Plan 

Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies 
your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for 
this Framework for Great Schools element, including: 

Target Group(s) 
Who will be 
targeted? 

  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional 
development, and/or systems and structures needed 
to impact change. 
Strategies to address the needs of students with 
disabilities, English language learners, and other high-
need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, 
SIFE, STH). 

 

Timeline 
What is the 
start and 
end date? 

Key Personnel 
Who is responsible 
for implementing 
and overseeing the 
activity/strategy? 
(include school, 
educational 
consultants and/or 
CBO staff) 

Cyprus Hills in collaboration with our in-house counselors will 
continue to work in order to implement various/differentiated 
intervention programs, mentoring support, college advisory, 
college and career preparation support, and parent and family 
engagement activities.  

Students and 
Families 

September 
2018 
through 
June 2019 

Principal, Assistant 
Principal, Coaches, 
Teachers, SBST 
Members, Partner 
Liaisons 

 

Our College Access For All program will support students in 
preparation for attending both two and four year colleges. 
Students will have the opportunity to take college level courses 
for college credit and experience what it is like to be in a college 
setting.  

 

The Extended Programs (mentoring program peer and staff; 
After-school activities, family engagement opportunities, etc.) 
will help to improve attendance as students begin to use these 
opportunities to bridge classroom gaps and begin to see 
themselves being more successful in their academic work. 
WATCH has also incorporated an advisory component to our 
program in order to offer additional support to target students.  

 

 

The target 
populations will 
be students in the 
lowest third in 
reading, ELLs, 
Special Education 
students, 
Advanced 
Regents diploma 
candidates, and 
Long Term 
Absence Students 
(LTAs) 

Our partner, BMS will continue to work with subsidiary groups 
in providing internship opportunities at medical clinics and 
hospitals that will keep our students engaged. Community 
partner’ liaisons will either support students by directly meeting 
with them individually or in small groups or collaborate with key 
staff members who spear-head intervention programs.  

 

 

 

 

September 
2018 
through 
June 2019 

September 
2018 
through 
June 2019 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

September 
2018 

Principal, Assistant 
Principals, guidance 
counselors, parent 
coordinators, 
partner liaisons, 
Paraprofessionals, 
and teachers 

2018-19 SCEP-SIG                                                                                                                                                                                                       25 

 

 

Through the funding of College Access for All grant, New 
Ambitions will support students through exposure to writing 
skills workshops, conflict resolution sessions, college tours, and 
work readiness programs.  

 

WATCH will continue to work with IVY Key to prepare students 
for SAT's in order to improve college readiness.  

 

We will utilize the The CTE Nursing Assistant Program as a 
conduit to support our students in attaining post-high school 
career options. 

 

In addition, the Academic and Personal Behaviors Institute will 
provide professional development to teachers and guidance 
counselors in order to implement and promote positive mindset 
strategies.  

 

The SIG-funded guidance counselors will identify, seek out, and 
conference with over-aged students and Long-Term Absent 
students to offer them alternative career opportunities so that 
they can experience success.  

The Parent Coordinator will engage in ongoing outreach, 
alerting parents/guardians to the needs of our students. The PC 
will also liaise with guidance staff and key organizations in order 
to create parent workshops addressing issues/topics that relate 
to teens' concerns, as well as college and career readiness 
information.  

School-wide 
students’ groups: 
Ells, SWDs, 
Bottom Third, 
Advanced, 
parents/guardians 

 

Parent Coordinator and BMS Liaisons will implement 
parent/student activities such as Family Nights and Award 

through 
June 2019 

 

 

 

 

September 
2018 
through 
June 2019 

 

 

 

 

September 
2018 
through 
June 2019 

 

 

 

September 
2018 
through 
June 2019 

September 
2018 
through 
June, 2019 

 

 

September 
2018 

Parent Coordinator, 
Partner Liaisons, 
Guidance 
Counselors, Deans, 
Attendance Team, 
Teachers, 
Administrators. 

2018-19 SCEP-SIG                                                                                                                                                                                                       26 

 

Ceremonies to recognize students showing improvements, 
efforts, etc.  

 

The attendance teacher will work collaboratively with guidance 
and support team to track and create action plans for those 
students who are frequently absent. Attendance teacher will 
also continue to engage in regular home visits to meet with 
parents/guardians and offer support for re-entry or to offer 
alternative programs to fit students’ needs.  

 

The guidance counselors will engage in weekly ongoing 
counseling with students who are particularly at-risk for 
attendance issues. Guidance counselors will create plans for 
managing student attendance and developing individualized 
interventions.  

 

The Attendance Team will engage in monitoring at-risk students 
and recognition of students who work to improve their 
attendance.  

 

WATCH will continue with our mentorship program assigning at-
risk students to in-house mentors as well as with mentors from 
partner organizations. 

 

We currently utilize several communication systems to share 
data with our staff, students and families: pupilpath, Naviance, 
report cards, progress reports, transcripts, and scholarship 
reports. As much as these systems transmit/communicate key 
data to families, they do not necessarily support clear 
understanding of what the data reveals/means. As a result, 
many parents do not use the data to advocate for their 
children’s needs. Although teachers spend time analyzing the 
data so that it can effectively inform instructional gaps and 
needs, the same is not true when it comes to using the same 
data as a talking point to influence parents and students’ 
decisions. 

The principal will monitor implementation through weekly 
cabinet meetings, weekly data review of attendance/OORS 
trends, SIG leading indicator progress monitoring and weekly 
check-ins with guidance and service providers. 

through 
June, 2019 

 

 

September 
2018 
through 
June, 2019 

 

 

 

September 
2018 
through 
June, 2019 

 

 

September 
2018 
through 
June, 2019 

 

 

 

 

September 
2018 
through 
June, 2019 

Administration, 
service providers 

September 
2018 
through 
June, 2019 

Principal, Assistant 
Principals, guidance 
counselors, parent 
coordinators, 
partner liaisons 

  
2018-19 SCEP-SIG                                                                                                                                                                                                       27 

 
 
3b – Parent and Family Engagement 

How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to 
support  the  whole  child?  Include  the  timeline  and  identify  key  personnel  and  stakeholders  responsible  for 
implementation and oversight. 
The Parent Coordinator will engage in ongoing outreach, alerting parents/guardians to the needs of our students. The 
PC will also liaise with guidance staff and key organizations in order to create parent workshops addressing 
issues/topics that relate to teens' concerns, as well as college and career readiness information. Although there is a 
collaborative effort amongst key stakeholders: administrators, teachers, parent coordinator, newly hired attendance 
teacher, guidance counselors, and other support staff to implement incentives to get parents to actively participate in 
meetings and workshops, the parent attendance data has revealed that these efforts are not making a significant 
impact in leveraging change in this area of need. We believe that the multiple forms of communication may be 
producing counter effects to our intended purpose and goals as some students have indicated that the volume of data 
reports become confusing; it appears that a correlation is not recognized. As a result, we are in the planning stage of 
implementing a unified reporting system that will allow us to report the data in an organized, coherent manner 
offering explanations as to what the data reveal, and then engage in follow-up with implementation of multiple 
sources of intervention and support strategies so that families can experience a sense of empowerment. This action 
we hope will help in generating parent participation, ultimately leading to an increased interest in attendance to 
workshops and other school activities. 

Timeline: September 2018 through June, 2019 

 

 
Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 

Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including 
human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 
Parent Coordinator will work collaboratively with administration, guidance/support staff as well as partners and 
subsidiaries in conjunction with the attendance team to implement daily outreach and tracking mechanisms in order 
to identify and address those students who are at-risk for attendance issues. Attendance teacher will engage in 
regular evening and Saturday home visits to meet and conference with parents/guardians of students at-risk for 
attendance. Attendance teacher will meet on a weekly basis with attendance team members to offer feedback from 
home visits and modify/adjust action plans for improved attendance.  

 
Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 

X 

Tax Levy 

X 

Title I 
SWP 

 

Title I 
1003(a) 

 

Title III 

 

 

Title I TA 

 

PTA 

Funded 

X 

P/F Set-
aside 

SIG 
Grant 

 

 

21st Century 

School 

Achievement 

Funding 

 

 

C4E 

Other 

 
Part 5 – Progress Monitoring  

Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement 
planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 
By February 2019, the school will achieve a 1% increase in the overall attendance as measured by the 2018 
attendance rate of 80% through the continuation of home visits, outreach efforts, and implementation of advisory, 
counseling, and mentoring programs. 

 
Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 
1. OORS Reports 

2018-19 SCEP-SIG                                                                                                                                                                                                       28 

 

2. Attendance Teacher's Data/Reports 

3. ATS Reports 

4. Kinvolved (Attendance tracking and family communication system) 

5. Skedula (Attendance tracking and family communication system) 

6. Naviance 

7. School Messenger (communication system) 

 

 

 

 
Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action 
plan, if applicable. 

2018-19 SCEP-SIG                                                                                                                                                                                                       29 

 

Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans 

Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success 
and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional 
development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 4: Teacher Practices 
and Decisions) 
 
Part 1 – Needs Assessment   

Part 1a.  Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice 
Tenet 4 Statement of Practice 
Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one.  Place an “X” in the 
appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 
4.2  School and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized 

around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. 

4.3  Teachers provide coherent, and appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards 

(CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. 

4.4  Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning 

environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences and tailored to the strengths 
and needs of all students. 

SOP(s) 

Addressed 

X 

X 

X 

 

 

 

4.5  Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by 
using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, 
and progress monitoring). 
Part 1b.  Needs/Areas of Focus: 
Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the 
most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources 
should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, 
NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School 
Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 
 

X 

 

1.  What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element?  Indicate the data trends, source and 

year. 

2.  What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? 

Indicate the data trends, source and year. 

4.2: 100 % of our staff members are engaged in structured inquiry-based professional collaborations that resulted in 
curriculum and daily lessons that address the needs of all students through the use of strategic programming across all 
core content. 

4.3: Teachers will continue to create and align lesson plans that incorporate the use of multiple strategies to address 
various learning styles in order to make students' thinking visible. 

4.4 We have created distributive leadership structures and ongoing opportunities for all staff members/stake-holders to 
engage in key decision-making. The impact of the teacher teams has strengthened the instructional capacity of the 
teachers resulting in 100% of teachers having a voice in key decision making. The school will earn a rating of 3 or higher 
on the QR Rubric 5.1 as indicated in alignment of teacher practices 

The most recent Quality Review indicated the following: 

Findings-Staff members are working collaboratively to develop curricula across content areas, in alignment to Common 
Core Learning Standards and content standards linked to Advanced Placement (AP) and CTE courses. Using student work 
and data, teachers are refining curricula and tasks for diverse learners across all grades and content areas.  

2018-19 SCEP-SIG                                                                                                                                                                                                       30 

 

Area for Improvement: 

The most recent Quality Review indicated the following: 

While some curricula show a focus on college and career readiness skills for students, they do not consistently 
incorporate rigorous tasks that offer all students opportunities to be immersed in cognitively demanding activities 
across content areas and grades. 

 Lessons in some classrooms offered students multiple points of entry to differentiated tasks. In a Career and Technical 
Education (CTE) class about nursing occupations, the teacher facilitated partner work by eleventh and twelfth grade 
student nurse practitioners who rotated through learning stations, using mannequins, hospital equipment, and other 
manipulatives to role-play tasks such as feeding a patient, checking vital signs, and transferring a patient safely from 
place to place in a hospital setting. By contrast, most students in an Algebra II class worked independently on problems 
involving exponential functions, with no support from a partner or group of peers, and with minimal support from a 
teacher dominated lesson that offered little time for students to complete the task.  

 

In addition, the 2017-2018 DTSDE Self-Reflection Report indicated: 

Based on ongoing teacher observations, it has been determined that some teachers have begun implementing lessons 
grounded in data that are addressing the individual needs of our students; however there is still work to be done in this 
area in order to build school-wide coherency. It is also evident that some teachers still struggle with implementing 
lessons that engage students in rigorous tasks as well as lessons that consistently include multiple entry points and 
strategies that lead to high quality student work. It is noteworthy to highlight that teachers across the school community 
are beginning to use a common language as they prepare their lesson plans to ensure consistency in the methods that 
students receive adequate instruction that meets the needs of every learning style.  

Effective planning appears to be an underlying barrier. Additionally, teacher retention has posed some challenges as 
training new teachers each year places resource burden on the school and creates instructional gaps. As a small learning 
community that houses 25% Special Needs students and approximately 18% ENLS, some teachers are challenged with 
consistently differentiating the data to engage sub-groups within the same instructional setting. 

 

 
Part 2 – Annual Goal  

Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this 
element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified 
priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-
bound. 
By June 2019, as a result of improved pedagogical practices identified through teacher team inquiry cycles, there will be 
a 5% increase in credit accumulation amongst the lowest third population in English Language Arts. 

 

 

2018-19 SCEP-SIG                                                                                                                                                                                                       31 

Key Personnel 
Who is responsible 
for implementing 
and overseeing the 
activity/strategy? 
(include school, 
educational 
consultants and/or 
CBO staff) 

Principal, Assistant 
principals, Dr. Linda 
Patterson, lead 
teachers, coaches, 
data specialists, 
professional 
development 
coaches. 

 
Part 3a – Action Plan 

Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies 
your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this 
Framework for Great Schools element, including: 

Target 
Group(s) 
Who will be 
targeted? 

Timeline 
What is the 
start and 
end date? 

  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional 

 

development, and/or systems and structures needed to 
impact change. 
Strategies to address the needs of students with 
disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need 
student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, 
STH). 

The school has created four data teams that will work 
collaboratively across core contents and the four grade levels. The 
school will support the work of the data teams through facilitation 
of teacher leaders, Coaches, Data Specialists, and key administrative 
support staff.  

 

In order to build capacity within teams, the professional 
development committee will regularly assess team needs, strengths, 
and weaknesses and make determinations as to necessary 
professional development opportunities and support strategies. The 
work of the data teams will be instrumental in strengthening the 
instructional capacity of the teachers as there will be on-going inter-
visitation and feedback, modeling, coaching, and refining of 
instructional practices which will result in improved best practice 
within all classrooms.  

 

During the inquiry cycles, the teams will continue to adopt and 
utilize knowledge gained through work with the Affinity coaches 
such as protocols for looking at students work and formative writing 
assessments- Exploding Analysis, Lightning Debates, Chalk Talk, 
Postcards, and Final Word- as the basis for our inquiry structures in 
data gathering and analysis to identify gaps and strengths in the 
implementation of Common Core Curriculum.  

 

SIG Funds will allow Dr. Patterson, vendor coaches, and the two 
instructional coaches to effectively facilitate, analyze, and refine 
strategies to support content teachers. 

Curriculum 
maps across 
contents; all 
content area 
pedagogues, 
team leaders 
and lead 
teachers 
and/or 
instructional 
coaches, data 
specialist 

September 
2018 
through 
June 2019 

 

 

September 
2018 
through 
June 2019 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

September 
2018 
through 
June 2019 

 

 

 

2018-19 SCEP-SIG                                                                                                                                                                                                       32 

 

 

 

September 
2018 
through 
June 2019 

September 
2018 
through 
June 2019 

 

 

 

September 
2018 
through 
June 2019 

September 
2018 
through 
June 2019 

 

 

 

Student 
populations: 
ELLs, SWDs, 
Bottom 
Third, 
Advanced, 
individual 
content area 
teachers. 

All student 
population, 
parents and 
guardians, 
teachers. 

Administrative Staff, 
Data Specialist, 
Curriculum 
specialist: Dr. 
Patterson, Pearson 
Coaches, Lead 
teachers, and 
instructional support 
staff. 

Administrative staff, 
coaches, parent 
coordinator, 
guidance counselors, 
data specialist. 

The Data specialist will engage in data gathering, and then provide 
team members with baseline and other data sources; data will be 
analyzed and disaggregated by content team members with support 
of instructional team. Data trends and patterns will inform next 
steps, not just for targeted students, but also for individual teachers.  

 

Information gathered from data analysis will also be used to 
determine modifications of maps and units, learning gaps, re-
teaching strategies, instructional grouping, and to target individual 
students for differentiated activities and additional supports. 

Team meeting minutes will be used for information sharing amongst 
key constituencies within the school community.  

 

Parent-teacher conferences and open-school forums will be utilized 
to offer parents feedback on what data reveals regarding their 
child’s performance and progress. 

 

Parent Coordinator, guidance counselors, and school instructional 
team will work collaboratively with content area teachers to support 
them in information sharing and workshops so that 
parents/guardians can better understand what the data is revealing.  

September 
2018 
through 
June 2019 

The school will continue with the implementation of extended 
learning time in order to provide individualized support as an 
outgrowth of assessments of students' needs through Spring and 
Winter sessions for Regents Prep, subject class reviews, and the 
utilization of APEX online courses.  

All students   September 

2018 
through 
June 2019 

Administrative staff, 
teachers, coaches, 
parent coordinator, 
guidance counselors, 
data specialist. 

 

Our inquiry team will engage in ongoing weekly analysis of students’ 
transcripts, programs, and schedules; our data specialist, guidance 
team, and administrative team will convene meetings with senior 

 

 

 

September 
2018 

2018-19 SCEP-SIG                                                                                                                                                                                                       33 

 

staff on a regular basis (weekly or bi-weekly depending on the 
urgency of the matter to address).  

through 
June 2019 

 

We will impact the credit accumulation process through credit 
recovery methods using the extended learning time spear-
headed/supervised by additional administrative support to address 
students’ credit gaps amongst our varying student populations.  

 

SIG Funds will allow us to effectively refine/modify our units as we 
revise and determine students’ needs and gaps to ensure that 
strategies and assessments are aggressively implemented to address 
instructional gaps.  

 

 

 

September 
2018 
through 
June 2019 

 

 

September 
2018 
through 
June 2019 

  
 
3b – Parent and Family Engagement 

How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies 
to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and 
identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. 
Parent-teacher conferences and open-school forums will be utilized to offer parents feedback on what data reveals 
regarding their child’s performance and progress. Parent Coordinator, guidance counselors, and school instructional 
team will work collaboratively with content area teachers to support them in information sharing and workshops so 
that parents/guardians can better understand what the data is revealing. In parent workshops, parents will be trained 
in reading and understanding students' transcripts; exposed to graduation requirements, as well as class and course 
expectations, grading policies, college and career readiness requirements for September 2018 through June 2019. Key 
personnel responsible for implementation will be done by teachers, administrative staff, coaches, parent 
coordinators, guidance counselors and data specialists.  

 

 
Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 

Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including 
human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 
The Assistant Principal Administration and instructional team will play an integral part in gathering, sharing, and 
analyzing the data in order to support team members. Researched-based literature will be used to support our 
inquiry protocols. The parent coordinator, guidance, and administrative staff will serve as conduits to parents and 
guardians. Coaches will support teacher teams in realigning maps to Common Core to address needs/gaps in the 
instruction. Per session funds will be utilized to support the ELT program, where students receive individualized 
support as our five year SIG is in the last year of implementation and has been reduced significantly. 

 
Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 

X 

Tax Levy 

X 

Title I 
SWP 

 

Title I TA 

 

P/F Set-
aside 

 

21st Century 

 

C4E 

2018-19 SCEP-SIG                                                                                                                                                                                                       34 

 

 

Title I 
1003(a) 

 

Title III 

 

PTA 

Funded 

X 

SIG 
Grant 

School 

 

Achievement 

 

Other 

Funding 

 
Part 5 – Progress Monitoring  

Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement 
planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 
By February 2019, as a result of improved teacher teams, inquiry cycles, the lowest third population of students will 
experience a 5% increase in credit accumulation in English Language Arts. 

 
Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 
1. Students' Report Cards 

2. Students' Transcripts 

3. Progress Reports 

 

 
Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action 
plan, if applicable. 

2018-19 SCEP-SIG                                                                                                                                                                                                       35 

 

Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans 

 

Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and 
nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional 
support that drives student achievement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions) 
 
Part 1 – Needs Assessment   

Part 1a.  Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice 
Tenet 2 Statement of Practice 
Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one.  Place an “X” in the 
appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 
2.2  The school leader ensures that the school community shares the Specific, Measurable, 

Ambitious, Results-oriented, and Timely (SMART) goals/mission and long-term vision inclusive 
of core values that address the priorities outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational 
Plan (SCEP). 
Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital 
resources. 

2.3 

2.4  The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district's Annual 

Professional Performance Review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and 
track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. 

2.5  Leaders effectively use evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve 

critical individual and school-wide practices as defined in the SCEP (student achievement, 
curriculum and teacher practices; leadership development; community/family engagement; 
and student social and emotional developmental health). 

X 

X 

X 

X 

SOP(s) 

Addressed 

 

 

 

 

Part 1b.  Needs/Areas of Focus: 
Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the 
most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources 
should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, 
NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School 
Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 
 

1.  What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element?  Indicate the data trends, source and 

year. 

2.  What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? 

Indicate the data trends, source and year. 

2.2 The school is developing and implementing common assessment practices across all classrooms in order to build 
coherency and impact students’ engagement in all content classes and ultimately improve their progress.  

2.3: Through SIG Funds the school's data specialist moved into the role of Assistant Principal deepening the work around 
data gathering, sorting, analysis, and dissemination of information. The school will collaborate with New Visions in order 
to repair and maintain effective programming and scheduling. Effective scheduling has allowed the school to maximize 
its fiscal resources and utilize funds to support the greatest need areas.  

2.4: Using an agreed upon rubric, as a measuring criteria for teachers' performance, the school's Instructional staff will 
engage in ongoing observations offering timely and relevant feedback. 

2.5: Based on the findings from our most recent Quality Review (QR) listed below, we have implemented structures such 
as Professional Learning Communities (PLCs) across all grades; daily Common Planning sessions within the core contents 
that will build consistent practice and support teachers in effectively implementing checks for understanding, 
engagement strategies, and adjust instruction to support learning gaps amongst targeted populations.  

2018-19 SCEP-SIG                                                                                                                                                                                                       36 

 

According to the 2016-2017 quality review 100% of teachers stated that the principal communicates a clear vision for 
this school (City: 82%)85% of teachers stated that curriculum and instruction are well coordinated across different grade 
levels (City: 79%) 86% of parents felt that the principal works to create a sense of community in the school (City: 93%). 
Our school community will upgrade its practices to secure a 3% increase or more in all areas that scored less than 100%. 

The latest Quality Review indicated the following: 

Findings-Although some lessons allow for partner discussions, lessons do not typically facilitate peer-to-peer discussion, 
with students demonstrating high levels of thinking across classrooms. Lessons also do not consistently include multiple 
entry points and strategies that lead to high quality student work.  

Impact-There are missed opportunities to deepen learning by all students via challenging tasks and discussions that 
consistently demand higher-order thinking across disciplines and result in high quality student work products. 

Supporting Evidence 

Some teachers at the team meetings described strategies to improve student learning, based on findings from item 
analysis of assessments and examination of student work. The strategies included use of manipulatives, graphic 
organizers, writing prompts, and interactive whiteboard activities as part of mini-lessons. However, there was minimal 
evidence of teacher modification of curriculum content based on work and data for students, including English Language 
Learners (ELLs) and students with disabilities.  

 In an Earth Science class, tenth and eleventh grade students viewed PowerPoint slides, read short segments of a text 
about physical and chemical weathering, and then answered questions by copying a few words from the text and video 
to fill in missing information on a cause-effect diagram. Further, most student work did not illustrate challenging tasks 
that required students to explain their thinking or to engage in authentic in-depth writing. 

Staff and students share feedback on assessments, via proficiency reports, individual conferences and transcript 
reviews. In addition, teachers use rubrics to communicate feedback to students. However, the format, quality, and 
quantity of feedback on student work varies across disciplines, with some samples of student writing showing check 
marks with comments, including next steps, and others showing number grades only, or just a check mark or 
performance level score with rubric-based comments on post-its. Some feedback seen on student work on bulletin 
boards and in student folders consisted of the teacher only circling portions of the rubric, with no additional feedback to 
explicitly identify actionable next steps for the student to improve the work. At times, the teacher’s comments were not 
aligned to the content of the rubric linked to the work. In addition, during the meeting with students, some of them 
were not able to clearly state what they needed to do to improve the work, based on the teacher feedback on the work 
that they displayed. 

 

 
Part 2 – Annual Goal 

Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this 
element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the 
identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART– Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, 
and Time-bound.  
By June 2019, WATCH will increase the college readiness index by 2% to 35% as compared to 2017-18 college readiness 
index of 33% through implementation of rigorous instruction evident in modification and adjustment of pedagogical 
practices, as well as through the implementation of reading and writing strategies that are reflected in lesson plans, 
units, and student writing portfolios.  

 

 

2018-19 SCEP-SIG                                                                                                                                                                                                       37 

Key Personnel 
Who is responsible 
for implementing 
and overseeing the 
activity/strategy? 
(include school, 
educational 
consultants and/or 
CBO staff) 

Principal, Assistant 
Principals, Lead 
Teachers, Coaches, 
Data Specialists, 
Professional 
Development 
Coaches, Teacher 
Leaders. 

 
Part 3a – Action Plan 

Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies 
your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this 
Framework for Great Schools element, including: 

Target 
Group(s) 
Who will be 
targeted? 

Timeline 
What is the 
start and end 
date? 

  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional 

 

development, and/or systems and structures needed to 
impact change. 
Strategies to address the needs of students with 
disabilities, English language learners, and other high-
need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, 
SIFE, STH). 

Teachers will engage in weekly differentiated and whole group 
professional development training opportunities based on needs 
assessments. Trainings will focus on effective ongoing assessment 
in order to differentiate instructional strategies dealing with 
literacy, critical reasoning, and discussion protocols.  

 

Teachers will also engage in daily common planning meetings to 
support the strengthening of writing across the content areas.  

 

ILIT and MyOn reading program will aid in the supporting of 
students with access to multiple entry points of understanding.  

 

Implementation of ongoing assessment strategies will also 
strengthen our ICT co-teaching models that serve as a support 
mechanism for our special education and ELLs students in that 
they will result in small group structures, modified, individualized 
forums (conferences), as well as through direct teaching and 
vocabulary support.  

 

Teachers will also be able to more effectively target daily reading 
and writing tasks in their lessons and engage students in rigorous, 
meaningful classroom discourses.  

 

Using data provided by the inquiry teams and teacher formative 
assessments, teachers will incorporate daily and weekly 
assessment strategies and corresponding instructional strategies 
aligned with the needs of their student population. 

Teachers 

September 
2018 through 
June 2019 

 

 

 

September 
2018 through 
June 2019 

 

 

 

 

September 
2018 through 
June 2019 

 

 

 

September 
2018 through 
June 2019 

 

2018-19 SCEP-SIG                                                                                                                                                                                                       38 

 

WATCH will continue to support the implementation of the ILIT 
reading program with the assistance of the Pearson Coach as well 
as Perspectives (Pearson's Newest Core Aligned Program for ELA 
Instruction). 

Teachers 

 

SIG Funds will allow the school to continue purchasing high 
interest readers in both traditional and electronic formats to 
further the student engagement in active reading and writing.  

 

In order to increase the involvement of the school community in 
our mission to engage students, the school will expand the Drop 
Everything and Read (DEAR) program. The number of classes 
outside of English Language Arts involved will increase, as well as 
the amount of time devoted to sustained silent reading and 
rigorous discussion and writing.  

 

Teachers will engage in weekly differentiated and whole group 
professional development training opportunities based on needs 
assessments. Trainings will focus on effective ongoing assessment 
in order to differentiate instructional strategies dealing with 
literacy, critical reasoning, and discussion protocols.  

September 
2018 through 
June 2019 

September 
2018 through 
June 2019 

 

September 
2018 through 
June 2019 

 

September 
2018 through 
June 2019 

 

 

 

September 
2018 through 
June 2019 

The principal will monitor implementation through weekly 
classroom visits to determine if transference of strategies offered 
at professional development workshops are being implemented 
in the delivery of the lessons. 

School Staff  September 

2018 through 
June 2019 

Principal, Assistant 
principals, lead 
teachers, coaches, 
data specialists, 
professional 
development 
coaches. 

Principal, Assistant 
Principals, Lead 
Teachers, Coaches, 
Data Specialists, 
Professional 
Development 
Coaches, Affinity 
Coaches, Parent 
Coordinator 

 

Also, there will be weekly data review during PLC's to determine 
if, and how students attendance trends is a factor in students' 
success; Weekly analysis of observation reports to identify trends 
and patterns in teachers' performance; ongoing refinement of 
units and lessons to ensure that strategies are embedded or 
incorporated into them; and, ongoing review of students work 
products in order to adjust and/or modify instruction. 

There will be monthly parent workshops that address topics such 
as types of instructional strategies to support college and career 
readiness skills; workshops based on support mechanisms to aid 
parents in becoming active partners in their children's academic 
lives; supporting them with homework help and creation of 
projects. 

School Staff  September2018 

through June 
2019 

 

Principal, Assistant 
Principals, Parent 
Coordinator, 
Teachers, Parent 
Leaders, Students 

2018-19 SCEP-SIG                                                                                                                                                                                                       39 

 

 

We will also work with the CBO to support the parents' 
understanding in internships and other community based 
opportunities. 

 

There will be parental involvement in the creation of SCEP as joint 
constituents, and focus professional development around using 
the SCEP as a tool to drive instruction, to implement school's best 
practice, and for joint decision making. Draft and final copies will 
be shared with all parties, and revision and alignment updates will 
be completed as the school's needs change in order to reflect 
those needs and changes.  

  
 
3b – Parent and Family Engagement 

 

September 
2018 through 
June 2019 

 

September 
2018 through 
June 2019 

How  will  your  school  engage  parents/families  and  support  their  understanding  of  Effective  School  Leadership  and 
strategies  to  promote  parent  leadership  and  engagement  in  order  to  support  their  children  at  home?  Include  the 
timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. 
There will be monthly parent workshops that address topics such as types of instructional strategies to support 
college and career readiness skills; workshops based on support mechanisms to aid parents in becoming active 
partners in their children's academic lives; supporting them with homework help and creation of projects. We will also 
work with the CBO to support parents' understanding in internships and other community-based opportunities. 
Parents will be involved in the creation of SCEP as joint constituents and for joint decision-making.  

Key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight: Principal, Assistant Principals, Parent Coordinator, 
Teachers, Parent Leaders, Students 

Timeline: September 2018 through June 2019 

 

 
Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 

Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including 
human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 
Coaches and instructional team/professional development teams will collaborate on a weekly basis to maximize 
opportunities offered to both teachers and parents in order for them to support students’ learning and progress. 
Parent coordinator will liaise with vendor coaches, lead partner support personnel in an effort to outreach to parents 
and facilitate parent workshops and information sessions. The Inquiry team spearheaded by the data specialist will 
support teachers and parents with ongoing data, training in data analysis and next step measures based on results of 
shared data. 

 
Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 

X 

Tax Levy 

X 

Title I 
SWP 

 

Title I 
1003(a) 

 

Title III 

 

 

Title I TA 

 

PTA 

Funded 

X 

P/F Set-
aside 

SIG 
Grant 

 

 

21st Century 

School 

Achievement 

Funding 

 

 

C4E 

Other 

 
Part 5 – Progress Monitoring  

2018-19 SCEP-SIG                                                                                                                                                                                                       40 

 

 

Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement 
planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 
By February 2019, as a result of the implementation of targeted professional development opportunities that 
supports pedagogical refinement and ongoing reflective assessment of practices, 75% of teachers will be developing 
their practice towards becoming effective in component 3d, on the Danielson Framework (Using Assessment). 

 
Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 
1. Danielson Rubric 

2. Weekly Snap-shots 

3. Frequent Observational Cycles and Feedback Conferences 

4. Students' Progress Logs 

5. Inter-visitation Reports 

6. Students' Work Samples-Portfolios 

 

 
Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action 
plan, if applicable. 

2018-19 SCEP-SIG                                                                                                                                                                                                       41 

 

Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans 

 
Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a 
welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. 
(Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement) 
 
Part 1 – Needs Assessment   

  Part 1a.  Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice 
Tenet 6 Statement of Practice 
Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one.  Place an “X” in the 
appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 
6.2  The school leader ensures that regular communication with students and families fosters their 

high expectations for student academic achievement.  

6.3  The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and 
community stakeholders so that student strength and needs are identified and used to 
augment learning. 

6.4  The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide 
training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to support 
student success. 

6.5  The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school 

community members centered on student learning and success and encourages and empowers 
families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their 
children. 

X 

X 

X 

X 

SOP(s) 

Addressed 

 

 

 

 

Part 1b.  Needs/Areas of Focus: 
Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the 
most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources 
should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, 
NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School 
Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 
 

1.  What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element?  Indicate the data trends, source and 

year. 

2.  What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? 

Indicate the data trends, source and year. 

6.2: School engages in weekly parent outreach, student mentorship programs with in-house staff as well as community 
partners and support personnel in order to ensure that parents and students are kept informed as to the necessary 
requirements for on-track, and timely graduation. However, the need for a more inclusive community is evident in the 
low numbers of parental involvement/attendance at school's activities. 

6. 4: The school’s administrators, New Ambitions, and Lead Partner (BMS) are collaborating with Memorial Sloan 
Kettering, Downstate Hospital, and other post-secondary institutions in order to promote career and college 
opportunities for students upon graduation.  

6. 3: The school's NYSED CNA (CTE) Program will be used in conjunction with our Lead Partner and subsidiary groups to 
promote career pathway and post secondary choices for our current students and alumni members.  

6..5: The school convenes monthly student and parent workshops to review students' transcripts, share attendance 
data, and update students' and parents as to credit gaps and next step action plans. Parent satisfaction with school 
supports and culture have increased by over 10 % this past year. Even with this 10% increase, there is still a dire need to 
improve parental involvement. In as much as a recent comparative analysis (based on the school' Quality Report), 
showed that when compared to the city, we are on par with the city average in terms of parental outreach efforts. Yet, 
despite our outreach efforts, we are 9 percentage points below the city's average when compared to parental 

2018-19 SCEP-SIG                                                                                                                                                                                                       42 

 

involvement in other schools throughout the city. As a result, the school is taking steps to improve this rating for the 
2018-2019 school year. 

 

 
Part 2 – Annual Goal 

Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this 
element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the 
identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, 
and Time-bound.  
By June 2019, as a result of increased parental involvement in college and career readiness workshops, newly State 
Approved CTE opportunities, mentoring programs, community and partnership internships, and other community-based 
opportunities, WATCH will increase the graduation rate for 2018-19 Cohort U to 76.5% as compared to Cohort T 
graduation rate of 71.%. 

 

 

2018-19 SCEP-SIG                                                                                                                                                                                                       43 

 
Part 3a – Action Plan 

Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and 
strategies your school will implement to achieve the 
identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, 
including: 

Target Group(s) 
Who will be 
targeted? 

Timeline 
What is the 
start and 
end date? 

Key Personnel 
Who is responsible 
for implementing 
and overseeing the 
activity/strategy? 
(include school, 
educational 
consultants and/or 
CBO staff) 

  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional 
development, and/or systems and structures needed 
to impact change. 
Strategies to address the needs of students with 
disabilities, English language learners, and other high-
need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-
credited, SIFE, STH). 

 

Administrative staff members in collaboration with the Parent 
Coordinator, Lead partner Outreach Support Staff, 
Instructional Coaches, and the School’s Professional 
Development Team will plan and facilitate at least 6 parent 
workshops that will focus on the school’s instructional plan, 
goals, and instructional expectations. 

 

Pedagogues will utilize the contractual parent-engagement 
time-frame to engage in weekly outreach to parents regarding 
students’ progress and instructional challenges. 

 

Using the New Vision tracker and the DOE tracking Tool to 
compare graduation data sets, parents will be kept abreast of 
students' progress via phone outreach, cohort group 
messaging- Kinvolved, parent workshops as well as 6 week 
cycles of progress reports and next steps actions to inform 
their children's progress.  

 

School will engage in monitoring and refining lessons based on 
IEPs goals and mandates.  

Parents/Community 
members 

September 
2018 – June 
2019 

Administrative Staff, 
Guidance Counselor, 
Coaches 

 

 

 

 

September 
2018 – June 
2019 

 

September 
2018 – June 
2019 

 

 

 

 

September 
2018 – June 
2019 

 

 

2018-19 SCEP-SIG                                                                                                                                                                                                       44 

 

The school will work with students and families in the 11th and 
12th - grade cohorts reviewing transcripts and discussion of 
future college and career plans through small groups and 
individual conferences.  

All students in the 
11th and 12th grade 
cohorts 

September 
2018 – June 
2019 

Administrative staff, 
guidance 
counsellors, data 
and inquiry teams 

 

 

The inquiry team and guidance counselors will conduct 
frequent, ongoing conferences with families of students who 
are at-risk for graduating in a timely manner.  

 

We will continue to work with our in-house data specialist and 
our Affinity support team to use the data source to inform our 
programming and scheduling of students, especially students 
in our senior cohort, our SWDs, ELLs, and our bottom third 
population.  

 

WATCH has hired an additional special education teacher who 
is certified in Science in an effort to leverage the work 
happening in the ICT classes and improve the work around 
differentiating content materials to support the learning needs 
of our IEP students, ELLs, and Lowest Third student 
population. 

We will continue to foster a positive learning environment 
with periodic events for the community that celebrate student 
achievement. We will also celebrate students' achievement 
through ARISTA Honor Celebration, Grade Assemblies, and 
Family Nights. 

 

The SIG Funded Guidance Counselor with the support of the 
school's administrative staff will convene monthly meetings 
with senior cohort members and their parents/guardians in 
order to support them with reflective practice and revision of 
their transcripts and class work, college options, college 
admissions, and completion of financial aid documents. 

 

 

 

September 
2018 – June 
2019 

 

September 
2018 – June 
2019 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

School community  September 
2018 – June 
2019 

Parent Coordinator, 
Administration, PTA, 
Teachers, students, 
guidance counselors 

 

 

 

September 
2018 – June 
2019 

 

2018-19 SCEP-SIG                                                                                                                                                                                                       45 

 

The school will engage in monthly informational meeting 
updating students and parents of students' progress towards 
graduation. 

 

 

 

September 
2018 – June 
2019 

Through SIG Funds the school will implement Extended 
Learning Time: After-school and Saturday Programs that will 
address credit gaps, credit accumulation, Regents Review, 
preparation sessions, and Academic Intervention Support.  

School Community  September 
2018 – June 
2019 

Administrators, 
Teachers, Students, 
Guidance 
Counselors 

 

The school will also hire a per-session administrator two days 
per week to engage in tracking and conferencing with senior 
cohort members. 

 

September 
2018 – June 
2019 

 
 

 

 

  
 
3b – Parent and Family Engagement 

If  any,  list  the  Community  Based  Organizations  or  other  partnerships  that  support  parent/family  and  community 
engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. 
Brownsville Multi-Service Family Health Center (BMS), AP For All, 

 

 
Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 

Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including 
human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 
School’s administrators, SIG Funded Guidance Counselor, and AP Administrator will work collaboratively with the 
Affinity supported data team on a bi-weekly basis in order to stay abreast of students’ credit needs and gaps. 
Instructional coaches will support the school instructional program/plan through monthly and bi-monthly facilitation 
of professional development intended to build teacher capacity around instructional gaps. Administrators, parent 
coordinator, guidance counselors, and partner liaisons will work collaboratively with instructional staff in order to 
disseminate information to both students and parents. Curriculum maps, monthly units, Common Core aligned texts, 
along with other supplemental instructional materials will be utilized to support students’ progress. The Parent 
Coordinator and Parent-Teachers' Association President will utilize funds to implement parent workshops.  

 
Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 

X 

Tax Levy 

X 

Title I 
SWP 

 

Title I 
1003(a) 

 

Title III 

 

 

Title I TA 

 

PTA 

Funded 

X 

P/F Set-
aside 

SIG 
Grant 

 

 

21st Century 

School 

Achievement 

Funding 

 

 

C4E 

Other 

2018-19 SCEP-SIG                                                                                                                                                                                                       46 

 
 
Part 5 – Progress Monitoring  

Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement 
planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 
By February 2018, 90% of students within our 12th grade cohort will have accumulated needed credits and will have 
passed at least 4 of their required regents exams to be on track for a timely graduation in June. 

 
Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 
1. Students' Transcript 

2. Student Tracking Logs 

 
Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action 
plan, if applicable. 

2018-19 SCEP-SIG                                                                                                                                                                                                       47 

 

Section 6: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) Program Description  

 

Directions: Expanded Learning Time activities are directly aligned to the elements of the Framework for Great Schools, 
Rigorous Instruction, Supportive Environment, and Strong Family and Community Ties. ELT provides enriching 
educational experiences that happen outside of the traditional school day and blend skill acquisition, relationship-
building and fun to foster academic and social-emotional growth. Summer learning, afterschool programming, and 
extended-day ELT models, when well-implemented, play a critical role in supporting students in all grades and ensuring 
that they graduate from high school, college and career ready. SED requires that Priority schools offer a minimum of 200 
additional student contact hours as Expanded Learning Time in addition to the current mandated length of 900 hours of 
instruction per year (25 hours per week) in grades K-6 and 990 hours of instruction per year (27.5 hours per week) in 
grades 7-12. Effective ELT models will blend school staff with community partners, and will provide a balanced 
curriculum that can include ELA, Math, STEM, arts, physical activity, and leadership development. Complete the sections 
on this page to demonstrate how the school will meet these requirements.  
 
Part 1 – ELT Program Goal(s) 

Describe the summative goal(s) of the ELT program for the 2018-19 school year. Be sure to construct the goal to be 
SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound.   
 

By June 2019, as a result of improved supports identified through Extended Learning Time (ELT), there will be a 5% 
increase in credit accumulation in English Language Arts amongst our lowest third population. 

By June 2019, WATCH will increase the graduation rate for cohort 2019 by 1.5% points achievable through 
individualized and small group instruction in an ELT setting. 

 

 
Part 2 – ELT Program Type  

Is the ELT program voluntary or compulsory? 

 

Voluntary 

X 

Compulsory 

If the ELT program is voluntary, indicate how you will actively encourage the participation of all students, with the 
goal of serving at least 50% of students.  
N/A 

 

 
Part 3 – ELT Program Description  

Target Population: The ELT program will be offered to all students in the school, with the goal of serving a minimum 
of fifty percent of students. 
Describe how the school will meet the following SED requirements for an ELT program in a Priority School: 
 

Integrate academics, enrichment, and skill development through hands-on experiences that make learning 
relevant and engaging. 

  Offer a range of activities that capture student interest and strengthen student engagement in learning so as to 

promote higher attendance, reduce risk for retention or drop out, and increase the likelihood of graduation. 

  Actively address the unique learning needs and interests of all types of students, especially those who may 

benefit from approaches and experiences not offered in the traditional classroom setting. 

  Contain components designed to improve student academic, social, and emotional outcomes, including 

opportunities for enrichment programs such as in music and art. 

  Ensure instruction in any core academic subject offered in the program will be delivered under the supervision of 

a teacher who is NYS certified in that particular content area. 

  Engage in outreach activities made to families. 

2018-19 SCEP-SIG                                                                                                                                                                                                       48 

 

In order to fulfill SED requirements of the ELT program: 

1. Staff will continue to work collaboratively with Dr. Patterson and Pearson Corporation to leverage current 
researched-based practices and programs in order to enhance our curriculum maps and units as well as strengthen 
teachers’ practice. This will carry through to ELT, where teachers will be expected to utilize student data to provide 
individualized and small groups support. 

2. Students are offered a range of support and enrichment classes based on what they are succeeding in or struggling 
with during the day. As student skill levels improve through ELT, there will be a reduction in frustration resulting in 
students who are motivated to come to school. 

3. Teachers will continue to utilize the practices and support strategies learned in PD during the school day. Teachers 
will also utilize data inquiry to provide the most individualized supports possible for students in ELT. 

4. The school will provide differentiated professional development for teachers based on their areas of need. 

5. The ELT staff will convene monthly meetings to determine instructional gaps and modification strategies. 

6. The administration will conduct ongoing informal observation of teachers’ practices to determine effective 
implementation of units, strategies, and differentiation support for target groups. 

7. Teachers will be using the Danielson Rubric to create and implement teacher self-assessment rubric for improved 
practice.  

8. The SIG funded guidance counselors will support students with bridging credit gaps, credit-recovery, transcript 
updates, college and career readiness support, and facilitating parent workshops in reading and understanding 
transcripts and college information. 

9. The SIG funded instructional coaches will support students and teachers with classroom instruction, curriculum 
updates, lesson planning and best classroom practices. 

 

In order to fulfill the requirements of Goal 2, the school will: 

1. We will continue to fund an attendance teacher for outreach and home visits to support school-wide attendance 
initiatives.  

2. The parent coordinator along with the lead partner attendance support personnel will work collaboratively to keep 
families engaged in school activities whereby increasing parental involvement and community building that will 
enhance students’ participation and attendance. 

3. The school will conduct regular attendance ceremonies and incentives opportunities to boost attendance.  

4. The school will engage the student government body in peer-to-peer attendance interventions. 

5. There will be an addition of a mental health counselor to support students experiencing severe mental and 
emotional challenges.  

6. We will offer training for guidance and support staff in peer mediation and crisis intervention strategies. 

2018-19 SCEP-SIG                                                                                                                                                                                                       49 

 

In order to fulfill SED requirements of goal 2, the school will:  

1. Ensure that grade teams will be implemented across content and grades; teams will engage in weekly meetings to 
evaluate the progress of the lowest-third students in each grade. 

2. Team members will meet regularly to develop both academic, social and emotional interventions in order to 
address the needs of targeted students. 

3. Grade teams will meet regularly with students as part of a mentoring program to help develop the study skills and 
habits of students who historically have not been successful in school. The teams will engage in transcripts reviews 
and students work to develop appropriate intervention strategies.  

4. The school will gather, aggregate, and disseminate data on a school-wide level in order to plan and drive 
instruction. 

5. We will utilize a part time data specialist who will engage in data analysis and distribution. 

6. The school will invest in high interest reading programs and materials (electronic and paper) that address the 
reading skill sets of struggling readers as well as fluency building for on grade and advance readers.  

7. Targeted students will be instructed by content area teachers in small groups and individual settings. 

8. There will be direct instruction, vocabulary instruction, and skill focus instruction for ELLs and SWDs to prepare 
them for success on the NYSESLAT and regents exams. 

9. There will be ongoing collaboration with lead partner and subsidiary CBOs to facilitate enrichment programs that 
will involve tutoring and individual mentoring opportunities for students. 

10. The school will engage in strategic planning, programming, and scheduling to ensure that all students are placed 
in required courses necessary for timely graduation. 

11. We will implement state approved credit recovery program for those students who have failed courses from the 
prior semester. 

12. We will implement rigorous additional instructional sessions in order to offer additional courses for those 
students who are under-credited as well as to accelerate those students who have been identified for advance 
regents diplomas.  

13. We will facilitate ongoing collaboration between data specialist, guidance counselors, and parent coordinator to 
monitor, track, students’ progress as well as to support teachers with modification of remediation and interventions. 

14. We will engage in college trips and multiple opportunities for work- based learning where students can be 
exposed to various colleges and career choices, ultimately making sound decisions regarding choices for post high 
school.  

15. We will support students with internship opportunities through our partner, BMS and the CTE program. 

16. We will continue implementation of advisory through New Ambitions college and career readiness program and 
mentorship. 

 

 
Part 4 – ELT Program Implementation and Oversight 

2018-19 SCEP-SIG                                                                                                                                                                                                       50 

 

Part 4a. Who will implement the ELT program? Who will oversee the program? 
1. 

Indicate the key personnel that will be responsible for implementing and overseeing the ELT program, including 
school-based staff and any high-quality community partners that will be involved. 
If applicable, describe the scope of involvement of all community partners and how the joint ELT program is 
structured. 

2. 

3.  Explain how you will evaluate the program to assess impact on student achievement. 
1. WATCH High School’s Principal, and Assistant Principal will rotate supervisory roles and be responsible for 
implementing and supervising the ELT program. The Literacy and Math Coaches will work with the administration and 
teachers to implement and modify programs. The target populations will be students in the lowest third, ELLs, Special 
Education students, and those students identified to graduate with an Advanced Regents Diploma. Attendance is 
compulsory for these groups.  

2. There are two main community partners involved with ELT programs, BMS and Berkeley College. BMS will be 
working with more advanced students; connecting students with their partnerships, such as medical clinics and 
hospitals in order to set up internship programs and other educational opportunities. Medgar Evers will support 
students in building their writing skills, core subject skills, conflict resolution, college access, and Career and Post 
Secondary skills. Through College Access For All we partnered with New Ambitions and Ivy Key in order to support our 
students with post secondary skills. We will continue to partner with these programs in order to support students 
directly in classes, at off-site internships, or support teachers leading these programs and classes. Another component 
of ELT is the Saturday Academy that will occur every Saturday from 8am-12pm. Students who will attend Saturday 
Academy are students who are under credited or in need of taking Regents exams (these students have often failed 
these exams multiple times). Saturday Academy will be overseen by the principal of the school.  

3. Program strength will be evaluated based on the number of students accumulating credits by mid-year, the 
number of students who successfully complete program requirements, i.e. number of college applications & 
acceptance, post-high school admissions, students’ writing progress, and performance on unit and regents exams.  

 
Part 4b. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. 
These programs will start in September 2018 and end June 2019. Programs will be in operation all dates except for 
school holidays. 

 

 
Part 5 – ELT Budget and Resource Alignment 

Part 5a. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to 
implement the ELT program. 
The ELT program will take place on Tuesdays, Wednesdays, and Thursdays during a newly designed Ninth Period. 
Approximately 75% of in-house pedagogues will be involved in conducting small group instruction, individualized 
tutoring during these periods. Teachers will implement units from curriculum maps and both teachers and students 
will need laptops, IPads, or other purchased software technologies for this program.  

 
Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support the ELT Program.  
Note: If the program is funded by 21st Century Community Center Learning Funds, it must be offered in conjunction 
with a high quality, high capacity community partner.   

 

 

21st 

Century 

Title I 
1003(a) 

X 

Tax 
Levy 

X 

 

Title III 

 

Title I 
SWP 

PTA 

Funded 

 

Title I TA 

 

P/F Set-aside 

X 

SIG 
Grant 

School 

X 

Achievement 

Funding 

 

 

C4E 

Other 

 
Part 6 – ELT Progress Monitoring  

Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement 
planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 

2018-19 SCEP-SIG                                                                                                                                                                                                       51 

 

By February 2019, students in the ELT Program will successfully complete term one of the academic year, passing all 
ELT courses with a minimum of 65% in order to show an increase in the number of students accumulating credit. 

By February 2019, there will be a 1.5 % increase of students in the lowest third population passing the English Regents 
Exams putting them on track for a timely graduation in June 2018.  

 
Part 6b. Indicate the instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 
1. Students' scores on mock Regents Exams 

2. Students' scores on classroom quizzes and tests. 

 
Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action 
plan, if applicable. 

2018-19 SCEP-SIG                                                                                                                                                                                                       52 

 

Section 7: Academic Intervention Services (AIS)  

(Required for All Schools) 

Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services 
(AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records 
need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area 
listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. 
 

Type of Academic 
Intervention Service 
(AIS) 

English Language 
Arts (ELA) 

Mathematics 

Science 

Criteria for 
determining AIS 
services (For 
additional guidance, 
refer to NYSED’s 
memo.) 
Baseline 
Assessments; IEP 
Goals; Credit 
Accumulation; 
Regents Exams 
needed; Classroom 
Progress Reports; 
Students whose GPA 
falls below 65 
average 

 

Baseline 
Assessments; 
Diagnostics; IEP 
guidelines and goals; 
Credit Accumulation; 
Regents Exams 
needed; Students 
whose GPA falls 
below 65 average; 
Classroom progress 

 
Baseline 
Assessments; 
Diagnostics; IEP 
guidelines and goals; 
Credit Accumulation; 
Regents Exams 
needed; Students 
whose GPA falls 
below 65 average; 
Classroom progress 

 

Type of program or 
strategy (e.g. 
repeated readings, 
interactive writings, 
etc.) 

Method for delivery 
of service (e.g. small 
group, one-to-one, 
tutoring, etc.) 

When the service is 
provided (e.g. during 
the school day, 
before or after 
school, etc.) 

Small group 
instruction, one to 
one tutoring, whole 
class instruction 

Extended Day; 
Saturday Academy; 
Lunch-time Prep 

 

 

Small group 
instruction, one to 
one tutoring, whole 
class instruction 

Extended Day; 
Saturday Academy; 
Lunch-time Prep 

 

 

Small group 
instruction, one to 
one tutoring, whole 
class instruction 

Extended Day; 
Saturday Academy; 
Lunch-time Prep 

 

 

High interest reading; 
DEAR; iLit; interactive 
writing; annotation of 
texts; citing from 
annotated texts; 
Read aloud; shared 
reading with teachers 
and students; 
Language Program 
for ELLs and SWDs; 
Castle Learning; APEX 
for Credit Recovery; 
Close Reading 

 
Castle Learning; 
Barons’ Regents Prep; 
Agile Mind program 
for Geometry and 
Algebra; APEX Credit 
Recovery 

 

High interest reading, 
interactive writing, 
annotation of texts, 
citing from annotated 
texts, Read aloud, 
shared reading with 
teachers and 
students; lab 
experiments and 
hands on activities; 
Castle Learning; 
Review of Past Exams  

 

2018-19 SCEP-SIG                                                                                                                                                                                                       53 

 

Social Studies 

At-risk services (e.g. 
provided by the 
Guidance Counselor, 
School Psychologist, 
Social Worker, etc.) 

 

Baseline 
Assessments; 
Diagnostics; IEP 
guidelines and goals; 
Credit Accumulation; 
Regents Exams 
needed; Classroom 
Progress 

 

Attendance Rates, 
IEP Guidelines; Credit 
Accumulation; 
Behavioral Incidents; 
Classroom Progress; 
Teachers and 
Mentor’s 
Recommendations 

 

High interest reading, 
interactive writing, 
annotation of texts, 
citing from annotated 
texts, Read aloud, 
shared reading with 
teachers and 
students, reading 
with primary and 
secondary sources; 
Castle Learning 

 
Outreach and Weekly 
Home Visits 
conducted by 
Attendance Teacher; 
Guidance 
Interventions; 
Mentors – in-house 
and CBO’s Advisory; 
Attendance 
incentives; 
EnrichmentActivities 
including trips, 
school-wide, and 
classroom activities  

 

Small group 
instruction, one to 
one tutoring, whole 
class instruction 

 

Extended Saturday 
Academy; Lunch 
Prep; Additional 
Argument Writing 
prep classes 

 

School Day; Ninth 
Period; After –
school; Saturday 
Academy 

 

Small Group and 
Individual meetings; 
Additional CBO 
Onsite Mentoring 
and Counseling 
Interventions; Home 
Visits 

 

2018-19 SCEP-SIG                                                                                                                                                                                                       54 

 

Section 8: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH)  

 

Directions: 
-  All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. 
-  All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. 
 
Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) 
As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the 
federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and 
report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support 
your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: 
http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf   

Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 

 

1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your 
school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE 
systems and may change over the course of the year.) 

Currently, 
we have 
forty (46) 
students 
who in 
Temporary 
Housing 
and 
attending 
our school 

 

2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. 

The school plans to provide students with ongoing counseling support. We will also provide instructional resources 
such as texts, notebooks, pens, pencils, and other classroom supplies. We will also provide uniforms for those 
students who are in special programs such as the Certified Nursing Assistant Program. We will collaborate Cyprus Hills 
and New Ambitions to facilitate college trips and other trips that enhance students' academic and social lives. We will 
also provide internship opportunities for eligible students to prepare them with post secondary work skills and offer 
them choices for career and college.Through the funding of College Access for All grant, New Ambitions will also 
support students through exposure to writing skills workshops and conflict resolution sessions. IVY Key will prepare 
students for SAT's in order to improve college readiness. Teachers will continue to use strategic comprehensive 
assessment system for using multiple measures of data: structure and protocols for analysis, plan to track progress 
over time on explicitly identified targets, creation of pre- and post-unit assessments and have a process for adapting 
curriculum that demonstrates improving individual and subgroup achievement. Lastly our STH population will have 
access to after school activities and Saturday academy to enhance their talents and academic abilities in an 
environment that fosters academic achievement. 

 

Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 

1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school 
(please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). 

N/A 

 

2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 

2018-19 SCEP-SIG                                                                                                                                                                                                       55 

 

N/A 

 

3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary 
housing.  If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation 
Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question.  If your school did not receive an allocation 
and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. 

N/A 

 

 

2018-19 SCEP-SIG                                                                                                                                                                                                       56 

 

Section 9: Title I Program Information  

Directions: 
  All schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1 
  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2 
  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3 
  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4  
 

If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can 
be found 

  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage 
 
Part 1: Title I Status 

Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. 

X 

Schoolwide Program (SWP) 

 

Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools  

 

Non-Title I 

 
Part 2: All Title I Schools 

2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) 

Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support 
including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. 
WATCH High School Administrators always seek to hire highly qualified teachers. Administrators attend teacher 
recruitment fairs and retain teacher resumes for times when vacancies become available. Once teachers become staff 
members at WATCH, they can expect high quality and differentiated professional development opportunities that 
allow them to professionally grow and adapt. The principal utilizes the Assistant Principals, Dr. Patterson, and 
Professional Development Committee members to collaboratively create and implement the professional 
development plan for the year. Additionally, SIG funding allowed the hiring of two part time coaches, one Math and 
one English coach. These coaches (members of the PD committee) also work with teachers to conduct inter-
visitations, peer observations, and meetings to further develop teachers' abilities. The school maintains a 
comprehensive professional development calendar available to all staff members that details topics and 
methodologies for all given sessions. Teachers are surveyed each semester and are asked to reflect on their own 
individual development goals to offer input into WATCH’s calendar. This way, teachers and administrators can work 
together to create professional development that benefits all teachers for the year. 

These activities are meant to support teachers in strengthening their practice. Maintaining this kind of professional 
environment allows WATCH to find and maintain a strong staff that strives for constant improvement.  

 

 
2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development 

Describe the strategies and activities for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, staff, and 
paraprofessionals that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS).  
Professional development sessions are held every Monday for eighty minutes each session. Generally a topic is 
introduced, such as Using formative assessments to drive instruction, and teachers are given the opportunity to 
implement the strategies to their content areas. Teachers work in both content area teams and grade level teams to 
unpack the content delivered during these sessions.  

Leadership teams designed professional development workshops that are aligned with the Danielson rubric and the 
teacher evaluation system. A needs analysis was completed in order to develop a process to aggregate data for future 
planning and usage. Interdisciplinary content meetings were established to strategically train teachers for the year 
and evaluate Regents scores, Danielson implementation, and moving our bottom-third students. PD was offered 
around the use of baseline and periodic assessment to gauge student progress and inform instructional objectives on 
the part of teachers. In order to reach Common Core Learning Standards, teachers conducted lesson plan 
conversations in which teachers shared lessons with content teams and coaches to examine how instructional 

2018-19 SCEP-SIG                                                                                                                                                                                                       57 

 

objectives connect with Common Core Learning standards. Coaches (in-house and vendor agencies) will continue to 
conduct non-evaluative classroom visits that will support analysis in decision makings as to how well teachers are 
meeting these instructional objectives. At professional development meetings, teachers, coaches, and administrators 
will continue to seek ways in which to improve instruction to meet standards.  

With the support of the instructional coach, the Affinity Coach, and Pearson Corporation, they will continue to 
support the teachers in modifying and updating curriculum writing that is in alignment with the Common Core 
Standards and authentic assessments, vocabulary instruction, writing across content, collaborative planning, and the 
effective implementation of the Danielson Framework. The UFT contracted PD time-frame will allow effective use of 
these differentiated activities so that teachers can hone their skills in implementing effective standards-based 
instruction and assessments.  

 

 
Part 3: TA Schools Only 

3a. Use of Program Resources 

Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. 
NA 

 

 
3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program 

Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., 
providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from 
the regular classroom during regular school day). 
NA 

 

 
Part 4: SWP Schools Only 

4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only)  

Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary 
school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/information, 
early intervention services, etc.). 
NA 

 

 
4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments 

Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate 
multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to 
improve instruction.    
Teachers are part of the decision-making process in multiple ways. The teachers who commit to leadership roles meet 
with the principal to discuss matters of assessments. This team includes APs, Coaches, Content Team Leaders and/or 
Grade Team Leaders, as well as the UFT Chapter Leader. At times, the decision making involves the UFT Consultation 
committee, who is representative of the whole staff, as well as key members from our lead partnership. 

Currently, teachers use periodic assessments and past regents exams in various content areas to assess student 
learning at three points throughout the year. Students take these assessments in September (baseline), January, and 
May. Teachers also have the flexibility to design their own formal and informal assessments given throughout the 
year. During PD times, teachers may examine students’ work in groups to analyze what is working in terms of 
instructional modalities and delivery practices. Looking at student work is an insightful process that is led by teacher 

2018-19 SCEP-SIG                                                                                                                                                                                                       58 

 

teams. This process allows teachers to examine instructional practices, resources, and assessments, and use the data 
to inform their next-steps implementations. With the support of instructional leaders, coaches and the data specialist, 
the school provides ongoing professional development opportunities to support teachers. Teachers will be provided 
with professional development on the topic of analyzing students’ work in a meaningful way and using the 
information to improve instruction.  

 

 
4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools 

Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and 
Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible 
for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds enables, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its 
Schoolwide plan (SCEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program 
contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the 
intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, 
State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the 
amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met 
the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. 
Program Name 

Fund Source 
(i.e. Federal, 
State or Local) 

Funding Amount 
Indicate the amount 
contributed to 
Schoolwide pool. 
(Refer to Galaxy for 
school allocation 
amounts) 

Place an (X) in Column A below to verify 
that the school has met the intent and 
purposes of each program whose funds are 
consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section 
references where a related program activity 
has been described in this plan. 

Column A 

Verify with an (X) 

Title I Part A (Basic) 

Federal 

Title I School Improvement 
1003(a) 

Federal 

Title I Priority and Focus 
School Improvement Funds 

Federal 

Title II, Part A 

Title III, Part A 

Title III, Immigrant 

Federal 

Federal 

Federal 

Tax Levy (FSF) 

Local 

 

206,706 

 

0 

 
70,376 

 

0  

n/a 

 
0  

1,929,590 

 

X 

 

n/a 

 
X 

 

n/a 

 
n/a 

 
X 

 
X 

 

Column B 

Section Reference(s) 
Pg. 15, 16, 17, 20, 
21, 22, 26, 27, 32, 
3437, 38 

 
n/a 

 
pg 15, 16, 17, 20, 21, 
22, 26, 27, 32, 34, 
37, 38 

 
n/a 

 
n/a 

 
n/a 

 
Pg. 15, 16, 17, 20, 
21, 22, 26, 27, 32, 
34, 37, 38 

 

1Explanation/Background: 
Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and 
programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and 
advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools 
may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, 

2018-19 SCEP-SIG                                                                                                                                                                                                       59 

 
State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This 
gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students.   
 
Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a 
single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual 
identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool 
to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds 
used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from 
which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to 
combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used 
conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the 
dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds.  
 
Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages: 

  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program 

separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different 
sources when accounting for their use. 

  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the 

statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., 
semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent 
and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended 
beneficiaries are met. 

 
2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as 
follows: 

  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to 
improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes 
provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH). 

  Title I School Improvement 1003(a): To support implementation of school improvement activities identified 

through the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) reviews or a school review with 
district oversight and included in the DCIP/SCEP.  

  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: To support implementation of school improvement 

plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs.  

  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in 

grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not 
available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional 
program. 

  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, 
develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and 
achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another 
purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-
quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in 
effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the 
participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language 
instruction programs. 

  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of 

English language acquisition and content area achievement. 

 
Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated: 

  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and 
programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent 
representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities 

2018-19 SCEP-SIG                                                                                                                                                                                                       60 

 

funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with 
student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. 

  Title I Priority and Focus School Parent Engagement Set-aside: Additional set-aside is to enable greater and 

 

more meaningful parent participation in the education of their children. 
IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education 
designed to meet their individual needs. 

  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process, including Title I 1003(g) SIG funds: These funds must be 

used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 

2018-19 SCEP-SIG                                                                                                                                                                                                       61 

 

Section 10: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)  

 (Required for All Title I Schools) 

 

Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and 
representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will 
participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I 
program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson 
that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the 
parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school 
will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic 
achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family 
Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. 
 
The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current 
S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent 
Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent 
involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen 
family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy.  
 
Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample 
Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) 
as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. 
 
 

Parent and Family Engagement Policy 

Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. 
The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of 
parents and community in the school. World Academy for Total Community Health High School, in compliance with 
the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and 
implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement 
between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving 
them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to 
actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained 
volunteers and welcomed members of the school community.  

 

Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students 

WATCH High School will support parents and families of Title I students by: 

 

● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision 
making in support of the education of their children; 

● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor 
their child’s progress; 

● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in 
languages that parents can understand; 

● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve 
outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other 
members of the school community; 

2018-19 SCEP-SIG                                                                                                                                                                                                       62 

 

 

 

Parental Involvement and School Quality 

The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all 
parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The 
school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement 
policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school 
surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and 
enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school.  

 

In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the 
school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership 
Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for 
additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: 

● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I 
program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title 
I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; 

● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated 
directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; 

● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as 
described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; 

● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent 
Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support 
and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills;  

● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. 
The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the 
parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and 
inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents 
each month and file a report with the central office.; 

● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability 
grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and 
technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home;  

● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g. ESSA /State 
accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, 
Learning Environment Survey Report; 

● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before October 30, 2017 to advise parents of children 
participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the 
program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, and other applicable sections under ESSA; 

2018-19 SCEP-SIG                                                                                                                                                                                                       63 

 

● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning 
or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and 
allow parents to provide suggestions; 

● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed;  

● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and 
workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help. 

 

The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: 

Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement 

 

● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; 

● hosting at least 6 educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the 
school year; 

● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher 
Association) and Title I Parent Committee; 

● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; 

● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; 

● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their 
children’s progress; 

● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school 
activities and student progress; 

● Providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, 
and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. 

 

 

School-Parent Compact (SPC) 

World Academy for Total Community Health High School , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of 
the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and 
support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in 
activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and 
students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent 
partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. 

 

 

I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum 

Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to 
meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: 

2018-19 SCEP-SIG                                                                                                                                                                                                       64 

 

 

● using academic learning time efficiently; 

● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; 

● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; 

● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; 

● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the 
Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); 

 

 

I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships 

Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: 

 

● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be 
discussed as well as how this Compact is related; 

● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to October 30th, 2017 of each school year for parents of students 
participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to 
be involved; 

● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation 
services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education;  

● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of 
participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; 

● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent 
Involvement Policy and this Compact; 

● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results 
for each child and other pertinent individual school information;  

● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents 
each year; 

 

 

Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: 

I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff 

 

● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited 
English speaking parents;  

2018-19 SCEP-SIG                                                                                                                                                                                                       65 

 

● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff 
member; 

● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to 
observe classroom activities; 

● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences;  

 

 

I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents 

Provide general support to parents by: 

 

● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment 
for parents and guardians; 

● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their 
child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of 
parents can attend); 

● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all 
members of the school community; 

● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents;  

● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in 
this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; 

● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and 
consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; 

 

 

 

II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities 

● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate 
procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; 

● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and 
his/her age; 

● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; 

● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes);  

● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; 

2018-19 SCEP-SIG                                                                                                                                                                                                       66 

 

● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports 
and/or quality family time; 

● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; 

● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; 

● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education;  

● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by 
prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; 

● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; 

● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy 
and this Compact; 

● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn 
more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; 

● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on 
advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams;  

● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; 

 

 

Student Responsibilities: 

 

III. Student Responsibilities 

● Attend school regularly and arrive on time. 

● Complete homework and submit all assignments on time. 

● Follow the school rules and be responsible for actions. 

● Show respect of self, other people and property. 

● Try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully. 

● Have high expectations for learning. 

 

 
 

 
 

 

 

2018-19 SCEP-SIG                                                                                                                                                                                                       67 

 

DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT 

GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY 

SUBMISSION FORM 

2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR 

 

DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information 

necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English 

language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a 

part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the 

services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should 

be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily 

available on file in the school.  When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces.  For 

additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. 

Part I: School ELL Profile 

 

 

 
 

A. School Information 

District  19 
School Name   World Academy for Total Community Health 

Borough  Brooklyn 

School Number   510 

 
B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant 

principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. 
 

Principal   Claudette Christie 
Coach  Sandra Bigaud 
ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher  
 Zachary Fehst 
Teacher/Subject Area Wiliam Karl 
Teacher/Subject Area Donna Dawson -  ELA 
Related-Service Provider Sean Johnson 
Superintendent Donald Conyers 

 

Assistant Principal  Isabella Borketey 
Coach Chudy Okorom - Math 
School Counselor  
Edwidge Dejoie, Chanel Jackson 
Parent  Shanette Williams 
Parent Coordinator Nichole Henry Douglas 
Field Support Center Staff Member Samuel Rodriguez (Affinity)  
Other (Name and Title) Edwidge Jean-Dejoie Guidance C 

C. Teacher Qualifications  
Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section.  Press TAB after each number entered to calculate 
sums and percentages.  
     
Number of certified 
ENL teachers currently teaching in the 
ENL program 

Number of teachers who hold both content 
area/common branch and TESOL certification 

0 

1 

0 

Number of certified 
bilingual teachers not currently 
teaching in a bilingual program  
Number of certified foreign 
language/world language teachers 
providing home language arts 
(HLA) to students in bilingual 
programs [applicable to grades 7–
12] 
Number of teachers currently 
teaching a self-contained ENL class 
who hold both a common branch 
license and TESOL certification 
[applicable to grades K–6] 

1 

1 

Number of teachers who hold both a 
bilingual extension and TESOL 
certification 

Number of special education teachers 
with bilingual extensions 

0 

0 

Number of certified 
bilingual teachers currently 
teaching in a bilingual program 

Number of certified ENL teachers 
not currently  teaching in the ENL 
program  

 

0 

0 

D. Student Demographics  
Total number of students in 
school (excluding pre-K) 

246 

2018-19 SCEP-SIG                                                                                                                                                                                                       68 

Total number of ELLs 

27 

ELLs as share of total student population 
(%) 

10.98% 

 
 
 
 
Part II: ELL Demographics 
 
 
 
 
 
A. ELL Programs 

This school serves the following grades (includes 
ELLs and non-ELLs) 
Check all that apply 

 
 
This school offers (check all that apply): 

K

    1

    2

     3

     4

     5

 

6

   7

     8

    9

     10

     11

    12

 

Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) 

Yes

             No

Dual language program (DL) 

Freestanding ENL 

Yes

             No

Yes

             No

 

 

 

If yes, indicate language(s):            

If yes, indicate language(s):            

 

 
Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a 
separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. 
 

Bilingual Program Breakdown 

School 
Year 

Lang. 

Opened 
(e.g., 2013-14) 

 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

1 

 
 

2 

 
 

3 

 
 

4 

 
 

K 

         

         

       

       

         

         

         

         

Program 
TBE 
TBE 
TBE 
DL 
DL 
DL 
Total 
 
 
 
Part III: Assessment Analysis 
 
 

 
 
0 

 
 
0 

 
 
0 

       

       

 
 
0 

 
 
0 

5 

6 

7 

8 

         

         

         

         

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

       

       

       

       

 
 
0 

 
 
0 

 
 
0 

 
 
0 

9 

0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 

10 

11 

12 

0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 

0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 

0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 

Tot # 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 

After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 

1.  What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, 

teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? 
To assess early literacy skills of ELL students, our school uses the NYSITELL exam. This exam is administered at the beginning of 
each year to determine students listening, reading, writing and speaking levels. The NYSITELL exam is designed to determine 
where to place students so they receive the required number of minutes of ENL instruction. The NYSITELL exam is used as a 
guide for ELL instruction. According to the data collected from the NYSITELL and the NYSESLAT results, there is a consistent 
pattern of students testing orally proficient, yet at a much lower level in reading and writing across all grades. However, 
WATCH has had an influx of beginner 9th and 10th grade students, who are not proficient in English.  
 
The ELL students also use a variety of web-based resources (including Myon, and Duolingo) that, in addition to being 
individually differentiated per student, allow teachers to monitor and measure progress in real-time. The ENL teacher also 
meets regularly with content-area teachers for the ELL students.  These check-ins involve common planning, as well as 

2018-19 SCEP-SIG                                                                                                                                                                                                       69 

 

 

reviewing student performance on class tests and other class assignments (e.g. essays, labs).  This information is used to drive 
future instructional planning.  
 

2.  What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 

Structures in place to support the effort include common planning periods, where the ENL teacher sits daily with the 
humanities team (including ELA and Social Studies teachers). WATCH also has implemented, school-wide, two literacy 
initiatives that are of particular benefit for ELLs. First, each Wednesday on a rolling basis (not always the same period), the 
students engage in something called Drop Everything and Read ("D.E.A.R."). This requires students to read something of their 
own choosing, for which they will be accountable afterward in the form of a written record and assessment of their reading. 
Second, each week, the students are introduced to a new WATCH Word of the Week ("WOW"), which is a college-level 
vocabulary term to be used and practiced in all classes. 
Also, the content-area teachers are in regular email contact with the ENL instructor about the next day’s (or week’s, or unit’s) 
lesson.  This established protocol helps the ENL teacher make determinations about how best to modify or supplement class 
work to ensure the students needs are being met, in alignment especially with WATCH’s goal of increasing the quality of 
writing instruction for all students.  
 

3.  What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL 

Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? 
To evaluate the success of the ENL program, our school examines the instructional model and student data based on 
the  NYSESLAT, and Regents scores. Throughout the year, we examine student progress on exams, class grades, credits and 
attendance. We look for trends amongst various populations of students, including the lowest third, ELLs, and 
Special Education students. Additionally, teachers evaluate if students are testing out of ENL or graduating from high school in 
a timely manner. Teachers, administrators, grade level inquiry teams, and the school wide inquiry team constantly review 
school programs, adjust curriculum, units and analyze students' progress to determine the success of our programs.  
 

4.  What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered?  

Structures in place to address interventions include, as noted above, the teacher, administrators, grade-level inquiry teams, 
and the school-wide inquiry team, all of which constantly review school programs, adjust curriculum and units, and analyze 
student progress to determine the success of our programs. 
 

5.  How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-
5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.]  
N/A  
 

6.  What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? 

([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS].  
According to the data collected from the NYSITELL and the NYSESLAT results, there is  a consistent pattern of students testing 
orally proficient, yet at a much lower level in reading and writing across all grades. However, WATCH has had an influx of 
beginner 9th and 10th grade students who are not proficient in English. In addition to the above-mentioned assessments, the 
ENL teacher works to assess student ability in the four modalities through general literacy coaching, sight reading/read-aloud 
assessment, regular literacy journals, and constant analysis of classwork.  
 

7.  What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? 
These findings are disseminated in collaborative groups of pedagogues and administrators—during common planning 
meetings, during scheduled professional development sessions, and while engaging in our weekly professional learning 
communities.  

 
 
 
Part IV: ELL Programming 
 
2018-19 SCEP-SIG                                                                                                                                                                                                       70 

 

Programming and Scheduling Information 

1.  How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented 
as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students 
regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in 
one class]).  

a.  Freestanding ENL program. 

        WATCH implements a Small Group ELL Instructional Program/Freestanding ENL from 9th -12th grade. Students 
are organized by proficiency level (Entering, Emerging, Transitioning, Expanding, and Commanding) and receive ENL 
services in pull-out/push-in classes. The primary goal of our ENL program is to foster full English Proficiency in a 
supportive risk-free classroom environment as well as to expand literacy and academic language and provide students 
with skills that will allow them to perform at city and state grade level in all subject areas. 
        The ENL Program at WATCH provides courses that meet the state requirements for ENL Programs. Students are 
grouped for their ENL classes according to their proficiency and grade levels as indicated on either the LAB-R or 
NYSESLAT Examination.  
        Freestanding ENL Programs are offered in a self-contained environment as well as an Integrated Classroom 
setting (ICT). The ENL teacher has a separate room and meets with ELL students there one period each day. ELL 
students who are also identified as special needs students receive Co-Integrated Teaching services for core-subjects. 
Entering through Transitioning students receive additional literacy instruction during their content area classes when 
the ENL teacher "pushes in" to work with them. ELLs are also offered additional support two days per week (one hour 
each) during Extended Learning (ELT) Program.  
        In addition, our freestanding ENL class accords with WATCH’s school goal of increasing writing ability and quality 
among all students, including ELLs.  

b.  TBE program.  If applicable.   

Paste response to questions here:  N/A  

c.  DL program.  If applicable.    

N/A   

 

2.  How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each 

program model? 

a.  How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 

below)? 

ENL programs are offered according to proficiency level as determined by the NYSITELL/NYSESLAT. Beginner/Entering ELL’s 
receive 540 minutes a week, Low Intermediate/Emerging ELLs receive  360 minutes of service a week and 
Intermediate/Transitioning and Advanced/Expanding  ELLs Receive 180 minutes per week. Proficient/Commanding ELLs will 
receive 90 minutes of ENL/ELA Integrated ENL. 
 
Students receive their mandated hours through a combination of Stand Alone ENL block classes (90 minutes) and Integrated 
ENL and content classes.  Integrated ENL is co-taught by a TESOL-certified ENL teacher and a content-area  teacher (typically 
the ELA teacher, but in the cases of the lower-level ELLs, this may include a Social Studies or even Science teacher).  Students 
are graded individually based on New York State Standards in conjunction with a teacher designed grading scale.  
 

3.  Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and 

methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core 
Learning Standards.  
Content is delivered mainly in English to immerse students in their new language. Students use texts that are modified or 
supported with graphic organizers and other learning tools in order to aid in comprehension. ENL students  read the same 
texts as native speakers when appropriate in order to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common 
Core Learning Standards. Our ENL students have the support of the ENL teacher as well as general education teachers. 
Multiple modalities within instruction such as audio books, flashcards, tactile manipulative, and sentence starters are used to 
enhance instruction and prepare students for the rigors of the Common Core.  Students receiving ENL services use MyOn, 

2018-19 SCEP-SIG                                                                                                                                                                                                       71 

 

which is a comprehensive literacy program. The program focuses on phonemic awareness, morphology, reading 
comprehension, spelling, grammar, and writing skills. In addition, computers are available in the computer lab and in the ELA 
classrooms for students' use. Laptop carts and Smart boards are also available for classroom use. Students often use 
computers and iPads to help translate words or phrases directly. The ENL teacher also works collaboratively with the teachers 
in each discipline using an accommodation log to keep track of individual student's instructional needs, learning styles, areas 
requiring remediation, as well as class successes. 
Students also have access to programs such as MyOn and Castle Learning on their own devices at home, and are frequently 
assigned homework to be completed within these programs.  This is in addition to lingual focus that includes both Cognitive 
Academic Language Proficiency (CALP) and Basic Interpersonal Communication Skills (BICS), general literacy coaching, and 
lessons in the acquisition of academic skills more broadly (such as note-taking and organization).  All of this ensures that 
content is delivered effectively, leading to successfully meeting our school goals of creating proficient writers, achieving higher 
credit accumulation, and increased graduation rate for all students.  
 

4.  How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? 

   N/A  
 

5.  How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? 

SIFE   

a. 
b.  Newcomer  
c.  Developing   
d. 
e. 

Long Term 
Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status  

a. Students with Interrupted Formal Education (“SIFE”) are placed into ENL programs in accordance with most recent NYSITELL 
results or NYSESLAT results. In addition to ESL, students have access to support services that help them transition into high 
school (i.e. Academic Intervention Services or Counseling).  Additionally, all lessons are taught to activate background 
knowledge with brainstorming and graphic organizers. Teacher instructs students how to use graphic organizers and 
strategies. Lessons are designed to develop interest and use Predictable English in coordination with the student’s home 
language. Lessons are adjusted to students' level and are created to challenge  them in moving towards academic growth.  
 
b. Our newcomer ELLs are nearly always beginners, receiving 540 minutes of ESL services per week.  Students receive their 
mandated hours through a combination of Stand Alone ENL block classes (90 minutes) and Integrated ENL and content 
classes.  Integrated ENL is co-taught by a TESOL-certified ENL teacher and a content-area  teacher (typically the ELA teacher, 
but in the cases of the lower-level ELLs, this likely includes a Social Studies or even Science teacher).  Students are graded 
individually based on New York State Standards in conjunction with a teacher designed grading scale. Beginner ELLs are taught 
in small self-contained classes, homogeneously grouped according to proficiency level. Instruction for Beginner ELLs is aligned 
with Common Core ELA Standards and New York State ESL Standards. Students are provided instruction in reading, speaking 
and writing from the certified ENL teacher. To incorporate the Common Core State Standards for ELA content, the ENL teacher 
meets with ELA teachers in a Professional Learning Community and for Common Planning every day of the week.  Teacher 
instructs students how to use graphic organizers and strategies. Lessons are designed to develop Interesting and Predictable 
English Vocabulary in coordination with the student’s home language.  Additionally, students are moved incrementally from 
concrete to abstract concepts. Emphasis is placed on high frequency words and vocabulary is explicitly taught. Lessons are 
adjusted to students' level and are created to challenge students to move towards  academic growth.  
 
c. Our developing ELLs (4-6 years) are typically Intermediate level and receive 360 minutes of ESL instruction per week. 
Students are usually placed in 90 minute block classes that meet daily in a self-contained setting. Students are programmed for 
small group instruction and are placed in homogeneous groupings based on proficiency level. Instruction for ELLs is aligned 
with Common Core ELA Standards and New York State ESL Standards. Teacher instructs students how to use graphic organizers 
and strategies. Lessons are designed to develop interest in Predictable English in coordination with the student’s home 
language.  Additionally, students are moved incrementally from concrete to abstract concepts. Emphasis is placed on high 
frequency words and vocabulary is explicitly taught. Familiar information is is taught in a new context.  Related 
information  taught in class is then related to the student’s real life experiences.  Lessons are adjusted to students' levels and 

2018-19 SCEP-SIG                                                                                                                                                                                                       72 

 

are created to challenge them to move towards academic growth.  
 
d. Our long term ELLs (6+ years) are most often advanced/expanding, and they receive 180 minutes of ESL services per week. 
Students are usually programmed for one 45 minute stand-alone ENL class each day. Instruction is delivered in a small group 
from a certified ENL teacher. Students are placed into homogeneous groups based on proficiency levels. Teacher instructs 
students how to use graphic organizers and strategies. Lessons are designed  to develop interest in Predictable English in 
coordination with the student’s home language.     
 
e. Students who have placed out of ESL as per their NYSESLAT results are integrated into General Education Classes. Students 
have access to support from the ENL teacher or other school personnel as needed. All former ELLs will receive .5 units or its 
equivalent of integrated ENL in ELA Core Content Area.  Lessons will be designed to meet their language needs, to build on 
background knowledge and strategies learned in previous standing ENL classes. 
 

6.  What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic 

content areas and accelerate English language development?  
ELL students who are also identified as having special needs receive services from a Special Education Teacher through 
collaborative taught, ICT, and push-in classes. Special Educators work closely with the ENL Teacher to ensure that the needs of 
ELL students with special needs are met. Lessons are then adapted: for example, language is simplified, checking in for 
comprehension, periodic summaries and reviews, tasks are broken into easier steps, and learning is connected to students' 
experiences.  Additionally, interactive whiteboards are used for presenting multimedia lessons.  Students can use this platform 
to review lessons and upload assignments.  Material used for all groups include dictionaries, post-its, highlighters, iPad for 
translations.  Also, Special Education ELLs are actively assisted during our Extended Learning Program (9th period). 
 

7.  How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and 

attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? 
The ENL Teacher works closely with the Special Education Department to ensure that ELLs with IEPs are able to achieve their 
IEP goals. We use differentiation, guided notes, scaffolding of material to support ELL-SWDs in meeting their IEP goals. 
Collaboration between Special Education teacher, general education teachers and the ENL Teacher create an effective network 
for our students. 
 
In addition, the least restrictive environment is ensured by having all our SPELLs in general education classes, where class 
materials are modified appropriately, and supports like sentence starters and graphic organizers are used.  Instructions and 
tasks are read aloud where required, and dictionaries and iPads are allowed for translation as needed. 
 

8.  Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups 

targeted).  List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which 
they are offered. 
WATCH provides a range of services for our ELLs population. There is Extended Learning Program (ELP) that provides Academic 
Intervention Services, with the additional assistance they may need in any of the content areas. This service is provided in 
English. WATCH provides all Beginner ELLs with access to the program MyOn, which is a literacy learning program which also 
targets student-specific gaps in reading skills. Additionally, students are provided with intervention through APEX, which allows 
them to acquire knowledge in content areas by use of their native languages.  Students' ENL Curriculum is linked to what 
students are learning in ELA, Global and American Government, intended to support their capacity in the content area classes. 
Students are able to participate in Saturday Schools, which focuses on Math, ELA, Social Studies, and Science content 
areas.  Several ELL students take advantage of the after-school tutoring offered by the content area teachers.  
 

9.  Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year?    

Depending on the needs assessment of the ELLs we have Affinity coaches working closely with our teachers to engage in 
curricula and unit modification, and to help align assessment to fortify existing programs.  Other existing programs - for 
example,  the campus-wide Professional Development sessions we began this year - have been assessed and are working well 
in order to address students' needs.   
 

2018-19 SCEP-SIG                                                                                                                                                                                                       73 

 

10.  If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? 

N/A 
 

11.  How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs?  Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in 

your building. 
Students receiving ENL services are afforded equal access to all school programs. Students receiving ENL are mandated to 
attend the Extended Leaning Program after school and/or Saturdays. Students also are provided equal access to all elective 
courses. Additionally, students are encouraged to participate in school's extracurricular activities, including sports teams and 
clubs. These programs include but are not limited to: AIS, Online Music Courses, APEX, Career and Financial Management, 
Regents Prep Classes, Saturday School, Clubs, Soccer, Football, and Baseball.  
 

12.  What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language 

materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. 
Students receiving ENL services use the MyOn program. This is designed to improve students' reading comprehension and 
writing skills. In addition, computers are available in the ELA classrooms for student use. Laptop carts and Smart boards are 
also available for classroom use. Students often use computers and iPads even in content-area classes to help translate words 
or phrases directly.  
 

13.  How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? 

In the ENL classroom handouts are written in English and, as needed, translated into the student’s home 
language.  Additionally, readings are translated into students' respective home languages as needed.  If translation is not 
available, students can use computers/iPads to translate text.  Furthermore,  students are required to use bilingual dictionaries 
(English as well as their home languages).   Additionally, frequent, ongoing dialogue is maintained with parents supported by 
our bilingual staff members, as well as calls home made through the Translation and Interpretation Unit.  
 

14.  Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels.  
All mandated services meet the emotional, social, academic-grade and age level- needs of all ELL students. In addition, 
students engage in check-in sessions with guidance counselors to determine how students are assimilating to the school's 
culture.  School engages in ongoing outreach to keep parents abreast of how students are handling the new transition and also 
to get support in terms of how students are doing at home. The school has also created a shared space where students can go 
to and engage in games and other social activities with their peers; shared space houses reading materials/literature in 
multiple languages and leveled texts.  The LPT utilizes all of the student’s information found on IEPs and other assessments to 
create a plan to meet the needs of the student. Once this information is assessed, teachers work on simplifying language, 
breaking tasks into manageable steps, highlighting critical learning strategies, responding to student’s progress positively, 
pacing lessons according to student’s needs, and reducing the number of extraneous concepts needed to be learned.  ELL-
SWDs will also work with their Special Education Teacher and paraprofessional (if assigned).  ELL-SWD will be placed in their 
required academic courses in the secondary level. Additionally, teachers meet daily in Professional Learning Communities for 
Common Planning every day of the week in order to discuss best practices and improve the ability to meet the needs of all 
students.  
 

15.  If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the 

ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met?   
Students receiving ENL services use the MyOn program. This is designed to improve students' reading comprehension and 
writing skills. In addition, computers are available in the ELA classrooms for student use. Laptop carts and Smart boards are 
also available for classroom use. Students often use computers and iPads even in content-area classes to help translate words 
or phrases directly. Students gain additional literacy support from the campus librarian through her frequent collaboration 
with content teachers as she provides additional resources for our ENL students.  Students also have opportunities to 
participate is shared college trips, college advisory (for example, through our campus Student Success Center), and skill 
building activities as a result of leveraging of shared campus resources. Our ENL students are also strongly encouraged to 
participate in shared campus-wide advance placement courses, art, sports, and other instructional and enrichment 
opportunities. 
 

2018-19 SCEP-SIG                                                                                                                                                                                                       74 

 

 

16.  Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for 

new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, 
parent coordinator).  
Newly enrolled ELL students have the opportunity to receive support during school in Extended Learning (AIS) facilitated by the 
ENL Teacher or content area teacher. Students may attend AIS Tuesdays through Thursdays during lunch (Lunch and Learn). 
AIS instruction is delivered in small groups and focuses on Regents Prep or any other academic needs of students in 
attendance on an individual basis.  Our Extended Learning Programs also include 9th period and Saturday School instruction 
for ELLs, as needed. 
 

17.  What language electives are offered to ELLs?  

Spanish is offered as an elective for all students at our high school. Spanish instruction is offered for levels 1-6. Instruction is 
provided by a native Spanish speaker who is also fluent in English.  
 

18.  For schools with dual language programs: 

a.  What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day 

(percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. 
In which language(s) is each core content area taught? 

b. 
c.  How is each language separated for instruction? 
d. 

Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same 
time (simultaneous)? 

 N/A  
 

Professional Development and Support for School Staff 

1.  Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic 

staff.)  What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs 
as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? 
The ENL provider attends professional development workshops offered by the New York City Department of Education as well 
as our other outside organizations and school's Affinity Group. In addition, on-site school based professional development is 
offered to teachers every Monday from 2:25 p.m. - 3:35p.m.  Administrators, teachers, and support personnel deliver 
professional development on various instructional and social topics. PDs for ELL personnel also include posted PDs offered by 
the DOE, UFT, and Affinity Group. It is an ongoing and comprehensive plan consisting of interdisciplinary teacher academies. 
Teachers, Guidance Counselors and Assistant Principals share research-based Bilingual/ENL methodologies and practices in 
order to enhance English Language Learners’ performance in ENL, ELA and ENL content-area classes (as mandated by Federal 
Legislation) and their performance on the NYSESLAT and Regents Examinations. In accordance with the New York City 
Department of Education’s Children First guidelines, the interdisciplinary teams of teachers collaborate to incorporate six main 
types of scaffolding. We ensure that ELLs benefit from strong instruction in English through a rigorous core academic 
curriculum. We focus on sharing practices that accelerate Language acquisition and content-area skills mastery, focusing on 
skills that are especially challenging for ELLs. We ensure continuity of initiatives by using specialized curricula developed over 
the years. Interdisciplinary teacher teams meet to share ENL methodologies and practices and to be trained in assessment 
methodologies. Professional development efforts have also been focused on the development of training packets for English 
Language Learners to familiarize them with the terminology of the ELA Regents Tasks. 
 
ELL students transitioning from middle to high school receive instruction in small stand-alone and interactive push-in (often 
ICT) classes. The small setting increases the instructional intensity offered to incoming ELL students. Additionally, WATCH is a 
small school with an extremely supportive staff. ELL students receive on-going support from the ENL provider outside of 
regular class time as needed. Students (and parents) also have access to language support from bilingual personnel including a 
bilingual school aide and foreign language teacher. The school offers guidance counselors ongoing training in ensuring that 
ELLs are transitioning smoothly.  We offer a wide range of professional development opportunities to teachers of ELLs in 
supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards. In Department Meetings and teacher team meetings 

2018-19 SCEP-SIG                                                                                                                                                                                                       75 

 

 

we continually revise and update curricula to reflect alignment with the Common Core and UDL Guidelines. We work on lesson 
planning through Backward Design and train teachers in infusing the CCLS and the UDL Guidelines into their lessons. We train 
teachers in designing effective questioning techniques to strengthen their lessons by infusing academic rigor in accordance 
with the CCLS. In teacher teams we examine student work and develop protocols for assessing student work in light of the 
CCLS and the UDL Guidelines. Through Faculty Meetings, Department Meetings and Professional Development Workshops 
teachers share best practices for implementing the CCLS across the disciplines. We will use data from the ELA Predictive for the 
Common Core ELA Regents to inform instruction in terms of empowering students to formulate and defend arguments based 
on the reading and interpretation of informational text. In Title III Professional Development workshops, interdisciplinary 
teacher teams share methodologies for assessing student work in light of the CCLS. 
 

2.  Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all 
teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include 
how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance).  Refer to ELL Policy and Reference 
Guide, Professional Development section. 
The pedagogue responsible for ENL services provides at the beginning of each semester Professional Development intended to 
inform staff of the needs and progress of ELL students. For example, the ENL teacher plans to attend Affinity Group's English 
Language Learners Fall Institute each year.  The ENL service provider also is a part of Professional Learning Communities 
(English Department), Language Acquisition Committee and Grade Level Inquiry Teams. Records are maintained in a locked file 
and updated as required per DOE request. 
  
Records of PD attendances are kept in the personal files of any teacher or staff who attend PDs. We continue to conduct 
ongoing training for all staff through teacher teams, department meetings, staff development and other staff trainings 
throughout the school year. For example, this academic year our ENL teacher attended Langauge Access Coordinator training, 
as well as Affinity PDs on content area instruction for ELLs. 
 
 

Parental Involvement 

 

1.  How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language 
development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? 
Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent 
orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences?  
PTA Meetings, ELLs Parent Conferences ( 2 times in a year), regularly scheduled parent-teacher conferences (4 times per year), 
SPEDS Parent Meeting, Annual Reviews for SPEDs, Parent Messages and Personnel Outreach. Also, monthly meetings with 
parents are offered through the guidance department by grade. Staff members proficient in student home language support 
parents with translation. The Translation and Interpretation Unit is usually utilized to provide written communication, as well 
as spoken interpretation via phone outreach to parents.  

2.  Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. 

Upon entrance into the school system, ELL Parents are given the HLIS. If students are eligible for ENL services, parents are 
informed of instructional models for ENL. Parents of students already receiving ENL instruction are contacted by the school to 
establish communication and describe what services will continue to be delivered. The ENL teacher is fluent in Spanish and 
makes frequent parent phone calls in that home language (teachers and staff also regularly use the Translation and 
Interpretation Unit hotline to make outreach calls).  Twice a year, WATCH hosts a parent-teacher night specifically designed to 
support parents of ENL students in understanding students' transcripts,  graduation requirements, the financial aid process, 
and opportunities and program to support families into smooth transition. Parents are able to conference with teachers and 
administrators during this time. Invitations for conferences are available for parents in their native language. Bilingual staff 
members are  available to translate at parent teacher conferences. Additionally, all parents are also invited to attend school 
PTA meetings. Also, parent workshops are offered after school and on certain Saturdays which offer parents help with areas 
such as communicating with their teens, and how to navigate the educational system in this country/city. 
 

2018-19 SCEP-SIG                                                                                                                                                                                                       76 

 

 

To provide full disclosure of student performance, WATCH uses Skedula. Parents, teachers and students have access to 
information on Skedula. Teachers post attendance, grades, assignments and anecdotal accounts that are available to parents 
and students; the school also provides training for all parents  on effectively navigating the system. The Parent Coordinator has 
also set up New York City Schools Accounts for all students and parents.  Bilingual staff members are available to translate and 
communicate information to parents. Throughout the school year, teachers maintain ongoing communication with parents to 
ensure that students’ needs are met. Bilingual staff members are available for translations at both informal parent/teacher 
meetings and IEP conferences for students who are receiving additional services in Special Education. Parents of ELLs are 
invited and encouraged to attend all school-wide activities including workshops and engagement activities. ELL parents  are 
also strongly encouraged to  join the school leadership team and actively participate in school-wide decision makings.  
 

Additional Information 

Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for 
ELLs.  You may attach/submit charts.   This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted.   
In promoting literacy for all, our school community has implemented Drop Everything and Read (DEAR) Wednesdays. For our ENL 
students, this system has  allowed them to enter into book talk and book sharing with their diverse peer groups facilitated by 
teachers. In encouraging and providing a safe and risk-free space, students freely make choices as to the type of genre they would 
like to explore and take pleasure in sharing the findings of their readings with peers and teachers. Students also have access to 
books in multiple genres as well as in several different languages.  
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

2018-19 SCEP-SIG                                                                                                                                                                                                       77 

Part V: ELL Identification Attestation 

Principal Certification 

2. 

3. 

4. 

5. 
6. 

7. 

8. 

9. 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 

In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL 
Policy and Reference Guide, I, Claudette Christie, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are 
adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 
 
1. 

The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for 
students entering with IEPs). 
Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined 
a. 

If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status 
relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level.  

The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue.   
a.  The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services 
are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality 
translation service.   

Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined.   
a. 

If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility 
to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. 

Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible.   
Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language.  
a.  Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. 
If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish 
LAB.  
Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources 
available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-
education-sife.  
If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting.  
a.  Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent 

video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask 
questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided 
throughout the meeting. 

10.  ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected.  

a. 

b. 

If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program 
in accordance with DOE transfer policies. 
If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent 
choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice.   

11.  Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process).  
12.  If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose 

ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 
 

 

2018-19 SCEP-SIG                                                                                                                                                                                                       78 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 

Part VI: LAP Assurances 

School Name:   WATCH                                                                              School DBN: 19K510 
Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate.  Names listed in Part A, should align with this 
section.  

Name (PRINT) 

Claudette Christie 

Title 

Principal 

Isabella Borketey 

Assistant Principal 

Nikole Henry Douglas 

Parent Coordinator 

Zachary Fehst 

ENL/Bilingual Teacher 

Shanette Williams 

Parent 

Donna Dawson 

Teacher/Subject Area 

Sandra Bigaud 

Teacher/Subject Area 

Sandra Bigaud 

Isabella Borketey 

Edwidge Dejoie / 
Chanel Jackso 

Donald Conyers 

Samuel Rodriquez 

Coach 

Coach 

School Counselor 

Superintendent 
 
Field Support Center Staff 
Member 
    Affinity Group 

Sean Johnson 

Other Related Service Prov 

N/A 

N/A 

Other            N/A 

Other            N/A 

 

Signature 

Date (mm/dd/yy) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

6/14/18 

6/14/18 

6/14/18 

6/14/18 

6/14/18 

6/14/18 

6/14/18 

6/14/18 

6/14/18 

6/14/18 

6/14/18 

6/14/18 

6/14/18 

N/A 

N/A 

2018-19 SCEP-SIG                                                                                                                                                                                                       79 

 

 
 

2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS 

Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools 

 

DBN: 

19K510 
 

School 
Name: 

WATCH 
 

Superintendent: 

Conyers 
 

 
The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. 
If there is more than one LAC, list all. 
 

First Name  

Last Name  

Title  

Has the LAC attended a 

2018-19 training 

The LAC was involved in 
the development of this 

conducted by the Field 

plan? Yes/No  

Language Access 

Coordinator? Yes/No  

Zachary 

Elizabeth 

   

Fehst 

Ramos 

ENL Teacher 

Attendance Teacher 

No 

No 

Yes 

Yes 

 
* The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs 
on translation,  
interpretation, compliance and budget.  
 

School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful 
opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's 
Regulation A-663).  
 
By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and 
interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). 
 
Part A:  Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 
 
1.  Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written 

and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from: 

  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS) 
  Automate The System (ATS) reports 
  Student Emergency Contact cards 
  Surveys conducted by your school. 

 

Once the parents or guardians of a child enter our school, the teachers at the school start the assessment process 
by discussing the home language with the family. Upon an initial meeting, parents are given the New York City 
Department of Education Parent/Guardian Home Language Identification Survey. During the enrollment process, 
a trained pedagogue will administer the home language survey. 
 
In addition to this, any parents of non-ELL students who may be unable to communicate effectively in English are 
identified through many or all of the following: utilizing student surveys from the first weeks of classes, by 
interaction with office staff when they enter the building, by checking ATS reports for such information from the 
enrollment office, by teacher parent phone calls, and/or by examining student records from middle school. 
 

2018-19 SCEP-SIG                                                                                                                                                                                                       80 

 

Currently, we have five basic language groups that we service: Spanish, Arabic, Haitian Creole, French and Bengali. 
This process also includes interviews with parents in their home language, using the Department of Education’s 
telephone translation services where necessary. Upon reading the parents’ answers, the school will provide 
subsequent written information to the parents in the home language, and also ensure that their Student 
Emergency Contact cards are completed satisfactorily. Additionally the ENL teacher conducts a survey with each 
new student, which involves further gathering of detailed contact information and home language/language of 
preference for guardians. 
 

 
 
2.  List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, 

which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language 
Report (RCPL) ATS report. 
 

Language  

Written Preferred  

Percent Written  

Oral Preferred  

Percent Oral  

Araucania 

Arabic 

Bengali 

Chinese (ANY) 

French 

Haitian Creole 

English 

Spanish 

   

 

1 

7 

8 

2 

3 

7 

327 

48 

.25 

1.74 

1.99 

.5 

.74 

1.74 

81.14 

11.91 

1 

7 

8 

2 

4 

7 

324 

47 

.25 

1.75 

2 

.5 

1 

1.75 

81 

11.75 

3.  From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at 

least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, 
French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. 
 

Not applicable for WATCH at this time. 

 

 
 
Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 
 
1.  List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be 

distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents.  
 

Document Name  

Month/Frequency Distributed to 

Families  

Annual handbooks  
 

First day of school 

 

 

How do you plan to translate? 
Include procedures to ensure 
timely provision of translated 

documents to parents.  

Unless otherwise necessary, 
documents are translated using 
online services such as Google 
translate. The DOE's Translation and 
Interpretation services may also be 
used.  

2018-19 SCEP-SIG                                                                                                                                                                                                       81 

 

Newsletters 

Monthly 

Calendars 

Monthly 

Parent-teacher conference 
announcements 

Two weeks prior to each conference, 
and the week of each conference 

After-school program information 

Mid-Sept 

 

In addition, the DOE Intranet web 
resources offer many pre-translated 
documents available for download 
in a wide variety of languages 
spoken by WATCH's student 
population. 

 

WATCH also has staff members who 
speak and write Spanish and Haitian 
Creole fluently; they are used as 
vital translation resources in order 
to maximize timely and efficient 
translation to families who speak 
those languages. In cases where the 
documents must be translated into 
languages that staff does not speak, 
outside help may also be utilized, as 
mentioned above.  

As mentioned above, online 
translators, DOE Intranet resources, 
Translation and Interpretation 
Services, and/or multi-lingual 
WATCH staff may all be used to 
ensure timely and accurate 
translation. 

As mentioned above, online 
translators, DOE Intranet resources, 
Translation and Interpretation 
Services, and/or multi-lingual 
WATCH staff may all be used to 
ensure timely and accurate 
translation. 

As mentioned above, online 
translators, DOE Intranet resources, 
Translation and Interpretation 
Services, and/or multi-lingual 
WATCH staff may all be used to 
ensure timely and accurate 
translation. 

As mentioned above, online 
translators, DOE Intranet resources, 
Translation and Interpretation 
Services, and/or multi-lingual 
WATCH staff may all be used to 
ensure timely and accurate 
translation. 

2018-19 SCEP-SIG                                                                                                                                                                                                       82 

 

New York State testing dates 

Sept, with reminder in Mar for June 
testing dates 

Parent/Guardian Home Language 
Identification Survey 

Sept 

NYSITELL Eligibility Survey 

Sept/Oct 

Entitlement Letter 

Sept/Oct 

Non Entitlement/Transition Letter 

June 

Parent Survey and Program Selection 
Form 

Feb/Mar 

Placement Letter 

TBD 

 

As mentioned above, online 
translators, DOE Intranet resources, 
Translation and Interpretation 
Services, and/or multi-lingual 
WATCH staff may all be used to 
ensure timely and accurate 
translation. 

As mentioned above, online 
translators, DOE Intranet resources, 
Translation and Interpretation 
Services, and/or multi-lingual 
WATCH staff may all be used to 
ensure timely and accurate 
translation. 

As mentioned above, online 
translators, DOE Intranet resources, 
Translation and Interpretation 
Services, and/or multi-lingual 
WATCH staff may all be used to 
ensure timely and accurate 
translation. 

As mentioned above, online 
translators, DOE Intranet resources, 
Translation and Interpretation 
Services, and/or multi-lingual 
WATCH staff may all be used to 
ensure timely and accurate 
translation. 

As mentioned above, online 
translators, DOE Intranet resources, 
Translation and Interpretation 
Services, and/or multi-lingual 
WATCH staff may all be used to 
ensure timely and accurate 
translation. 

As mentioned above, online 
translators, DOE Intranet resources, 
Translation and Interpretation 
Services, and/or multi-lingual 
WATCH staff may all be used to 
ensure timely and accurate 
translation. 

As mentioned above, online 
translators, DOE Intranet resources, 
Translation and Interpretation 
Services, and/or multi-lingual 
WATCH staff may all be used to 
ensure timely and accurate 
translation. 

2018-19 SCEP-SIG                                                                                                                                                                                                       83 

 

Default Program Placement Letter/Letter 
Not Returned From Parent 

TBD 

   

 

As mentioned above, online 
translators, DOE Intranet resources, 
Translation and Interpretation 
Services, and/or multi-lingual 
WATCH staff may all be used to 
ensure timely and accurate 
translation. 

2.  List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as 

parent-teacher  
conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings.  
   

Meeting Name  

Month/Frequency of Meetings  

How does your school plan to provide 

Formal PTA Meetings 

Monthly 

 

WATCH Family Night 

Sept/Oct and Mar/Apr 

ENL Parent Meeting 

Oct 

Parent-teacher conference 

9/26/17 (night) 

interpretation service(s)?  

For these meetings, the school will be 
standing by to place calls to the DOE 
Translation and Interpretation services 
hot-line as necessary.  

 

School-based staff members who are 
fluent in languages comparable to 
families are used as resources to 
support this work. 

 

For families who speak languages staff 
does not speak, The Intranet 
resources or online translators may 
also be used. 

As mentioned above, WATCH will be 
prepared to utilize Translation and 
Interpretation services, multilingual 
school-based staff, and/or online 
resources to ensure appropriate and 
timely interpretation. 

As mentioned above, WATCH will be 
prepared to utilize Translation and 
Interpretation services, multilingual 
school-based staff, and/or online 
resources to ensure appropriate and 
timely interpretation. 

As mentioned above, WATCH will be 
prepared to utilize Translation and 
Interpretation services, multilingual 
school-based staff, and/or online 

2018-19 SCEP-SIG                                                                                                                                                                                                       84 

 

Parent-teacher conference 

11/29/17 (night) 

Parent-teacher conference 

11/30/17 (afternoon) 

Parent-teacher conference 

3/7/18 (night) 

Parent-teacher conference  

3/8/17 (afternoon) 

Parent-teacher conference 

5/9/18 (night) 

Face-to-face Annual Meeting with 
Parents 

TBD 

Attendance, guidance and/or 
Academic reach-out meetings  

Will occur two weeks before the end of 
each marking period 

Re-identification Meet with Parents 

TBD 

resources to ensure appropriate and 
timely interpretation. 

As mentioned above, WATCH will be 
prepared to utilize Translation and 
Interpretation services, multilingual 
school-based staff, and/or online 
resources to ensure appropriate and 
timely interpretation. 

As mentioned above, WATCH will be 
prepared to utilize Translation and 
Interpretation services, multilingual 
school-based staff, and/or online 
resources to ensure appropriate and 
timely interpretation. 

As mentioned above, WATCH will be 
prepared to utilize Translation and 
Interpretation services, multilingual 
school-based staff, and/or online 
resources to ensure appropriate and 
timely interpretation. 

As mentioned above, WATCH will be 
prepared to utilize Translation and 
Interpretation services, multilingual 
school-based staff, and/or online 
resources to ensure appropriate and 
timely interpretation. 

As mentioned above, WATCH will be 
prepared to utilize Translation and 
Interpretation services, multilingual 
school-based staff, and/or online 
resources to ensure appropriate and 
timely interpretation. 

As mentioned above, WATCH will be 
prepared to utilize Translation and 
Interpretation services, multilingual 
school-based staff, and/or online 
resources to ensure appropriate and 
timely interpretation. 

As mentioned above, WATCH will be 
prepared to utilize Translation and 
Interpretation services, multilingual 
school-based staff, and/or online 
resources to ensure appropriate and 
timely interpretation. 

As mentioned above, WATCH will be 
prepared to utilize Translation and 
Interpretation services, multilingual 
school-based staff, and/or online 
resources to ensure appropriate and 
timely interpretation. 

2018-19 SCEP-SIG                                                                                                                                                                                                       85 

 
   

 

3.  Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of 

a school emergency.  
 

To ensure timeliness in case of emergency, WATCH will create and utilize an itemized list of languages spoken by our 
students' parents or guardians. Then, in the event of an emergency, the WATCH school messenger system sends mass 
texts and makes robocalls to all parents or guardians. Additionally, the guardian-outreach application Kinvolved, 
which is utilized by WATCH teachers, can also be used to send mass texts about important information like school 
emergencies. Multiple languages are available for this service, and would be used to contact ELL parents as necessary.  

 
 

 
 
Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure

 
Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and 
what resources are available to meet compliance.  
 

Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 aims to ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are 
provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their 
child’s education. In order to make sure all staff members of WATCH are aware of this mandate, as well as how to 
provide adequate and timely translation and/or interpretation for our students and parents/guardians, WATCH will 
present this information during scheduled professional development time, and as part of the Principal's regular 
Monday Message to all staff. This will occur in the fall, in order to ensure all teachers and staff are aware of 
appropriate regulation compliance at the start of the year. In addition, all Chancellor's Regulations are made available 
online for teachers to see.  

 

 

As the Language Access Coordinators, Mr. Fehst and Ms. Ramos will make themselves readily available to serve as 
bridges in regard to ELL students. They keep lists, available on demand for any faculty or staff member, of all the 
English Language Learners in the school, and are recognized from the beginning of the school year as the point people 
for information about both the students, and the interpretation services. 

 

 
 
Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services 
 
Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive 
information. Include any: 

  Translated signage 
  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents 
  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) 

 

Signage in our main office and hallways includes important information for parents and guardians in a variety of 
languages. The school will also provide interpretation services in Spanish by a licensed bilingual pedagogue or staff 
member who can speak this language. For parents who speak Arabic, Haitian Creole and Bengali, the school will 
contact the Translation and interpretation unit for further assistance, to the maximum extent possible within the 
budget of the school for the services during regular business hours for parents whose primary language is not English. 

2018-19 SCEP-SIG                                                                                                                                                                                                       86 

 

In addition, language demands for letters sent home to families, as well as engagement events, will be handled as 
demonstrated in Part B of this document. 
 
Also, as noted in the above Part C, Language Access Coordinators Mr. Fehst and Ms. Ramos will make themselves 
available to serve as liaisons in regard to ELL students, as they are recognized from the beginning of the school year as 
the point people for information about both the students, and the interpretation services.  
 
Furthermore, all notification documents for limited-English Proficient parents are available in all of our current 
parental home languages through the DOE's Intranet site, and are thus available and are used as appropriate.  
 

 
 
Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services 
Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the 
language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services?   
 

The school will implement parent surveys and feedback documents where parents will be able to voice their 
satisfaction, concerns, and recommendations for improved support. Such surveys will be available in other languages 
as needed, as WATCH will utilize the DOE Intranet site, online translation services, and Translation and Interpretation 
services over the phone, as needed, to ensure this. Parent Coordinator will engage in ongoing outreach and action 
plan for next step improved support for parents. Teachers will continue to use the contractual outreach time to 
communicate with parents/guardians.  
 
Alternatively, per regulation 663, parents have the option of bringing someone that they trust to provide 
interpretation, should they so wish. 
 

 

2018-19 SCEP-SIG                                                                                                                                                                                                       87 

